Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	Thus we begin to read the paragraphs of Albucasim.
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	Oh, sons, since you have completed this book, which is the last part of the science of medicine, for the completion of it, and for its consequences, and for its declarations, it seems to me that you have compiled it for yourselves in this treatise, which is a part of my operation, so it is surgery.
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	Because the operation of my mother was prostrated in our region and in our time, totally deprived, until they feared losing the science of it, and its vigilance is outdated; and there remained no remainder of it except some small descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which muddy the most and endevour to avoid those errors and hesitations until their intentions are closed and its force is elongated.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	And it seems to me that you will vivify this mother in the ordering of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and because it comes into the forms of the ferraments of cautery and of the other instruments of the work, as is necessary for the addition of the declaration, and for its preparation, which cause is necessary.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	The reason why no artificial hand was found in this our time is because the art of medicine is long, and it covers the whole actor, denoting that it should be exercised in the science of anatomy, which Galen understood until he knew the juvenation of the members and their forms, and their conjunction and separation; and had knowledge of the osseous, nervous, and cartilaginous, and their number, and their dimension; and of the pulsating veins and quiet ones, and of the places of their issuance.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	And for that Hippocrates said that a name is moved, more in the small work, and greatly in the art of the hand.
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	We have already said that about him in the introduction of this book; because whoever does not know what we have said about anatomy, is not evacuated from falling into error, for which many men die, thus you have seen many of them, because they are formed in this science and get away from it, and their experiences.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	Because you have seen a foolish doctor who has attempted to incise an scrophilous aposteme on the neck of a woman, and has cut some arteries of the neck so that great blood flowed out until the woman almost died in his hands.
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	And I have seen another doctor who pretended to remove a stone from a man's bladder, which had progressed in his state, and the stone was large, and he came to him and extracted that stone in a tube of the bladder, so that the man died on the third day.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	And you have already called it foolish to extract that, and I saw that because of the greatness of the stone and because of the disposition of the patient's thighs, which conduced under him, he would die.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	And I saw another doctor who received a stipend from a duke of our land for surgery, and he made a cruel incision on the black crust which was devouring his fracture in the thigh; and because of the doctor's ignorance, he extracted the fracture, above the plague, with pulvination and astelation in strong structure, and did not leave the plague to breathe.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	And then I followed according to the wishes of the sick ones, and then I relieved, and then I left it for some days and commanded that we disband the ligament; and it was thus until the thigh and the foot were apostematous, and I came to ruin.
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	And you have foolishly called it to him, and disband the ligament, and achieved tranquility and thus also alleviated some of his pains.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	But the corruption was confirmed in the limb, so that it could not be restrained, and it did not cease to walk corruptly in the limb until the patient suffered.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	And I saw another doctor who perforated a cancerous aposteme, and it was ulcerated for several days, until the wickedness of it was magnified in the lord of it.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	The reason is that the cancerous tumor was pure melancholic humor, then it did not cover that it would come to him in entirety, but rather it was a member that suffered from everything, as if it had been hostile.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	And for that, sons, it is necessary for you to know that the operation of my mother was divided into two devolutions: one is an operation associated with health, and another work in which there are major dispositions.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	And you have already existed everywhere in this book where I found operation in which there is error and fear; because it is necessary for you to keep that and leave it, so that the foolish ones do not find a way to speak and deceive you.
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	And therefore take your arms in solicitude and protection of God, and your maladies are facilitated and are strengthened.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	And you have used the better way by the grace of God to obtain health and laudable success, and you have left the terrible maladies of difficult healing, and you have kept your arms from that which makes you afraid, so that you may establish faith in your heart and in your name you are not evasive: because more remains in your glory, and thus it is established in the world and in the end among your sanctities.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	Sometimes I diagnose in certain clear signs:
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	"Do not mistreat a sick patient, so that bad doctors are not named."
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	"And I have divided this book into three chapters."
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	"Here begins the division of the book, and first of the first partition."
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	"The first chapter deals with the head and feet, in the forms of instruments and in the furnishings of cauteries, and what is necessary for the operation."
La divisio de la segonda partida.	"The division of the second partition."
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	"The second chapter, on scission and perforation, and on cupping glasses, and on poultices, and on extraction of arrowheads and on similarities to those, all chaptered and ordered according to the forms of instruments."
Divisio de la tersa partida.	"The division of the third partition."
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	"The third chapter, on restoration and dislocation, and on treatment of torsion and on similarities to those; chapter ordered from head to feet, and according to the forms of instruments."
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	"On cautery I focus and I bring acute medicine and reminder of the operation."
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	"I begin the treatise on the entire book."
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	"I know the quality of the youthfulness of that cautery and of its instruments, and in what complex situation it is prohibited to use cautery."
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	"Therefore I say that the sermon on the quality of the youthfulness of cautery and of its instrument is long and prolix, subtle for science, and secretly hidden; and already many wise men have spoken about it, and they disagree among themselves, and to me it suffices a small part of their sermons, fearing prolongation."
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	"Therefore I say that cautery universally comprehends all complex situations, whether it is a matter or several matters, except for two complex situations, which are cold complex situations without matter."
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	"In the cold and dry complex situation with matter, they disagree; for some said that cautery is youthful in that, and others said the opposite of that, that cautery is not convenient in illness which is due to quality and dryness, since the nature of fire is quality and dryness, and it is inconvenient that cold and dry illness is healed by cautery."
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	"And they say that one who says the opposite of that, that by cautery youthfulness is made in all cold and dry illnesses that occur in men's bodies, because when you compare men's bodies with the humidity of them to the complex situation of fire, you find men's bodies are fragile."
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	"And I say through the sermon of that one, that I have experimented and already discovered many times at my own expense."
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	"Moreover, I do not know who can come up with something about that which has already been experienced and exhausted in the chapter of cautery through previous exercise, and has known the diversity of complex situations of men's bodies and the disposition of illnesses in their measures, and the causes of those, and their accidents, and the space of time of those."
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	"Moreover, in the other complex situations, it is not about your fear, and especially in the fragile and humid illnesses, because all doctors have agreed on those, and do not disagree about the youthfulness with cautery in those."
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	"And you know, sons, that the secret of cure by cautery is fire and its goodness, so about cautery I bring combined medicine, because fire is simple, whose action does not penetrate except to the member which is cauterized and does not reach another member unless adjusted with a small benefit."
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	"Moreover, the action of combined medicine penetrates to that one in the members where it is adjusted, and strongly makes it come into the diseased member with difficult healing and strongly helps."
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	"Moreover, fire, by its sublime limit and goodness of its substance, does not make anything except to overflow. And it is already known to us through experiment and length of service in studying the art about the truth of causes; and for that I have excused the length of the sermon. And if it were not that it is not read in my own book in this passage to you secret hidden fire, and the quality of its operation in bodies and of the expulsion by which it expels illnesses, a demonstrative philosophical sermon, which would be acute in your writings."
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	"And you know, sons, that they disagree about the time when it is convenient to use cautery and pause at the best time of spring."
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	"And I say that cautery is convenient at all times, because the harm from the accidental time is submerged in the youthfulness of that which I have with cautery, and especially if cautery is for pains or necessary pains, strong and fixed, which do not suffer tardiness so that it is feared by those who come with evil, which is greater than small harm entering at that time."
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	"And it is not seen in your writings, or, sons, that which they do not esteem except the common people and foolish doctors, so it is that at that illness which is healed by cautery, there is no return to all time, and pause at that consequence."
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	And the cause is not so obvious as the one that alters the complexions and dries out the humidity, which is the cause of the pains.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	Perhaps emperor's cauteries are excessive in medicine, wanting to demonstrate the value and truth of his operation and greatness of his lordship.
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	And it is possible that his illness returns at some hour of time, according to the complexion of the patient and the location of his illness, and its truth, and what has been prepared in his body by the aggregation of excesses in him, and what has happened to him in his acquisition of vices and similarities to those causes; but that the illness in which cautery is administered is a subtle illness in some members with few excesses and humidity, thus as cautery for toothache and similar to that, it is possible that in him it does not return that pain, rather it becomes less.
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	And the common speech is that cautery is the last resort of medicine, and it is a desperate remedy, not because they understand it, since they believe it is not a cure that advances with medicine nor another cause that advances with cautery.
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	And the cause is contrary to that; and the intention that cautery is the last resort of medicine is not so when we administer various methods of cure in certain illnesses, and those medicines do not confer, and then at the end of the cause we administer thus cautery, and advance thereby.
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	And from here on, I cancel the idea that cautery is the last resort of medicine, not according to the intention which the common people and foolish doctors understand.
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	And they said that gold cautery is better than iron cautery, and they didn't say it except for the equality of gold and the limitation of its substance.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	And they said that the place of cautery does not make a break, as if it were not absolutely true, because you already have that probed and experienced that it does not make that except in some bodies with others, and cautery in that is good and better than iron, as they said; but when you do cautery with gold focus, it is not declared to you, since it depends on the quantity that you want for the rigor of the gold, and prepare to receive frost; and if you adjust over the igneous surface, the gold melts from the focus, and sometimes in the focus some layers are formed so that the artisan can occupy himself with that.
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	And therefore it is done to do iron cautery more lightly and more profoundly in relation to the rectitude of operation.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	And I have now ordered this chapter on cautery according to chapters, and I have ordered those of the head within the feet, so that one can easily find what one wants from it.
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	On cautery for headache caused by cold and humidity.
Le capitol primier.	The first chapter.
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	This cautery confers on the humidity and coldness above the affected part of the body, which is the cause of swelling and multitude of rheumatic flux, called corissa, from the head to the divisions of the veins and arteries, and multitude of sleeplessness, and toothache, and gum pain, and universally all illnesses that come from coldness, as well as paralytic, apoplectic, and similar in those illnesses.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	The form of this cautery is this, that primarily it commands the patient to evacuate the medicine from the head, for three or four nights, according to the truth of the patient and his age and custom.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	And then command him to shave his head with a razor, and then make him sit between his thighs on a heated bench and place his hands on the floor of his feet.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	And then place the razor in the palm of your hand, then put your fingers on the razor between your thighs.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	Perhaps, as the finger of my own place has arrived, it signifies that place is tender, and then ignite the olive oil cautery, of which this is the form.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	And then place that on the sensitive spot, in a way that descends, as if my finger is constricted little by little, and you revolve that.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	And then lift your hand lightly and regard the spot, and if you see that some quantity of the head has been discovered, thus as the quantity of grain of errors, then lift your hand, and if it doesn't return to your hand in that iron, another of that, if it is frozen, until it is seen by the eye what I have told you.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	And then take a small amount of salt and dissolve it over the spot and leave it there for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	And then place it on the wrapped cloth in a bundle and leave it there until the crust of the focus is destroyed.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	And then cure the spot with four-part angel's hand until it is healed.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	And they said that when the Roman plague bursts, so much better gets the arm, because it is better and more youthful.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	They should burn some of those that need to be cauterized on the outside of the bone, and hold the cautery inside so that it is burned in some part of the bone's structure.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	Then return to adjusting the bone, and then take care of the cure.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	They should also make others who apply the cautery from behind, so that it penetrates deeply into the bone to strengthen it, and this is the way to alleviate small weaknesses.
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	They should estimate from that place where the vapors of the head expire.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	It should be held in the open wound for a long time, and then take care to consolidate it.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	But I have not seen these two special kinds of cauteries in total, but only in some homes according to the way of fear; and therefore, you should tell me, it is better for my health, when it is; because the head is developed by solution of continuity with the aforementioned, as we have testified in the other members, and especially when the head of the patient is of frail nature.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	And the first kind of cautery is most safe and better for me; and from that house and that work, I am healthy.
Capitol segon.	Following chapter.
Del cauteri del cap.	About the cautery of the head.
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	When the entire head is affected by chronic and long pain, and it is in prolonged illness, and uses remedies and poultices and applications and implants and girdles and cadels and galenas and similants, and especially if it has been cauterized with a cautery that recounts and does not provide relief from any of those causes, then consider that the head of the patient is of strong creation in its nature; and it is not fragile and atrophied with much fear, then that cauterying should be done with another cautery below that one.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	And then cauterize above the crown of the dry head with a cautery so that the bone is divided.
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	Cut the bone and discover the quantity of the os that we have recounted and cauterize it with a cautery at the back of the head in the place called "vas" — and it is that place where the wind is paused.
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	And lift your hand in that way, and do not discover the bone, because the patient suffers greatly from various pains different from the pain of all the other cauteries of the head.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	And you will direct this cautery to its place, because it is known that the cautery is the one that cauterizes the horns of the head and the occiput is a more subtle cautery than the one that is cauterized in the middle of the head; and this is the way of it.
Capitol ters.	Chapter three.
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	On the cautery of non-ancient migration.
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	When you find pain in the head's part, or it is a standing pain within the vein, evacuate with mondifying medicines, and administer another cure, which you have stated in the deviations of the illnesses; and if not relieved, then cauterying is done in two ways: either cauterying with acute burning medicine, or with iron.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	A cauterying medicine that burns is that you take a dollop of alum, and scrape it away and bind the extremities of it with both ends of the heads.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	And then incise the place of pain in the temple with a sharp lancet into the bone so that it is in the very same place below the bone, so that it is hidden.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	And then strengthen it above with a stopped constricting bandage, and leave it like that for three hours; and then remove the alum and extract the lancet, and leave the wound open for two or three days, and then pause on the submerged bone in a bath until the place forms a scab.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then cure it with an ointment until it is healed.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	And if you want, I will give you some burning medicines which I have written about in the two treatises on burning medicines.
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	A cauterying with iron is done according to this method: ignite the iron for cauterying, of which this is the form.
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	and it is called "claus clavilhs", because the head of it is like a form of nail in which there is some curvature, and in the middle of it is a small prominence.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	And then pause on the place of pain, and hold your hand — so that the acidity which is beneath is not burned — and turn the small iron little by little with velocity.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	And if the quantity of it that is burned by the structure of the bone is as much as the marrow of it, and lift your hand so that the artery is not burned beneath, so that there is no flow of blood.
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then soak the bone in salt water and pause it on the place, and leave it like that for three days; and then pause the bone many times in a bath, and then cure it with an ointment until it is healed.
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	And if you want, cautery the extremity of the cutting instrument according to the cautery, and beware of incision of the artery in this non-ancient migration properly.
Capitol quart.	Fourth chapter.
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	On the cauterization of old migraines.
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	When you treat migraines in the way that we have said about previous treatments, and what we have said about the divisions of illnesses, and do not hasten the treatment, and sometimes for the illness that does not respond to what we have said about the first cauterization in medicine or of the cauterization with fire, then you should ignite the cautery tool until it is white hot, since it indicates on the line of the long duration of which is the greatest pain, or somewhere; and pause your hand for a while and strengthen that until you incise the artery and penetrate to the bone.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	However, it is necessary for you to be careful with the continuity of the jawbone, which is weakened by chewing, and that the ligament is not injured and the nerves that give bad signals, so that there is no spasmodic contraction.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	And it is about the custody and caution of the flow of blood in the artery that is affected, because in the affection of it there is fear, and more so for those who ignore what they do and are not skilled and experienced; and thus the operation begins in it at the beginning.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	And you will find the reminder of the regulation of blood flow in the artery according to the usual manner, in the same place of this book.
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And if you see that this illness does not respond to this cautery and you see the body of the patient tolerable, cauterize it in the same place on the head as we have recounted, and cure the wound until it is healed.
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	And if you wish, administer the cautery which we have said in the chapter on the stretching of arteries with cautery having two points, and it is a better cauterization than this one and more convenient.
Capitol .v.	Chapter five.
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	On the cauterization of ear pains.
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	When in the ear there is pain due to cold and it is treated with laxative causes and another treatment which was said in the division, and the pain does not subside, then ignite the cautery, and it is this one that has been named pointed, of which this is the form.
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	And place the point near the ignition, and it should be aimed at the environment of the whole ear, just as a wheel is turned around, or in the circle of some things if the pain is somewhere.
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	Also, you have the cautery of the root of the ear, little by little, because you should feel the place with your finger.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	And if you cautery several points on the whole ear, and that is it, and then cure the areas until they are healed.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter six.
De cauterizacio de turtura.	On the cauterization of sciatica.
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	Sciatica which is treated and with cauterization is not only of the species that come from fluxion, according to what we have said in the divisions of illnesses.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	It avoids cauterization of the species that originates from dryness or spasm of the nerves.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	When you treat that species of sciatica with herbs and capypurgi and guarguarismes, and it does not respond to your treatment, then you should cauterize the illness with three cauteries: the first is at the root of the ear, the second a little below the same temple, and the third at the junction of two lips.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	And pause your cautery on the contrary part of the affected area, because mollification is only seen in the part that appears healthy.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	And the form of cauterization is that you cauterize it with the cautery on the right side of the ear's extremity, slightly above the horn of the head, and in another temple, the length of which is according to the length of the aforementioned pain, and pause your hand on the cautery until the quantity of the greatest pain of the specific code is burned.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	And this is the form of the cautery, and it is a species of cutting, the form of which is described in the table.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	However, more subtly it is that one should not be so vehement; and it is necessary to cut in it with excessive roughness a little.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	And then cure the area with what is described as a process until it is healed.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter seven.
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	On the cauterization of old apoplexy.
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	When apoplexy is old and you treat it with what we have said and it does not respond to your medicine and the illness has no fever, then cauterize it with four cauteries: on all the horns of the head; and with a cautery in the same place on the head, as we have said; and with a cautery on the neck.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	And the manner of the cautery is done according to what has been said above.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	And it is cauterized over the mouth of the stomach; and it is more serious; and then it should be cured with what proceeds.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter eight.
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	From the cauterization of oblivion made by weakness.
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	Because they give to the patient in the beginning great and pill-like servings of significant mondification.
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	And then you shave the whole head of the patient and pause on the nape of their neck in this described implant in the treatise of implants.
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	And stop those somewhat vague things, because that is the manner of cautery.
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	And do it according to that method in order which I have already said.
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	And therefore if for those healthy aspects; and if not, then make three cauteries on the back part of their head, which descend from the upper part of the head down to the back of the neck.
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	And stop between each cautery the thickness of the finger, and then take care to make the cautery as it is proceeding.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	Perhaps if you find the patient is tolerant of that, then make the cautery in the same place; and if you find greater tolerance, then cautelize over both horns.
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	Then take care that it enters so that it may be healthy; and let the olive-shaped cautery be according to the form given beforehand.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter 9.
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	On the cauterization of paralysis and softening of the whole body.
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	Because you should proceed in mondification of the head with jars and as we have said; and then shave the patient's head, and then make a cautery on the same place on the head, and make a cautery over all the horns of the head, and make a cautery on the back part of it, and make three cauteries on the vertebrae of the neck.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	And if it is necessary in the case of softening of the body of those who are tolerant patients and the illness is strong, then make a cautery with four cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, and afterwards make a cautery until it is combined from the codeina motion of it, and elevate the same hand.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	And then take care that it enters so that it may be healthy, and let this olive-shaped cautery be.
Capitol .x.	Chapter 10.
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	On the cauterization of epilepsy.
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	It is not a case of cauterizing the epileptic, but rather that epilepsy is due to flux.
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	And therefore, since you mondify the brain of it from the beginning with years and another cure which we have dictated in the division when the patient is great and is tolerant of the exception of medicines.
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	And if it is an infant who does not suffer from medicines, then administer gentle purgatives and mastigators of the serving mondification, beforehand for some days, with good benefit of the food.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	And then shave the patient's head, and then make a cautery on the same place on the head according to the previous manner, and another cautery on the occiput of it, and on each horn of the head there is a cautery.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	And if the patient is strong and tolerant, then make a cautery on it with the cauteries that I have said, having paralysis and softening of the body over the vertebrae of the neck and the vertebrae of the back.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	And let the olive-shaped cautery be according to what has been preceded.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	Perhaps if the patient is an infant, then pause with a subtle cautery according to this manner.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter 11.
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	On the cauterization of melancholy.
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	When the causes of melancholy are corrupted humidity and gross weakness, then make a cautery on it with the cauteries that we have said in having paralysis.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	And if the cause of melancholy is superfluous decline into melancholy, and the patient's body is humid, then give them something that mondifies their brain according to what has been preceded in the division.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	And then shave the patient's head, and then make a tortoise-shell decently made of them over the circle, and then place it on the same place on the head.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	And let the patient be seated comfortably, and let them be held firmly from all parts.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	And then pause with a liniment; and it is more worthy of healing old wounds.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	And heat that over the fire for tempered warmth by measure, which the patient suffers when it is mixed in them.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	And then put that on the same place on the head of it in the circle, and let it enter until it is refreshed.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	And do that with the patient for a whole week, once a day, another regimen of it is good until it is healthy; or if you want, make a cautery making small points according to the size of it, but you should have your hand on a cautery thus ordered: this is a special type of cautery which humidifies the brain in equality.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	And then pause that cut into healing or in greyish tints of gall.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter 12.
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	On the cauterization of waters descending into the vein.
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	When you have declared the beginning of water in the veins through the senses which you have divided into sections, then it begins and gives a bitter taste to the patient's mouth, which shows the head of it, and guards that from all humidity.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	And make that sweetener in a bath through certain daily journeys.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	And command it to reach the dry head, and cauterize that with a pointed cautery in the middle of the head; and then cauterize that with two cauteries on two temples if it is the beginning of water in two veins, or one side if it is the beginning of water in one vein.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	You will cauterize all the veins and arteries, which you have placed on the spine; and you will place the cauteries in that long longitude at the latitude of the temples.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	And beware of fluxes of blood when it is cauterized; and if you see the fluxes of blood, or apply some medicine, which is possibly available to you.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	And you will find wisdom in the extraction of arteries and their excision, and beware of the fluxes of blood.
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	And some veins are cauterized in the neck between two bones with two cauteries, producing immediate results.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter 13.
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	On the Cauterization of Ancient Tears.
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	When the tears of the veins are ancient and assuaged through the veins and arteries which are in the manifest place of the head before, and it is verified that this is a superfluous flux of phlegmatic humor, then cauterize that with a pointed cautery which we have recounted in the chapter on the beginning of water flowing into the veins, and cauterize in the middle of the head and with two cauteries on the temples, and with two cauteries between two bones.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	And if you need to induce addition, then cauterize that on the entire side of the vein above the extremity of the eyebrow with a small pointed cautery.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter 14.
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	On the Cauterization of Foul Odors of the Nose.
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	When you medicate that with water which we have said in the division and do not hasten your medication, then prepare it and give it to the patient to drink for three nights; and place the head of it, and cauterize it with a pointed cautery or with an olive-pointed cautery.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	And then cauterize that with a keyed cautery or with two cauteries on the two eyebrows below the hair, a small one.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	And beware of the artery that you do not injure it.
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	And this is the form of the keyed cautery.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter 15.
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	On the Cauterization of Softening of the Eyelids of the Veins.
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the eyelid of the vein is softened by disease or humidity, then cauterize that eyelid with a cautery or with this lunar cautery; and this is its form.
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	And if you wish, cauterize that above the two eyebrows, a small one, with two cauteries in the entire affected area, and thus lengthen the temples.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	And let the longitude of each cautery be according to the quantity of the eyebrow.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	And do not press too hard with your hand on the cautery, but rather according to the quantity that the third part of the eyelid is affected.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter 16.
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	On the Cauterization of the Eyelid of the Vein when the Skin is Converted into the Inner Parts and Pounds the Vein.
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	When the skin of the vein is converted into the inner parts and pounds the vein, cauterize it in two manners, because either a hot iron or a burning medicine is applied.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	If you cauterize it with fire, command the patient to sit in front of that which liquefies the skin thus as those which are mundane, until they are prolonged and swollen; and if you pound that vein with its own force, then strengthen the veins of it with a bandage so that it is not weakened until the skin is born.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	Since they are born and swollen, then pause the head of the patient in the tender seat, and place a sign above the eyelid of the veins of it with a tent, as a signal which is according to the figure of the leaf of myrtle, and let it be the beginning of the proper signal of the skin.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	And then pause with a cotton cloth in an album of veins or in a poultice of powdered salt above the vein.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	And then ignite the cautery, which is its form.
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	And then cauterize above the figure which is signed, little by little, in well-veiled motions, until the surface of the spine which is thus as a leaf of myrtle, entirely and properly apparent.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	And the signal of health in this work is that you see the eyelid of the vein already constricted and the skin of it elevated from the puncture of the vein.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	Then raise your hand and let it rest for three days, and then place a bandage over the affected area to reduce the inflammation.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that wound with an ointment until it is healed.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	But if the skin returns to its original state for some reason and the eyelid is softened, then do another pass with the cautery over the entire area as you had done previously.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	But if the skin is on the eyelid below, then cauterize it until it is elevated to its natural place and is equalized, so that the skin does not touch the wheel.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	But the cautery is a burning medicine that commands the patient to lift the skin until it is prolonged and equalized, and then make a template of paper in the form of a leaf of myrtle.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. .i., o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	And then take a gentle grasp with a living vein and a hollow reed. I apologize for the mistake. Here is a revised translation: Or that water, and then mix those causes well, and do that fasting for so long as not to be harmed; and then spread it over the paper which was made thus in the form of a myrtle leaf, and place that on one wheel of two; and place below the wheel a gut encased in albumen, and the head of the patient is in the tieu seat.
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	And place the finger on the medicine and press it a little and not too much until the patient feels the sting of the medicine, for the sting is in it like fire.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	And then as you perceive that the sting is felt, then release the medicine and touch it with your finger; then as the sting ceases, then remove the medicine and wash the wheel with water; and then consider if the eyelid has been lifted thus as it has been washed free of constriction or incision, for then it is well; and if not, return to that point of the medicine where you did not apply the medicine and do not deny until your operation is equalized and the wheel is constricted.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	And then place on the affected area with a bandage until the code of the adjustment is eradicated, and then treat that wound with a definite ointment or another until it is healed.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	And it is necessary for you, from your operation to keep diligent vigilance that no residue of the medicine falls on the wheel, and if the eyelid after some days is softened and some cause of the skin touches the wheel, then repeat your medicine on that place where the eyelid is softened, and properly thus as you did at the beginning, and then send it in to be healed.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	And this is the form of the myrtle leaf.
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	And you know that the wheels of men are diversified according to magnitude and littleness, and thus according to what is done your contraction.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	And it will not be misleading the way of straightness towards that which is studied in this art.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter 17.
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	On the cautery of a fistula that is in the tear duct of the eye.
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	When you treat a fistula with water that we have said in the divisions of the illnesses and do not confuse your treatment, then it is necessary that you cauterize it according to this manner: command the patient to place their head in the tie seat, and hold the head of some minister between the ties more in such a way that it is neither moved nor agitated in the tied head.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	And then place the affected area in an album of skin or in a poultice of ptilli over the wheel of it.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then ignite the cautery of which this is the form:
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	Which should be conical, thus as it is the form of a reed or a feather's point, from one extremity to which the cautery is made.
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	And if you see, it should penetrate into the other extremity.
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	And if you want it to come out thus as it is held.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	But especially that which is burned is better for the tied work.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	And then take the fistula if it is opened, and draw out its liquid and dry it.
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	And if it is not opened, then open it and extract the pus from it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	And then place on it the cautery which is well ignited, and take care that the tied hand is a little away from the cautery of the wheel at the parting of the nose, so that your hand does not err or the patient is not disturbed, and then place the cautery in the grooves of the wheel and corrupt it.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	And then at the beginning of the tied cautery, perceive into the bone, be it; and if not, then repeat the cautery one or two times, if necessary; and let that thus for three days, and then place on that affected area with a bandage and send it in to be healed.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	But if they have passed eleven days and it is not healed, then place on the acute corrosive medicine until the bone is discovered and is scraped according to what is convenient in the sixth chapter.
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	It is another manner of cautery for fistula, which the first wise men discovered: then in the place of the fistula and make a pause in that fissure subtly as it forms; It is made with a quantity of one ounce of lead melted; and you hold your hand firmly on it, so that the lead does not penetrate to the depth of the ulcer; and cover it with albumen or egg white, or in water, because the lead adheres to the place of the fistula and heals it marvelously.
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	And if the fistula is healed in the water that we have spoken of regarding the cautery and the cure, well; and if not, then it is necessary to administer a treatment through the nose and reduce the fistula to its original place in the nose according to how it will come into its own location.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter 18.
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	On the cautery of the fracture of the toes.
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	Warts that grow rapidly and produce fissures on the lips, and especially on the lips of children.
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	Therefore, when you treat those fissures in the way that we have spoken of in the divisions and do not deepen your treatment, then ignite the small cutting cautery according to this form that is shown:
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	And it is the conquest of it (the disease) according to the subtlety of the scalpel.
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	Then pause that initial cut deeply in those fissures until the cautery penetrates to the root of the fissures.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	And then treat it with wax until it is healed.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter 19.
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	On the cautery of a fistula in the mouth.
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	When in the root of the uvula or on the palate or in the roots of the teeth an aposteme is formed and then it breaks, and then it becomes inflamed, and then it becomes chronic, and correct the break and make a fistula, and then you treat it and do not deepen your treatment, then cover it so that you ignite the cautery according to the quantity that has been received in the fistula, and then put that ignition in the channel of the fistula, and hold your hand until the iron ignites at the root of it, and afterwards make one or two applications; and then treat it with water as we have spoken of regarding the cure until it is healed.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	And then if the wound is abscessed and healed, well; and if not, then it is necessary to discover the location and lift the corrupted bone according to how it will come into its own chapter.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter 20.
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	On the cautery of teeth and softening of gums.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	When the gums are softened by humidity and the teeth are weakened, and you treat them with medicines and do not confide, then pause the head of the patient in the correct position, and ignite the cautery in the form that will come out, even so that you pause the cotton on the tooth and insert it into the ignited cautery firmly, and hold your hand for a little while until the patient feels the heat of the fire at the root of the tooth being penetrated.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	And then remove your hand, and then repeat the cautery several times according to how you want.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	And then the patient should hold his mouth full of salty water and keep it for an hour, and afterwards spit it out, because the weakened tooth is strengthened and the softened gum is fortified and the corrupted humidity is dried up.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21.
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	On the cautery of toothache.
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	When toothache is due to coldness, or if there is a worm or vermin, or does not respond to medical treatment, then cautery it in the following two ways: either cautery with a cow's horn, or cautery with fire.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	Cautery with a cow's horn is that you take a cow's horn and boil it in a copper vessel, and then take a piece of cloth and wrap it around the extremity of the instrument, and then immerse it in the boiling horn, and pause it on the aching tooth firmly until it is cooled.
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	And then repeat it several times until the virtue of the fire penetrates to the root of the teeth.
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	And if you wish, submerge the cloth or instrument in the aforementioned horn, and pause it on the aching tooth, and pause on that ignited iron until the iron penetrates to the root of the conquest of the tooth.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	Moreover, the emperor's cautery with fire is that you attend to the quantity of iron or copper, and it should be in the core of some gross matter and the acuity of the fire does not penetrate to the mouth of the patient.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	And then ignite the cautery in the form that will come, and pause it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery is cooled; and do it several times because the pain will be alleviated or on that day or on another day.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	And it is good that by impression of that cautery the patient holds his mouth full of good horn and keeps it for an hour and then spits it out; and this is the form of the cautery.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	And you should cauterize at the point where you feel the most extreme pain, as far as it is possible for you.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	And this is the shape of the cannula:
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22.
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	On Cauterization of Deformed Limbs.
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	When deformed limbs are of a weak flesh and cold humors and do not obey the digestion through medicines and you see the digestion of those lightly, then you ignite the cautery in the form that is this following, having two extinguished extremities so that you may apply the smoke to the other extremity, and place that ignition over that aposteme once, and another if it is necessary for that, until you reach the root of the aposteme.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	And if the aposteme is small, then place the cautery according to the quantity of the aposteme, and let it stay there for three days and place it on the swollen area until what the fire has consumed is removed.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	And then heal that which is wounded and bandaged and dressed until it is healthy.
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	And the shape of the cannula or of the cauteries is such as to convey.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter 23.
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	On Cauterization of Ulcers of the Voice and Constriction of the Wings.
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	When humidities come over the canal of the lung, and especially when that is accompanied by a cold complexion, then it is necessary that the patient be evacuated at the beginning with laxative medicines, and then cauterize that which is the root of the ulcer in the predetermined place.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	And beware that you do not bring the cautery to the ulcer nor burn the coding of it, but only a little.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	And cauterize that with another cautery at the joint of the spine in the upper vertebra of it.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	And the cautery of it should be made firm in the same way as before.
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And then heal that which is preceding until it is healthy.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter 24.
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	On Cauterization of Diseases of the Lung and of Coughs.
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	When coughs and diseases of the lung are of cold humidities and the patient has no fever nor tiredness and it is an old disease, then cauterize that with two cauteries on the furcula in the predetermined places, and with another cautery in the middle place of the chest between two nipples; and let the cautery be made firm according to the previous form.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	And if you wish, let your cautery be pointed with the cautery that is called a point, the form of which is described in the punctuation of pain of the ears.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And let them be points until they reach those; and then heal that which is wounded, as it is described, until it is healthy.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	And now the cautery has three ranks because the cauterization is in that: you can make three cauteries according to this form.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25.
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	On Cauterization of the Tonsils, which is the Head of the Helper.
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	When the head of the helper is dislocated due to lubricating humidities and does not remain in its place at the hour of its return, until it returns to its usual custom, and then by a small movement it is displaced, as we have testified, then it is necessary first to reduce the dislocation, and then the patient should be reversed on their back or side; and then lift the coding which is in the partition of the citillic to the upper parts with your left hand, if the joint is dislocated at the upper parts.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then ignite the cautery having two heads; and this is its form:
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	And then cauterize the coding until it penetrates into the other side; and you will find the figure of cauterization with four heads of cauteries.
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then apply those subtleties according to the quantity of tension; and this is its form:
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	And some times it is adjusted according to this count and because they are the eight cauteries.
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	And then place over the cautery a cloth soaked in salt water, and then make the patient adhere to tranquility, and the limb should not be moved for some time until it is comforted.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	And if the dislocation is at the upper parts and it is done thus, then cauterize over the muscle with a firm cautery or with many pointed cauteries, because the joint is confirmed and the humidity is removed and the patient is healthy.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter 26.
De cauterizacio del stomac.	On Cauterization of the Stomach.
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	When cold and many humidities enter the stomach to the point that it extracts its completeness and is multiplied in it, and if you continue the manners of cure and do not contradict, then it is necessary for the patient to be on their back raised, and extend their hands and their hips, and then cauterize that with three cauteries: one cautery below the chest for the quantity of a finger's length made firm, and two cauteries below the two sides of the cautery, until the figure of the triangular cautery appears; and elongate between those who are not adjusted so they will make a poultice.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	And if the depth of the cautery equals the amount of the two tender spots on the greatness of the codena.
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	And the figure of the cautery is added in this form, And if you wish, make a great cautery in the middle place of the stomach according to this form; and let it be a cautery according to the circular form.
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	And the stomach is cautery-pointed at that which of this cautery is frightened: and it is that you feel on the stomach point according to the amount that you wish to hold, and then cautery that with the cautery in the points; and then cure that with the cure that is preceded until it is healed.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter 27.
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	About the cautery of the fat foot flesh.
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	When there is pain in the foot due to cold or humidity or gross ventosity until it deviates from its normal complete complexion, and it is cured with the remedy that we have said and not comforted, then it is necessary that the patient be resupinated on their bed, and feel held by three cauteries according to this form and quantity, measured on the foot below the hip-joints, where one perceives the decubitus of the home.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	And let the space be which is between each cautery according to the greatness of the digit, and let the cautery be according to the length of the right body.
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	And do not comprehend your hand with the cautery motion.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	And if the amount of water that is absorbed is equal to the amount of the majesty of the speciosity of the codena, and it is not yet adjusted; and if the patient stands on their feet; and if they are not standing, then let them sit, who has already extended their thighs, and lifted their own arms.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	And this is the form of the cautery:
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	And it is possible for you to cautery these cauteries with a cautery cutter, when you are with subtlety and prudence in the art.
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	And beware that you do not proceed excessively in the cautery, and let the speciosity of the entire codena be absorbed so that it is absorbed throughout the whole body and reaches even into the intestines, because the codena here is subtle; and know this.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter 28.
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	About the perforation of an abscess of the foot with a cautery.
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	When there is an ulcer or abscess in the foot and you want to know if that abscess is in the flesh of the foot or in its tunic, then if it is in the flesh of the foot, the patient will feel grave attrition and sharp pain.
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	And if it is in the tunic of the foot, then the pain is greatly sharpened and many times the doctors fatigue themselves with the cure of it.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	Therefore it is necessary that the patient be turned over onto their back; and then feel the place of the abscess with attention; and then ignite the cautery which is assembled like a rake, in the form of which has been described on the other page.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	And cautery it with that cautery until the entire codena is consumed, until it reaches the siphac, until it does not remain sane.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	And then cure it by curing other abscesses until it is healed.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	And it is not necessary that this form of cautery be used unless the one who has studied in the art of medicine is prolonged, and in those who have many maladies anointed; more I have experimented with some veiled things being said about this operation, more however I leave to you, and it is better.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter 29.
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	About the cautery of plague sores.
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	The ancient cauteries of the roots of Aristology for plague sores are made according to this manner of being a doer, and it is this that you take from the roots of Aristology a long dry root which is found, and let it be of the greatness of the digit.
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	And then submerge it in oil and heat it at the fire, and then cautery with a cautery in that place which is between the continuity of the furcula and the neck; and make two small cauteries below guiding, one slightly declining towards the part that is below the beard, and make two cauteries on what declines between the fifth rib and the cisterna, declining slightly towards the back parts; and make another cautery in the middle place of the foot; and another on the stomach, and three cauteries of the back parts; and make a cautery in that place which is between the two shoulders, and make two cauteries of the two sides of the foot, below the cautery which is between the two shoulders.
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	And it is not necessary that you comprehend your hand with the cautery, but rather let it be in the manifestation of the codena in work.
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	And thus I have described the ancient customs that are of the men who use iron cauteries resembling a ray and ignite it, and place it in that place which is between the ribs, until they reach the abscess and heal the sanity, just as we have said about the abscess of the foot.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	More in this perforation, a cautery is not its remedy, because it can cause more harm than good by accelerating the flow of bad humors to the affected area which does not heal.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter xxx (where xxx represents a chapter number)
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	About the cauterization of the spleen.
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	When you treat the disease of the spleen as we have said about the treatment in the division and do not confuse your treatment, then cauterize it in three ways, all of which are direct, one of which is to make three or four linear cauterizations according to the length of the spleen according to the figure of the cauteries of the foot, the figure of which has preceded.
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	And let there be between each cautery the width of a finger or a little more, and the manner of the cautery should be the same as we have said about the cautery of the foot, in accordance with the guideline.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	And do not comprehend your hand on the cautery; and the disease should be alleviated above the two kidneys.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	And there is another way of cauterizing, so it is that you should ignite the cauteries having two vertiments, which causes we have said in the chapter on dislocation of the muscle, and elevate the codena which is at the end of the spleen where it perceives the jaundice of the sinister disease.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	And let your elevation be the one that elevates the codena according to the length of the body, so that you make several cauteries according to the width of the body.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	And then insert the two vertiments, ignite slowly, in that interval where they penetrate the codena on the other side.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	And then extract the cautery; and thus you will make four cauteries.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	And if you wish, cauterize with a cautery having three vertiments.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	And then you should cure the cautery afterwards, so that it does not remain stuck for three days, because it is more comfortable than the other causes preceding in the treatment.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter xxxi (where xxi represents a chapter number)
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	About the cauterization of dropsy.
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	Cauteries are not made on dropsical patients except in certain specific places.
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	When you treat a dropsical patient, the methods of treatment are those which we have said in the division and do not confuse your treatment, then it is necessary that those cauteries are four cauteries around the navel, and one cautery on the stomach, and another cautery on the foot, and another cautery on the spleen, and two cauteries between the vertebrae of the back, and one cautery on the right side of the chest, and another cautery on the stomach.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	And the quantity of the depth of the cautery should be proportionate to the specific condition of the codena.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	And then leave the cautery open so that it does not remain stuck for a long time.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	And do not evacuate the disease from treatment then with the cautery as it is necessary for that to be added to the two intentions, and it will be fastened to the other healthy helper.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	The shape of the cautery on which the belly is cauterized should be club-shaped according to the shape of that which precedes, and it is that on which the back is cauterized olive-shaped according to its preceding form.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter xxxii (where xxxii represents a chapter number)
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	About the cauterization of feet and thighs.
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	When the feet are afflicted with dropsy and are full of stagnant water, it is necessary to cauterize the feet on the back of the foot at night, in a place that is between the auricular and the anular, and elevate your hand on the cautery and do not twist it; and then elevate your hand, and do not return it at all, because the stagnant water recedes.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	It is the cautery according to this form: And then make on both thighs two cauteries, and in each thigh a cautery is made at the extremity of the cautery, cutting instrument.
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	And let the cautery be according to the length of the thigh: one is below the knee and the other is in the middle of the thigh; and on each thigh two cauteries.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	And leave the open plague untreated for a long time, so that some water recedes from it.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	And then cure the hands according to those causes which we have said.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter xxxiii (where xxxiii represents a chapter number)
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	About the cauterization of the body and belly.
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	When the body and belly are cold and humid, so that they debilitate the vertebrae, it is the digestive and retentive virtue, which are in the stomach and intestines, and it is cured according to the methods of treatment and do not confuse, and sometimes the suffering disease exhibits a cautery of virtue, then cauterize it with a great cautery on the navel of the stomach according to what has preceded in the cauterization of the stomach, with a circular cautery and four cauteries around the subtle navel, with a subtle club-shaped cautery; and a cautery on the alcatin above the great kidneys, or two cauteries.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	And if the patient's excessive moisture is exhuberating and they can tolerate it, then cauterize above the navel and above the intestines, and strongly adjust two cauteries on the stomach and near the groin, for it is a perfect cure of juvenile gout that does not err.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter 34.
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	On the cauterization of ancient hemorrhoids.
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	When they are in the nature of ancient hemorrhoids or one of gross humors that corrupts or moisture that corrupts, and they are cured with what has been said in the division and do not confer quick cure, then cauterize with three cauteries above the pus below the small triangular spine, and with a cautery above the navel on both sides.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	And if you suspect that their stomach is inflamed and their food is not digested, and their face is often spotted, then cauterize above the stomach with a large cautery as previously described; and with one cautery on the thigh, and another on the middle of their back with a clave-shaped cautery, and leave the cauteries for some time open, and thus cure them from within so that they are healthy.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter 35.
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	On the cauterization of atheyl for the removal of them.
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	When you remove atheyl, then you ignite the cauteries that are assembled in a row.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	Then insert the ignited cautery into that removed atheyl, and finally, place your hand inside so that you reach the cautery to the orifice of the vein from which the blood flows.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And make it one or two, for if they are many, then cauterize each of them according to what has been recounted, and thus cure those who confer health to their joints from within so that they are healthy.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	And if you cauterize with a large cautery on the shoulder, it is more beneficial in juvenile gout.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter 36.
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	On the cauterization of fistulas that are formed in the nature of the patient's divided parts.
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	When the nature does not obey the work that has been recommended in its place, and the patient is despaired by it, then heal with a cautery.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	Therefore, when you have a fistula in the patient's nature, and it is ancient, corroding their health with corrupting moisture, and therefore it is more worthy that you cover it with a subtle probe, and then determine the quantity of its depth beforehand mentioned probe.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	Then ignite the cauteries that are assembled in a row.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	And then insert that ignited cautery into this fistula, and according to the quantity by which you introduce the probe.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And iterate over that cautery until you consume those corrupted bodies entirely, one or two or three times, according to the quantity of your necessity.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	And beware of combustion of nerves and veins; or if the fistula goes to the body of the bladder or to the body of the intestine, then beware of all those places; and do not make it so unless the fistula is in a fleshy place and you think that it does not penetrate.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	And thus cure the place from within so that it is healthy.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	And if the place is sealed, and you have removed from it the materials, and it remains like that for a long time, then you will know that it is entirely cured.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	And if the materials are not removed from it, then you will know that it is penetrating or in the vicinity of their corrupted bone, or thus one of those causes which will bring remembrance to its place.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter 37.
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	On the cauterization of the kidneys.
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	When in the kidneys there is pain due to cold or gross ventosity, and thus the side of the patient's thigh is weakened, then cover that which you cauterize above the kidneys with a cautery on each kidney with a clave-shaped cautery, from which proceeds remembrance.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	And strongly cauterize them in the second small space, so that three lined cauteries will come, and thus they will be more beneficial in juvenile gout.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter 38.
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	On the cauterization of the bladder.
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	When there is debilitation and mollification in the bladder due to cold and moisture, so that the patient's urine does not retain, then cauterize that in the lower part above the bladder, where the skin of the navel begins, and cauterize with one cautery on the right side, and another on the left side.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	And let the length of each cautery be according to the quantity of notes of the foot; and cauterize that with a cautery in the lower part of the back, or with two cauteries if it is necessary.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	And let it be clave-shaped cauteries as previously described.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter 39.
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	On the cauterization of the matrix ( uterus ).
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	When cold and moisture come to the matrix ( uterus ), and thus it is prohibited from conception, and its menses are corrupted, and it is delayed in provoking them, and there is pain due to the hindrance of them, then cover that place which is cauterized with three cauteries in the circuit of the navel, as we have said in the cauterization of the bladder; and with a cautery on the lower part of the back, or with two cauteries, and let it be clave-shaped cauteries.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter 40.
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	On the cauterization of a dislocated ankle.
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	When moisture accumulates and is retained in the ankle joint, and it causes inflammation of the surrounding tissue, and it seems that the thigh is prolonged over the other when compared between them.
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	And the place of the dislocation is revealed by the boy's cries.
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	Therefore, it is advisable to cauterize the patient's ankle joint with a circular cautery, since you will have felt it in the circuit of the joint thus, and for that reason the joint returns to its proper place within the circle.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	And this is the cautery which precedes the form in the cauterization of the stomach.
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	And if this cautery is not present for you, then cauterize that man with three olive-shaped cauteries.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And make the cautery according to the quantity of the inspection of the entire code; and then cure that interior so that it may be healthy.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter 41.
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	On the cauterization of the sciatic vein.
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	When pain occurs in the ankle joint, and it is caused by cold and moisture, the patient is cured with what we have said and not contradicted, and that which is ancient, then it is advisable to free the patient from gross humors through foul-smelling pills or artificial ones; and then cauterize accordingly.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	And the manner of cautery in that is according to two manners: either cautery with burning medicines, or cautery with fire.
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	It will be according to two scientific manners, one of which is that it cauteries the patient's ankle joint with three triangular-shaped cauteries in this form; and do so with good depth.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	And the space between each cautery is according to the quantity of the thickness of the digit, and so the olive-shaped or large cautery.
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	Sometimes it is necessary to place the cautery on the proper spot above the head of the ankle because there are four cauteries.
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	And if you wish, cauterize with the circle in which the form is preceded in the cauterization of the ankle's dislocation, there where the circle contains and burns the inspection of the entire code.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	And this is the manner of cautery in every case when pain is adhering to the ankle and does not extend into the thigh.
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	But if it is extended into the thigh, then cauterize that man with two cauteries on the thigh at the place where the patient's pain is; and with one cautery on the hip for four fingers' breadth below the affected part.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	And if the cautery is cutting, and its depth is according to the quantity of the inspection of the code.
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	And if the patient finds that the pain is extended into the proper place near the toes, then cauterize accordingly with three points or four, or even more if it is necessary for that.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	And if the patient finds pain beneath the knee towards the thigh, then cauterize accordingly with a cutting cautery.
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	And beware in all cauterization that you do not exceed with the cautery so as to burn nerves or large arteries, and that for this reason you are above the patient's evil or contradiction.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	And I have already seen one and another of those who cauterized on the hip and ultimately in the cauterization, and the inflamed tumor inside which reached the foot, and fire perforated and corrupted the entire foot.
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	And then a strong solution of wormwood, and then death follows.
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	And if the pain is in two parts simultaneously, cauterize each one according to this manner.
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	And I will describe the wise men in the cauterization of ankle joints, which is this manner: make a circle of iron like a ring of which the circumference is the width of a palm; and it should be about four fingers' breadth or a little less.
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And let that circle be another inch; and the space between them is the quantity of the knuckle of the thumb; and those circles are used for two parts; and their length is one or two inches, and make the iron margin decently apparelled in the circles; and this is the form of it:
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	Then ignite it in the fire until it becomes red-hot and sparks appear, and then place it on the ankle joint, the patient holding onto the thigh with their hand.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	And thus cauterize that man with three red-hot cauteries in one go.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then leave it like that for three days; then apply a poultice to the patient's wound and leave the ulcerous plague for many days; and then cure the patient with an ointment until they are healthy.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	Here says Albucassis: Oh, sons, of this species of cauteries few have used for the terror of the regard of it, and for that reason few have found those who regard it above all.
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	More of the cauteries are applied to him who suffers, and it is necessary to remove them from that place.
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	More cauteries are medical adhesives that you make two circles with a perforated armula in which you insert the hinge of the iron door; it is the length of the partition in the nausea of their signs or those aquelines.
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	And if the space which is between almost the quantity of the thickness of the digit; and they are opened above and below, and they contain themselves among their following this form:
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	And then stop on the partition of the water which the patient is sitting on, and comprehend your hand on the partition of the water; and take hot water and put it between two circles, and the quality of that water should be warm little by little, and hold it for the quantity of an hour, and suffer the patient the moderation and adjustment of it — because that moderate warmth thus from fire — until the moderation ceases.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	And then lift your hand with the instrument and evacuate the hot water from all of the water into warm water.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	And then leave it like that for three days and stop on that border until the blackness of the adjusted remedy remains, and leave it like that for some days, and correct the purification of the putridity; this is the last stage in the treatment.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then cure him who is wounded until he is healed.
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	And if the pain is extended into the thigh or leg, make him stand in it containing water according to what is done in the warm bath.
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	And this is the method of hot water, and I have already written that in the treatise on the rectification of medicines.
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	Recipe of alkaline and cause not extinct of two names one, and crush them and stop in a new vessel of which the partition below is perforated by a small tube, according to the quantity that enters into the rule.
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	And stop below the bottom of another vessel enveloped, and gather above that alkaline and cause living water which covers those for one digit, and since you comprehend those with your good compression, and leave the hole that separates from the sharp water in the partition below to the enveloped vessel.
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	And then adjust all that water, and gather it above another living cause and other alkaline renovating, because at that time it will be of much stronger acuteness, which is administered in many operative operations of medicine and in cauterization of the other members, because the operation makes fire.
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	And thus of the medicines some are those which are cauterized deeply, thus like Tezizic and Mel Anacrat and cause are known in that way, so they are mixed.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	And Gualia recounts of a man of the ancients the operation and cure in which he cured pain of water and sciatic vein, and magnified much to be of that, and says that there is no need for another cure, and because it is healed for a while thus as recommended, because the strong one enters into banishment and thus I know of that.
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	And it is that he takes certain vert green, and if it is not found vert, take recent fig; and much is triturated in a few gray ones and placed on the water where the pain is, or in the thigh, or in the leg, and bind.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	And let it sit for a quantity of three hours or for the amount that the patient feels relief from the adjustment.
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	And then put him in banishment and thus when his body is enraptured, bury him in the ground, because the pain ceases and he is healed.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	And you know that it does not cover that some use of cauteries in these medicines, but rather the evacuation of the body.
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	More, Escorides says that when an opening of a goat's vein is cauterized, it will make him well; and it is the cautery in him according to this method: take wool and dip it in hot oil, and place it between the toes of the foot and between the fossils.
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	And then take a dry goat's opening and inflame it with fire until it is made into charcoal; and then stop him above the wool and leave it until it is stretched.
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	And then repeat this, and do not stop until the sentiment of moderation penetrates into the water and relieves the pain.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	And this method of cauteries is called cautery of goat's horns.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter 42.
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	On the Cauterization of Pain of Teeth.
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	Some teeth pains are due to multiple causes, such as decay or percussion or excessive evacuation, and similar causes, from infusion of corrupt and humid matter.
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	And cauteries are not effective except in this sole species which is made by effusion of corrupt matter.
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	Therefore, it is necessary to evacuate the patient with fitted pills and similar to them, which are made on the teeth where the pain is three lines according to the latitude of him, because you have ten in each line or cauteries or more, according to the quantity that is seen from the tolerance of the patient and the virtue of him.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	And if it is necessary to make a pointed cautery on the surface of the foot.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	If you want, cauterize with three or four cauteries on the middle clavicle in this manner:
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter 43.
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	On cauterization at the beginning of gout treatment.
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	Moist heat is applied to this sickness in small children; and the sign of its beginning in children is that it settles on their little arms and legs, causing elevation and movement.
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	And it starts in the posterior spinal vertebrae of the back and ribs, which begin to overcome the other vertebrae.
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	And then when you see this and want to prevent it, then cauterize with a cautery that is circular in shape according to this method:
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	that takes the cautery over the entire affected part of the spine, including.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	And if you want, cauterize around the circle of the spine with a pointed cautery in two lines or three.
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	And place the points properly between them.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	And then heal the area inside so that it is healthy again with what we have said.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	Be careful that cautery is not administered in gout that is caused by nerve spasm.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter 44.
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	On the cauterization of gout and joint pain.
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	And then how gout caused by cold is cured in a manner of cure and the pains are not relieved, then they are relieved with cauteries.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	And it is that you cauterize with proper evacuation around the circle of the foot joint with several cauteries.
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And this cautery is olive-shaped, of which this is its form:
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	And if the pains go inside to the teeth or to other joints, and there is much moisture, then cauterize with an olive-shaped cautery on each tooth with three or four cauteries of the entire affected part.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	And if many cauteries are needed for this cautery to be necessary, then cauterize and do not press too hard with your hand on the cautery beforehand, but only surround the affected area of the codena.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	And if the pains go inside to the tooth and the back, then administer the cautery which we have said in the seventh chapter.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	And if the pains are only in the jaw, and it is called sagra, then point around the circle of the teeth thus as they revolve, point in those two lines.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	And if the pains remain in the fingers, then point around the circle of the teeth on each rib and on the palm of the hand.
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	And if the pains go near to the joints or to the muscles, then cauterize the affected parts of the joints.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	And do not evacuate the sickness with good regimen and reception of medicines, for if it is done with good regimen and evacuation is done with this cautery, it will be healthy, God willing.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter 45.
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	On the cauterization of fractures.
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	When there is a fracture in the veins and the intestine comes out of its cavity to the genital area, and this is the beginning of the problem, then it is necessary that you send the sickness to its own consumption on the seventh day and that you use lenient causes so that the wound is closed on the seventh ventre.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	And then follow the sickness between your hands over the seventh back, and command it to hold the seventh wing inside so that it is not visible or apparent in the cavity or intestine.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	And then return it to the ties of the fingers and hold it in tension over the bone of the little finger on the sign of the rupture, similar to the circle at the subordinate parts of the body.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then ignite the cautery of which this is its form:
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	until it is very red and has many sparks.
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	And then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	And then stop the cautery on that sign with your hand on the cautery stand upright, and thus it enters into the bone of the little finger within the middle of the two; and afterwards, if you have not succeeded in the first attempt, try again another time until you succeed.
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	And observe carefully the movement of the intestine during your cautery, that you do not harm the intestine so that on the sickness it does not come into death or another great evil.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	You should know that when you hold the cautery, do not touch the bone, nor confuse your operation.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	And it is necessary that the cautery for children be subtle according to their age and measurement.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	Then treat the area of the cautery for three days by keeping it wrapped so that the crust of the burn is removed.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then treat those with other ointments until they are healed.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	The patient should sit on a soft cushion for forty days until the area and the wound are sealed.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	And it is necessary that the nourishment of his body be regulated according to the length of time of his treatment, which will reduce the emptiness of his belly, and that the intestine does not come out due to the effort of healing.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	And then when it is desired to get up after forty days, administer the decent food gradually, and hold him back for another forty days.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	And he should be moderate in labor and in replenishing with food and drink, and of violent vomiting, because when one uses this entire regimen of healing, they will entirely be healthy.
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	And you will direct the healing of ruptures in other parts of the belly, and so at the beginning, and you want that there be no delay, then cautery the rupture with a red-hot iron according to its quantity, and it is that which is expelled from the codena thus as the third part of it; and then treat him who has said this, and do not adjust.
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	And you will discover some first principles that the rupture should be cautered with a triangular cautery according to this form, since it is signified by a tent.
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	And it is a paused line that goes for the latitude in the lattice above the rupture, and another line below; and place your hand with a keyed cautery, but the first cautery is more light and better.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter 46.
De cauterizacio de torcio.	On the Cauterization of the Torso.
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	When pain is fixed in some members by fall or by percussion and it persists for a long time and does not yield to medical treatment, then it is necessary to cautery with a pointed cautery.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	And the cautery of each member is according to its size and smallness, and its purity and development, and location of torso and pain of it.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	Then if it is healthy through the first cautery, it is good; and if not, then iterate over it with the cautery; because it is customary for those pains to be punctured from member to member, approaching the one that is closest to you, so that it is necessary to continue with the cauteries until the patient is healthy.
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter 47.
De cauterizacio de lepra.	On the Cauterization of Leprosy.
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	Some lepers are wounded by cautery for great judgment, and it is better if the species of leprosy that is made by putrefaction of flesh and melancholy.
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	And then when you want to cautery that, consider if the leprosy is common and as it can be cured with what we have said in the division and not delayed, nor is this, and fear about the patient that the corruption comprehends all of his body and all of his complexity, then cautery that on the head with five cauteries: one in the middle of the head, and one below it, and one on each side of the forehead to the ends of the hairs; and two above the ears; and one behind, above the nape or service.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	And finally place your hand with the cautery a little inside so that it impresses a small impression on the bone, and from it the scorpions are dislocated, so that the expiration of gross vapors is alleviated from him; and cautery on the mesentery according to what is prescribed.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	And if the leprosy is already expanded over the patient and appears manifestly, then it is necessary to cautery with those cauteries which we have said on the head; and one cautery on the extremity of the nose, and two cauteries on each shoulder blade, and two cauteries on each vertebra of the neck, and six cauteries on each vertebra of the back, and one large one on each vertebra near the hip, and one on the hip, and two on each thigh, and one on each knee, and two on each shin, and one on each ankle, and two on each foot, and one on each toe; and cautery on all the joints of the said parts and feet, and on each talon of the aforementioned feet, and on the soles of their feet.
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	And beware of the nerves that are above the talon so that you do not harm them.
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	And some wounded are cautered with a cautery on the bone of the thigh and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the liver.
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	And you should know that the more you adjust cauteries, the more they are judged and conferred; and you should know that the patient does not have pain in the cautery, thus as they have said, because the body of him is already stupefied.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	It seems that the medical treatise is describing a procedure for treating joint pain or gout.
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Here's my translation:
Capitol .xlviii.	Here's my translation:
De cauterizacio de stupor.	Here's my translation:
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	Here's my translation:
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	Here's my translation:
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Here's my translation:
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	Here's my translation:
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	Here's my translation:
Capitol .xlix.	Here's my translation:
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	Here's my translation:
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	Here's my translation:
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	Here's my translation:
Capitol .l.	Here's my translation:
De cauterizacio de cranc.	Here's my translation:
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	Here's my translation:
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	Here's my translation:
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	Here's my translation:
Capitol .li.	Here's my translation:
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	Here's my translation:
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	Here's my translation:
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	Here's my translation:
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Here's my translation:
Capitol .lii.	Here's my translation:
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	Here's my translation:
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	Here's my translation:
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	Here's my translation:
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	Here's my translation:
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	Here's my translation:
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	Here's my translation:
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	Here's my translation:
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	Here's my translation:
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	Here's my translation:
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	Here's my translation:
Capitol .liii.	Chapter Three.
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	About cauterization of wounds and other similar ones.
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	Moth-eaten wounds appear on the affected parts of the foot afflicted by what is called a nail, and it is a gross, deep-seated cause that afflicts the foot; and cauterization is done in two ways, so it is done with fire and it is done with hot water.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	The cauterization with fire is that you ignite the cautery iron similar to a burning branding iron, which is made of iron according to the quantity it holds of the entire affected part, and has subtle margins.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	And then stop the burning iron on the nail, and then rotate your hand with the cautery in a circular motion around the nail until the cautery penetrates to the depth of the nail.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	And leave it like that for three days until it begins to form crusts.
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	And then apply a plaster made with soothing herbs mixed with salt, and leave the plaster on it for a night, because it will eradicate its roots.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	And then heal the place where the cancerous flesh is generated until it is healthy.
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	And if it does not convert, and moth-eaten wounds appear on the surface of the body, especially on the hands and feet, then it is necessary that you administer to those a cautery with hot water, and it is that you take a small tube of iron or of fire or of branding iron, and stop it on the nail; and then pour a small quantity of hot water into the tube, and hold your hand, and you rotate it in compression with your whole hand, and it is pressed against the margin of the tube on the root of the nail, and the hot water flows through to the root of the nail; and wait for the patient a little while the biting of the hot water per hour, and then remove it, because the nail with its roots will be eradicated.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	And thus do the same to those and then to the other until you come upon all the ones that are in their place in the body.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	And then heal those whose roots of the nails are eradicated, and the flesh that was generating them is healed.
Capitol .liiii.	Chapter Four.
De cauterizacio de tremor.	About cauterization of trembling.
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	When there is a trembling due to cold in the nerves or because of fever from a cold cause, or another similar cause, then it is necessary that you cautericize it with four cauteries or five over the vertebrae of the back, between each vertebra a cautery; and apply a cautery on their chest, and on their stomach, apply a cautery on the olive-shaped part.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	And the trembling of it is relieved and the health of the affected cold is restored.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter Five.
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	About cauterization of sudden accidents to the body.
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	When the body is suddenly afflicted, and pus-filled wounds appear which are made of gross, corrupt materials; therefore it is necessary at the beginning to appear, that it be cauterized over the entire head of the fistula with a subtle cautery made of myrtle wood, the extremity of which is extended in fire; or with roots of long-lasting unction; or with a slowly-releasing cautery.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	And the same wounds are cauterized at the beginning of their expulsion according to this method; and not swollen, and the superfluous flesh is dispersed, and they are healthy.
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	However, it is necessary that this be done with evacuation through bloodletting.
Capitol lvi.	Chapter Six.
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	About cauterization of bloody fluxes caused by accidental incision of an artery.
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	Moth-eaten wounds appear with bloody fluxes from the artery that is cut by the wound which appears beforehand, or by the incision of apostemes or cauteries of the limb, and it seems difficult to stop that.
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	Then when it happens to those, then you should grasp with your hand at the orifice of the artery, and stop on that place until the blood flow stops, so that the moths-eaten wounds are stifled until the bloody fluxes cease from that place, and do not come out.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	And then stop in the fire the olive-shaped cauteries, few and large in number, for many wounds, and blow on them until they are extinguished.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	And then take from them a small or large one according to the place and the wound in which the artery is broken, on that vein firmly, so that you may reattach the severed tie, and apply the cautery until it is closed and restrained, and the blood flow is restored.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	And if the blood is expelled from the orifice of the artery when you reattach the severed tie and remove the cautery, then take another cautery carefully from among the cauteries that are prepared in the fire, and thus do not cease to apply it until the blood flow is restrained.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	And beware that you do not touch the nerves that are here, and that another evil comes upon the affected part.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	We know that when the arterial flow is healthy, then it is not possible to restrain the blood in those who are restless, and especially when the artery is large, if not one of four manners: either with a cautery as I have said, or with extraction when it is not extracted, because when the extremities of my veins are burned they are restrained and the blood is repressed; or that it be tied with a strong ligature, or placed on top of medications which restrict the blood flow; and thus they are strengthened in a pulvine constriction.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	Perhaps he who administers a decent restraint to his ligature and strictness in the drops or by position of causes that burn and of similarities, does not compare but is bitter.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	Perhaps if he endeavored to remove the medicine, and there was no doctor present nor medicine, then he would have made a pause in the indicated position over the orifice of that vein, as I have said, and intended to constrict greatly within so that the blood would be stopped from the superior part of the plague, and above the artery it is not renewed; and above the artery it is aspurgated with abundant water of great coldness within so that the blood would be congealed and thickened; and perhaps he should have cauterized or applied necessary medicine.
Comensa la segonda partida.	It begins the second part.
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	Of incision and perforation and vesications and of phlebotomy and of wounds and of their similarities.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are the teachings of Albucasis.
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	I have said in the first chapter all about the malady in which cautery is convenient and comburent medicine, and the occasions and causes of it, and the instruments necessary for its forms; and I will order the chapters according to the subordinate nature of the head until the feet.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	And I will proceed in this chapter by that method, so that it may be clarified to the one who seeks it, then above that which he will have demanded.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	And therefore I begin here, my dear son, to learn that in this chapter it is for fear of what is in the first chapter of cautery.
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	And for this, my dear son, it should be with great caution, because in the operation which is in this chapter many evacuated matters are involved, such as evacuation of blood from the vein or incision over the aposteme or perception of exosture or purification of the wound or extraction of a splinter or beginning of a pyre and their similarities.
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	And all these things are accompanied by fear and trembling, and in the end of their matters death.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	And I warn you that above you do not fall into the situation in which there is stagnation, because some evacuated matters are causes of many manners of men with many manners of maladies.
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	And of them it is clear that they flee from their malady and fear death, and thus for the vehemence of what they find in their malady, and for the length of their malady, and in the malady is the fear which signifies death.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	And of these it is what I give to your son to have and to say, you hoping for that health, and the following malady is pernicious.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	And therefore do not think that you consent to that which comes from what is in this manner; and your caution should be greater than curiosity and your rashness; and do not presume any cause over what is not certain science, which verifies what comes from you, and at which point you will have a successful outcome.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	And you will be established in the cure of all your maladies with prognosis and indication of what is converted health, because in that you are helped by acquisition of fame and memory, of praise and glory.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	Oh, sons, God inspire your understanding and not lack direction and protection, because that is in His hand.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	And I have ordered this chapter distinctly into chapters according to what precedes in the chapter of cauteries, from the cure of the head to the feet, so that it may be clarified to you what you demand of it and of what you have need.
Capitol primier.	First Chapter.
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	On the cure of water which is contained in the head of infants.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	We know that this malady has many evacuated matters in the infants from birth and when the nourishment strengthens the head of the infant, it vivifies.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	And some evacuated matters come from a hidden cause which is not known.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	Perhaps I have not seen this malady except in infants; and all those whom I have seen are touched by death, and thus it is to me a sad and mournful work in them.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	And I have seen that an infant whose head was filled with water, and the head of it was magnificently enlarged until it could not support itself because of the greatness of its head, and perhaps the humidity made it increase until it died from the fire.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	And this humidity or is added between the codena and the bone, or is added beneath the bone above the siphac.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	Because the operation on that man is between the codena and the bone and the apostema is small, then it is necessary to make a hole in the middle of the head in a fissure in latitude, and let the length of the fissure be two inches so that the humidity can flow out, and this is the shape of the spatula.
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	And so if the humidity is more increased and the apostema is larger, then there are two fissures here according to this manner.
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	And if the humidity is below the bone, it seems that you sometimes close the commissures of the head opened from all sides and the water is squeezed out when you compress it in the same manner with the parts divided into sections and it is not what you are looking for.
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	It is necessary to make three fissures in the middle of the head according to this manner.
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	And then extract the entire humidity; and then strengthen the fissures with draps and plumassols; and then introduce water above in six days, and then dissolve the liament and cure the plague in tenderness and inflammation, and strengthen the head in equality; and nourish the patient with dry food of little humidity until the member is comforted and healed.
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	And there is another manner of incision, which considers how to appear the magnitude of the apostema and the collection of water, because some veins are more in the occipicii, or in the front part, or on the right, or on the left; and so attend to the incision to appear the apostema and the replenishment of water, and do it according to what is most possible for you.
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	And observe that you do not cut the artery and avoid fluent flows of blood and more, lest the patient die from that flow of blood with evacuation of humidity.
Capitol .ii.	Chapter 2.
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	On the incision of the arteries which are near the ears, called hilasseysse.
Capitol segon.	Chapter following.
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	When there are many catarrhs or rheums in the eyes or chest, and it is antiquated water, and it does not confer on that the cure of medicines, then the last cure is to make an incision of those two arteries.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	And so it is necessary when you want to incise those that the patient's head is swollen, and then strengthen the location with a sharp drap for so that the arteries appear, and then strengthen the neck of the patient with some drap; and then consider the pulse of the vein; and the locations of each one above the locations which are near the ears, and they hide themselves in some homes.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	And then place a sign above the artery in tension, and then incise each one with the spatula of each part affected by the incision penetrating into the bone, and it is so for the latitude of the head.
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	And if you want, introduce the spatula below the artery and cut into it to make incisions in the parts above.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	And let the length of the incision be two digits adjusted, because when a vein is incised, the blood is ejected with pulsating egress, which bursts forth frequently.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	But if the artery does not appear at the incision site, then it is necessary to measure from the ear the quantity of the space of three digits, and then place a sign in tension, and make an incision into the bone.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	And it is necessary to extract from the blood a quantity of six ounces. and strongly hold that it is not gotten from the patient more or less, and all that is according to the quantity which appears from the virtue of the patient and from the replenishment of the artery of it.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then consider the plague, and so if there remains on the bone some cause of the ciphac, then incise that so that no apostema is cauterized.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then strengthen the plague with plumassols and liaments of drap from it, and then cure that in inflammation until it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter 3.
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	On the extraction of the arteries which are in the temples.
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	When there are many accidental migrations of ancient or chronic catarrhs, due to humidity and quality in the lacertz of the temples, or an old vehement and similar thing, and it is medicated with the manners of cure of medicine and that does not confer, then we have progressed to these maladies extraction of the arteries from the temples, or cauterization of those thus as we have shown.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	And the manner of the operation and extraction of those is that the patient's skin is lifted from the places which are in the temples; and intend to the apparent artery in the temple because it is shown to you by the sieu pulse, and is hidden only in few homes due to vehemence of friction.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	And if it is hidden, then the neck of the patient should be strengthened with some drap; and then rub the location with a sharp drap or evaporate the location with hot water until the artery appears manifestly to you.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then you take the spatula of which this is the shape:
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	And then you scrape the codeina in a way that facilitates its entry into the artery; and then get it out of the ontium and extract it from the superior parts until you extract it from the codeina and discover it among the tunics which are already there, from the whole affected area.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	Maybe the artery is subtle, then envelop it with the extremity of the instrument, and then incise that one part according to the quantity for which the extremities of it are elongated and constricted, and there will not be a flux of blood, because if they are not incised, the blood will not flow at all.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	And then evacuate the blood from the vicinity. up to three.
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	And if the artery is large, then it is necessary that you ligate it in two places with a double thread of hemp or with cordons at length, and do not allow putrefaction to occur within the consolidation of the wound and prevent the flow of blood.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	And then incise the superfluity which is between two ligaments; and do it at that hour or then another hour.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	And if you wish, cauterize it with a cautery into the bone with a cuticular cautery until the extremities of it are incised, and stay in place of that same great work.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	And it is a better work if the patient has fever or is of complicated composition; because cautery is among those causes that help to end humidity, and therefore it is better in healing.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	And it is necessary to extract the arteries that occupy the place of the ancient cut, and they are paused decently on the pillow, and then be cured with secret medicines that make the flesh and calcify within until it is healthy.
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if meanwhile you are working on another wounded area and blood flow from the artery occurs, then you must stop that blood, or use a cautery, or occupy the place of the cut, and strengthen your hand until the blood is restrained.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	And if none of those causes is present to you, then pause the tieu on the place until the blood is congealed, and wrap the place with water of vehement coldness until the acute pain reposes, and be strengthened according to what is necessary.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	And what is more suitable in the extraction of arteries is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery having two cotels, because you have touched the two places with tension, and pause sometimes, not much, until they penetrate to the bone and incise the vein in two places, so that it is elongated what is between the extremities of it, because they are not consolidated at all with this cautery.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	And this is the shape of the cautery:
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	And it is the acute pain of the two cotels together.
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	Maybe however it is better to mend the acute pain with two cotels, because if they are agitated together with two cotels close to each other, and do not incise the flesh quickly.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	So since there is some thickness in those, it has held the heat of the fire in those and the flesh is absorbed more lightly.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	And this work is better in all works and more lightly.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	And it is the space which is between two cotels, according to the quantity of the thickness of the finger.
Capitol quart.	Fourth chapter.
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	On the cure of bodies of acute and acidic ulcers of the eyes.
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	When the eyes are acidic, and it is the body of those veins which are above the forehead before, and there is no confidence in any cause of medical cure, and sometimes the face of the patient already enrogesir and feels in the sieve front of walking thus as if it were a walking of ants, and the eyes of that one are extinguished, humiliated thus that already their hair are conoduted, and the eyelids are scalped by the acuteness of tears, the ancient masters agree in the cure of those with this operation, and no one remembers that cure in space.
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	And it is that you command the patient to shave the hair which are in the sieve front, and then incise on the forehead three fissures equally distant according to the length of the forehead.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	And if the length of the fissure falls into two digits: one fissure is equally distant to the length of the nose in the middle place of the forehead, and the second according to the length of a small movement of the eyelids which are in the lacrimal, and the third part of another side.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	And beware of the beginning of the arteries which are in two layers, and elongate your hand from the continuation of both the mandibles.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	And if the space of each incision is adjusted to the quantity of three digits exactly.
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	And if you have a piece of spongy apparatus or secret threads that absorb the blood excessively.
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	And then insert the spatula of two acute extremities, of which this is the shape of the incision of it:
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	That it is of the partition of the temples entering into the second incision.
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	Extract the entire cord which is between two incisions at the cleft which is above the bone, and then make a point of the minor incision entering into the second incision.
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	And then insert a spatula into this space and enter the first incision with another instrument which is called a cutter, having one part and not having the other.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	And stop the latch of that cutter which detaches the annexed flesh from the cord, and the latch of the iron enters the bone, and embeds it so that it reaches the minor fissure, and absolves all those veins that descend from the head to the heels.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	It is better to continue the incision up to where the cord appears, and then make a point in the minor fissure entering into another fissure.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	And then correct the flow of the blood in equal quantity, express the places of the passages of the congested blood.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then stop in each warm fissure of the hot oil, and stop above those swollen veins that are inflamed with wine and oil and wine, and beware that there does not develop a post-operative abscess.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	And on the third day, remove the bandage and administer a great infusion of hot water or decoction, and then cure with basilicon ointment and rose oil and other things that the wounds may be healed.
Capitol .v.	Chapter 5.
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	On the cure of ulcers caused by catarrh and descending from the partitions of the head.
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	When you have catarrh coming and continuing, and sometimes the thighs of the patient are slightly extended, and already their eyes are weakened, and the eyelids are ulcerated and because of this the skin is rough, and in the forehead of the head there is sharp pain and consequent inflammation, then you will know by this accident that the materials and catarrh do not come except from many veins descending from the partitions above.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	And the best cure for this is: command the patient to shave their forehead, and then make an incision in that place at the middle of the forehead, a small one for the latitude (and begin with the incision from the left temple to the right temple; and it should be an incision into the bone; and extend your hand over the lacrimal ducts of the temples which are obstructed by mastigation), until the bone is uncovered.
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	Dry out all the blood with a sponge or a dry cloth, and then replace it between the two lips of the incision with hot oil or a dry cloth.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then strengthen below with swollen veins that are inflamed with wine and oil, so that there does not develop a post-operative abscess.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	And when you see that the abscess has diminished, then it is necessary to scrub the bone until it reaches the new flesh, and then cure with a regiment of drying treatment which makes the flesh numb, thus if you take two parts of flour from wheat and four parts of colofania and mix them, and make an emplastre and administer it to these wounds of the native flesh.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter 6.
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	On the cure of what falls into the ears.
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	The entire cause that falls into the ears is one of four species, either it is mineral peyra or a cause similar to peyra, thus like iron and vein, or it is from a plant thus like cese or fava, or it is a fluxtible cause thus like water and wine agree and its semblance, or some beast.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	And then when peyra falls into the ear or another similar cause among those causes that do not adjust in the ear, and stop the ear from the sun, and if it is peyra, then distill in some cause of violet oil or sizami, and then administer the extraction of it, and make a snuff with conditi, and open the nostrils to receive the benefit of the snuff.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	And then stop in the circle of the ear with some pieces of cloth or wool, and extend the ear to the parts below, because many evacuated matters are forgotten in these causes.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it is not evacuated, then administer extraction of it with the instrument called gesti epicicarios subtle of which this is the form:
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	And if it is forgotten in gesti, good; and if not, then administer the extraction of it with an instrument subtle of little duplication.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	And then if it is not forgotten for that, then make a tube of iron and insert the extremity of the tube into the tract of the ear and close the environment of the tube with wax and oil mollified so that nothing gets in except the tube.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	And then extract it from the tender vein with strong attraction, because many evacuated matters are gathered together as if they had been recounted.
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	It is better if it is not forgotten in this manner, then take alum water or prepared vessel according to which the wings of a small quantity are pressed, and stop that at the extremity of the ray, and then wrap around it with hot decoction paused decently.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	And then insert the instrument into the tract of the ear to facilitate, and then extract the ear from humidity.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	So then if not all the causes that we have recounted are forgotten, then you should touch the tooth with your finger to detect whether there is an abscess or spasm.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	And the manner of touching it is that you at the beginning sense the patient's vein pulse and extract the blood according to the manner of their vertigo, and then make a circle between your fingers and convert the ear to the lower parts, and find a small fissure in the root of the ear where the veins of it are premised.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And it is the lunar-shaped fissure that leads to the stone, and, the stone being obstructed, you can use an appropriate instrument there; and then close the fissure at that hour with velocity, and cure it so that it may be healthy.
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	And if the cause resides in the ear is one of the fats that grows and becomes inflamed, then administer the cure and extraction of it; but if you do not obey your own judgment, then take a subtle spatula tuned according to this form:
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	and administer to that the abscession of that fat which has fallen into the ear.
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	And do not do that when you think that it has already been moistened by the vapor of the ear, and pause in many places, and prepare to extract them with the fingers or gestures subtly, or without incision as we have said, because the extraction of it is alleviated.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	But in the water that has entered into the ear, because the patient uses sternutation at the beginning, and fills the entire ear with a lot of fluid, and pours over that ear where the water is, and if it is forgotten, well; and otherwise, then take three or four fingers' length according to the longitude of the finger, and heat them in a focus for a short time, and the patient inserts one of those into the tract of their ear and sounds above one side of that part and percusses with another stone on the stone that is inside the ear.
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	So, do not cease until all the water has been forgotten.
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc .i., e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	And then the water will be forgotten in this way that you take pieces of paper or of cotton. and place one end of it in the ear and extend the other end to the focus until it is burned by the bad humor of it.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	And then put another cotton and do it so many times until all the water is forgotten, and remove that with a cannula as was said about the extraordanary stone.
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	But in the extraction of beast that enters into that ear, if it is a small thing, thus pierce and to its likeness, cure it as we have said in the division; but if it is of great size which causes pain at the time of movement, then administer the extraction of it with gestures and fingers, and the cause of it is put less serious than all the other causes that occur in the ear.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	But in the extraction of worm engendered in the ear, when you cure it with water that we have said in the division and in the treatise on distillations and do not confuse your cure, then it is necessary that you expose the ear to sunlight.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then if any cause of worms appears here, then extract it with gestures or subtle fingers, but if no cause appears, then take a cannula straight and descending from the width of which this is the form of it:
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	And insert the subtle extremity into the ear according to the quantity that the patient can suffer; and then suck it with strong suction, and do it many times, until all the worms are forgotten.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	But if you do not obey your own judgment, then operate and close in the circuit of the cannula with wax as we have said; then administer distillations which have already been experienced by the ancients in the cure of worms, and you will find it in the treatise on distillations.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And it is your effusion which you pour out the medicinal oils into the ear with this instrument of which this is the form:
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	And make that of silver or of bronze, straight, in which there is a small hole, and place it thus.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	And then it is as they fill what is in the cavity of the cannula, to continue here where it will be necessary.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	And if you want, take the rod and envelop it decently in the extremity of it, and then put oil in the cavity of the instrument, or juice of some herb, or whatever you want of these medicines in the cannula — and that is in the ear —, and then insert the rod with a warm compress of it until the oil is expelled from the cavity of the instrument and the patient feels the oil dripping.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	And what is poured into the ear is already scaled in a focus for a short time.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	And beware that the cause which you distilled in the auricle is not too frequent, for auricular medicines do not suffice for this.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter 7.
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	On the treatment of obstruction of the ears.
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Some blocked veins in the belly of the mother are not perforated, and that is why it happens in some homes, an obstruction in the middle of the ear due to a plague or carnation in that; and this obstruction occurs in the prominence of the ear canal which does not receive the transmission, and some blocked veins are in the partitions before.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	And that which happens in its prominence, which does not receive the transmission, is in the major dispositions of difficult healing.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	And in that which receives the transmission, you should hold the ear of the patient to the sun and gaze into it.
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And thus if an apparent obstruction occurs, observe that with a subtle spatulum of which this is the form.
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	If the extremity of it is where the latitude is small, of which one part is acute and the other not; and the spatulum should be of two soft leon layers so that it does not cause harm to the ear.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	And thus if the obstruction is due to a birthmark in the ear or in its middle, then you should use subtle and vigorous incisions to facilitate the entry of the instrument so that all the flesh is removed.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	And if the obstruction is in the prominence of the ear, then take a subtle iron rod and heat it over fire for a little while, and then place it into the middle of the ear.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	And thus if you have felt an obstruction in that which the patient has facilitated, due to the gravity of the humor, it forces out the oppression of it; and beware that you do not harm the nerves of the ear.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then stop in the ear a drop of the oil according to the quantity of the width of the tube which you have involved in the Egyptian ointment; and do it for several days until you are sure of the consolidation of the plague; or take some water and infuse it into a saucepan, and pulverize over the already tritured and use it; and if the ear has been apostemated, then you should extract the water and permute it with another water which you have enveloped in wax that is well-roasted, until it is an apostema-free cauterized spot; and then cure it until it is healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	Moreover, if a flow of blood occurs, then submerge a sponge or cloth in cold water and apply it to the ear, and use another remedy that restricts the flow of blood, which is described in the treatise on distillation.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter 8.
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	On the treatment of athelial ulcers that occur in the eyelids.
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	Athelial ulcers which occur in the eyelids of the eyes, some blocked veins are humid, some blocked veins are dry.
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	Then you should hold those with tenacious or onion-like medications, and anoint them with their root extracts, and then apply it to the affected areas thoroughly triturated.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	Moreover, if pain occurs with a flow of blood, then you should cauterize those with a subtle lancet-like cautery.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	And the best cauterization is to return the incisions and many blocked veins when some cause of their roots remains; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter 9.
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	Treatment of cataracts that occur in the eyelids of the eyes.
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	Some blocked veins occur in the eyelids of the eyes due to some cause which is assembled with greatness in its strength and hardness, and thus it is called cataract.
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	And it is an addition of thick humidity in the upper eyelid and underneath.
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	Then the operation on them is that you should consider then if the cataract is proceeding in it from what appears on the eyelid and is moved to the entire part; and the cause of it is laziness.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	Then make an incision above it with a width, and then scrape off the entire affected part to facilitate evacuation, and then suspend it with an onion-like medication and absolve it.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	Moreover, if you do not prepare the incision of it, then you should not push so that it penetrates the eyelid with an incision little by little, then it will not be noticed in any case.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the figure is large, then you adjust it with a suture; and cure it until it is healed.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	And if it is small, you will not overcome evil through that which the anguish of it restores and incarnates.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	And if the cataract is declining to the deep parts of the eyelid from the superficial deep parts, then remove the eyelid and suspend the cataract with an onion-like medication, unless you indicate an incision, and prepare it for the entire part, and if the eyelid by incision is elongated, then it will not be noticed in any case.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	And apply the treatment, wash the wound with salt water; and care for the area in which it becomes enclosed so that it may be healthy.
Capitol .x.	Chapter 10.
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	About the treatment of abscesses under the eyelid.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	Abscesses are grayish in color, which are generated in the membranes of the eyelid, and worsen especially in children, aggravate the eyes of those who have it, and cloud their clarity of vision; and they cannot gaze at the brightness of the sun because of the great pain that afflicts them.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	And thus you find that they often shut their eyes during the day, and sleep with their eyelids half-closed, which have covered the inflamed membranes, and imminent danger of approaching cataract appears in the eye; and when you press on the place where the veins are, you feel an encroaching abscess.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	And a certain method of operation is in that patient who pauses his evil humor in the vein where it is, and then pause to draw out the fluid and its warmth, and make a circle according to the quantity that contains the entire affected part, and then pause on that area and press on the veins of the entire circle so that an abscess may be gathered in the middle of the circle, and then finish in the middle of that humidity at the spot incident on the fissure, and the fissure is not greater than the one made in phlebotomy.
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	You will find in the preceding cavity that you close the entire code entirely so that you may reach the abscess, because in the most disposed processes an abscess forms through a fissure according to the form of white grayness.
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	Then extract that fluid which you have enveloped between the veins of the affected parts before and revolves between the right and left hand so that it may be dispersed.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	And beware that you do not adjust on the fissure so that the spatula does not reach the eye and damages it.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	But if the abscess does not appear at the beginning of the fissure, but you adjust on the fissure with a small facilitating instrument so that it may process the abscess; and then extract that fluid as we have said; and then submerge the fluid in water and vinegar and place them over the area and strengthen those poultices.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	And thus you will find that they draw out salt and pause on the cavity of the fissure so that what remains of that humidity is removed.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then heal it so that it may be healthy.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	But if there is a post-apostemic ulcer, then treat it with applied poultices so that it may be healthy.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter 11.
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	About the methods of touching the eye.
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	When the eyelids of the eyes are naturally naked and antique, then they are close to the eye and become accustomed to methods of evil habits such as excessive tears and mollification of the eyelids and webbing, so that it is a cause of destruction of the eye which is called touching of the eye, and it is treated in four ways: either by cauterizing with a focus; or by acute medicine according to what has been said in the chapter on cauterizing; or by making an incision and suturing; or by cantharides as you have heard.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	And then you pause the head of the evil humor in the vein where it is; then convert the eyelid of the eye with your left hand, and if it is converted, well; and otherwise, insert a needle in that place where the faith of the affected part is beneath the eyelid, and make the needle penetrate into the faith underneath, and that is — near the edge of the eyelid where the hairs are — near the hairs, and pull the faith to the upper parts beneath the eyelid, and convert it into a ray.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	And then finish in the affected part beneath the eyelid, adjusting with a spatula incident on the major lacrimal into the minor lacrimal; and then extract the faith and pause beneath the eyelid with small poultices of cotton or cloth, and then place a bandage over the eyelid, taut, so that it may be like a figure of a myrtle leaf.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	But it is necessary to make the figure according to the quantity of elevation of the eyelid, because that has been diversified in many ways, so that it is the one which indicates that a great quantity should be incised from the eyelid according to the quantity for which the eyelid is mollified.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	And then finish with the spatula over the two lines which have been marked, and begin from the major lacrimal to the minor lacrimal.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	And if the fissure is near the natural hairs, thus it is like the largest root of the king.
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	And then place the ounce in one of the two angles of the code, and then excise all of it, and then adjust with a suture the two labial lips with thread or fine wool, and remove the blood, and make adhere what is superfluous of the lips above the two eyelids for some envisioning causes, if you want to do so, and otherwise, do not cure.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	And you should leave the stitching of the wounds for three or four days, and then take care to heal it.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	If you want, leave the wound's stitching, and take care to dry and constrict it, because the eyelid is elevated from the sealing of the wound and its aggregation; a better stitching is thus achieved by avoiding the toxins.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	It is more often solicited on the patient, and it is a good operation, and it is not in fear.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	And it is another manner in taxation, and it is that you sense on the eyelid figure thus as a mirror of myrt, and then elevate the eyelid by three inches separated and gathered according to this form:
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	If it is not possible otherwise, take the inches, and it does not get entangled, then take a needle in which there is thread and place it in the middle of the figure, and enter the other vein near the larger lacrimal, and the vein according to the smaller lacrimal, and adjust between the tissues of the veins equally, and then elevate your hand with elevation, elevate the entire code above which it is sensed thus as I have recommended.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust the two lips of the wound to stitching, and take care that it enters so that it may be healthy.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	But if there is an abscess from your incision or your fissure, then that abscess is to be removed and it seems similar, and it is of the same nature.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	And some veins are seen on the eyelid that seem to be converted, so cover them with something of what we have said about incision; but stitching is sometimes more artificial.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	To avoid toxins in this manner:
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	and it is that you convert the eyelid and dissect the figure that is deeply seated according to what I have recommended; and then by skillful art make two channels or two subtle threads of which the longitude is according to the longitude of the eyelid and the latitude of theirs is smaller than the latitude of the spatium.
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	And you have already made incisions in the extremities of certain divided parts, where you hold the threads.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	Then add subtlety under what superfluously flows from the eyelid of the wheel, and constrict the channels of certain divided parts with strong structure, and leave it for some days, because the code for the strict morbid structure will be denied and will be buried until it is seen that it will collapse.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	But if it is delayed, then break the crust of the tumors, and then take care to heal the wound until it is healthy.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	Then when it is consolidated, the eyelid is elevated and the skin does not puncture.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	And this is the method of making two channels which you will do according to this form:
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	and it has the quantity of longitude and latitude neither more nor less.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter 12.
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	On the elevation of punctured skin on the wheel with a needle when the skin is hard.
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	When the skin is unnatural, hard and rough and punctures the wheels, then the operation on it is that you take a subtle needle and pause in that vein of cedar subtle and lion, and then adjust the extremities of it and move subtly in some manner.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	And it is the longitude of the veins of a quantity of one palm.
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	And then you compose another subtle vein below it briefly, and numb the extremities of that if you want.
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	And then stop the patient's blood flow in the vein there, and it is proper of the sun for which your work is declared, because it is a subtle and minute operation.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	And then introduce the needle into the root of the adjusted skin which has need of ingenium, and make it penetrate the eyelid firmly until you extract it from under the natural skin.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	And then pull the skin until underneath and introduce it into the alloy, and they are one or two or three skins and no more.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	And then pull your hand until the skin is separated from the alloy in the eyelid with the natural skin.
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	But if it is stuck to the alloy and the skin is not freed, you will stick the alloy to the divided parts below with the vein which you have composed in that, until it is freed from the alloy of the superior trauma.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	And look at it in the vision of the wheel, because then you will free the alloy and the vein, and cleanse something and lock the wheel, and leave the lock for two days or three, until the skin adheres to its own place and grows over that good flesh.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	And if it is shorter the skin, then you adjust a long skin of natural skins, and it is elevated in that, or it remains until it is lengthened then to some space, and then you elevate it.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter 13.
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	On the treatment of extracting what is seen in the eyelid underneath.
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	When the vein in the eyelid is constricted, and it is countered by the eyelid being contracted in itself, either on the right or left side, due to bad consolidation of the wound or of the burn or of the cautery, and it is called leporina, and this constriction is natural or accidental, and it is done for consolidation of the wound or of the burns or of the cautery, or for resembling their bad mixture.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	Maybe the method of operation is that you make that consolidation and separate the lips from it, and pause in it what is between them a piece of cloth, and bind them together so they are healthy.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	And do not think that you use the cure of it from the causes which are outside, constraining; because if you do so returns to the worst condition, much worse than nothing has been done.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	Use in that cause which softens thus with fenugrec, and immerse the water in which are cooked altea and essence of it, or enguient dyaquilon, which is liquefied at the alcove of the joints, and submerge it in that, and cure it.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	And the treasure of your cure is that you perforate everything so that nothing is consolidated according to the form that you did at the beginning.
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	And this operation which we have said, is not but some rectification of the bad mixture that does not return the form of the place according to what was before.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter 13.
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	About the cure of bad mixture which is done in the eyelid below.
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	This bad mixture which is done in the eyelid below, which is named vertadieramente bad mixture; and it is of two kinds, one natural, another accidental.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	The accidental bad mixture is done by wound or by burn or by cautery or by other similar things.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	And the way of operating on it is that you take a needle in which you make a double thread, and you place it in the flesh, and you make it pass from the left lacrimal to the right lacrimal, until the thread penetrates into the two extremities of the flesh.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	And then stretch the flesh to the parts above with the needle and sew it with the needle, and insert it into the spatulum abundantly.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	And then if it returns the shape of the eyelid as it was, well; and if not, take the thread and pause it in the broken figure, and with that convert the eyelid, and make the two fissures on the side of the lower eyelid.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	And they are the extremities of the two fissures at two angles of the incision, which has been made so that they converge, and it is from their made angle that when they gather together, it forms the figure of them.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	And this figure is a Greek letter: lambda.
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	And then lift the flesh there for the quantity that is the thickness of the lower part of it, so that you sew the eyelid.
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust the separated parts and sew them with the thread of flax; and then cure them with what we have said about the softening medicines and poultices, until it is healthy.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	And if the bad mixture ends up in a fissure or suture or cautery, then it is necessary that you make a flat fissure over the skin of the eyelid as it has been preceded.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	And then separate the poultice between two lips according to what we have said.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	In the summary of the sermon on the cure of bad mixture whether it is above or below, that runs in the operation, according to what is prepared in the form of bad mixture, and that is in the form of various diverse motes.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	And the skilled craftsmen always prepare everything in whatever way is possible to return it to its natural form, or near to that, and that bad mixture according to what is convenient for the operation and of the instruments in the major dispositions.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter 15.
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	About the adhesion of the eyelid with the conjunctiva or with the cornea.
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	When this consolidation happens to many people in such a way that the eyelid is solidly stuck above on the white of the eye, and it is prohibited from the facility of movement and of its natural works, therefore it is necessary that you introduce the extremity of the thread below the eyelid, and elevate it upwards, or stretch it with the nail.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	And then you insert the adhesion with a subtle spatulum, which is not sharp enough to make incisions, having obtained a small opening so that the bad mixture is not disturbed during the operation, and remain with the spatulum that does not lead the eye to its sharpness.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	And it is your incision that extracts this adhesion with facility until the eyelid returns to its natural form and all the adhesion is healed.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	And then you put in the eye salt water in which you wash; or dissolve zinc oxide in the water.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	And then separate between the eyelid and the eye with a poultice of it, and pause over the eye flax infused in egg white, and then use three days of causes of consolidation until it is healthy.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter 16.
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	About the inflammation of a nail and prominence of flesh around the eyelids.
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	You know that a nail is according to two manners, because it is nervous, and resembles a subtle, dry cicatrix; or it is non-nervous, resembling a white, congested humidity, which when touched, or is forced to take hold of the onion, is abscessed and the onion does not stick to it.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	And both species do not start but from the largest tear gland, which goes little by little covering the sight and prohibiting the light and movement of the wheel.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	The manner of operating in the inflammation of the eye is that the patient holds their head back in the chair, and opens their eyelids, and elevates the eyebrow with their own hand, and then collects the nail on the edge of a little double container, and extends it to the upper parts.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	And then take a needle and insert it into a hair of horse or ox or water, or similar, or strong thread, or double the extremity of the small needle little by little and place it in the middle of the nail, and penetrate it with the needle, and tie it with strong thread; and extend it to the upper parts, and extract it from the skin at the side of the nail, which closes the pupil.
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	And thus you will follow it through the skin into the back of the eye.
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	And then you will inject the medication into the root of the eyelid with a subtle spatulum or small forceps, and remove the flesh of the eyelid naturally so that by injecting it there will not be continuous flows of tears.
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And sometimes the nail on the sole of the foot is extended or strong, thus we have said, and then it will be excised with a lion's spatulum, from which this is the form of it.
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	And beware that you do not touch the corneal membrane with the spatulum and that it does not rupture, and that the pupil is not perforated.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	Then the inflammation goes into the wheel a little of triturated salt or of clear wine, and let it stay there another day; and then cure it with water that covers it so that it may be healthy.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	And if the nail is not nervous and you cannot put in the needle, nor is it fixed on the onion, then many times this species of nail is cured with medications, and it is healed thus, as I have said and recommended in the division.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	And if you want to operate on it, then open the wheel of the patient and take a subtle lion's spatulum of acute freula according to this form.
am subtilitat.	with subtlety.
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	And if sometimes it is rarefied and confused and embedded in the root, then distill from your hour in the wheel of clear wine or strong oil or triturated salt, and open the wheel another day.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	And then iterate over that operation until it is completely removed from it, so that the contrary abscess does not remain in the wheel, because then you will leave it, and cure the beginning of the abscess until it is healthy.
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	And then iterate your operation over that reason until it is healthy.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	The prominence of the eyelid flesh, if noticed in the wheel for great annoyance, is suspended with an onion; and inject it from that one part, and do not ultimately inject it so that it does not inject flows of tears.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	And then distill in the eyelid with strong oil and clear wine until it is healthy.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter 17.
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	About the inflammation of ulcers and of what is born from adjusted flesh in the wheel.
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	Some ulcers in the wheels of the eyes are born from red flesh, and it is superimposed until it covers the pupil, or approaches or stretches over the eyelids and strongly compresses the eyelids to the upper parts before and is assembled like a rose of a balustrade.
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	The operation in it is that the patient holds their head back in the chair; and then open the wheels of that and collect all that flesh on the convenient onions; and take hold of it with a forceps or a chest; and then inject the flesh from the beginning until everything is finished in the incision, and beware of the wheel that you do not leave it to deviate from your operation.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	And it is your injection in which you inject those or with the spatulum which we have recommended in the injection of the nail, or small forceps which are collected according to what will be seen in the form of it, then see this chapter.
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	Therefore, when your injection is completed and all that flesh is removed, then fill the wheel with triturated salt, or distill in the red powder and similar to that of the corrosive medications, and put it above the wheel beforehand like a book of hours until it is assured against abscess.
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	And if some cause of ulcers and it is lorded over with holy caution, and fears abscess, then leave the wheel and cure that abscess with water that falls on that abscess, and iterate over that operation until it is healthy, and similarly make a just adjustment in the flesh which accedes to the wheel of this species.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	You should always try to cure the entire treatment of the damaged foot through natural or accidental means, taking iron in hand, and do not put your hand in any of these operations until you see that the member is sufficiently prepared for that operation.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter 18.
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	About the collection of pus in the foot.
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	Pus that comes out through the veins which are placed on the foot and prevent its healing, and they delay the foot's recovery for many days.
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	Therefore it is necessary at the beginning that you consider if the foot in which there is pus is strong and there is no other ailment besides pus, then you collect that pus.
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	And it is that you order the patient to raise their leg up high, and suspend those veins with an ounce or two according to your prudence; and let that ounce be of subtle double filtration in this form:
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	or two ounces gradually in a container according to this form:
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	And then collect those veins with subtle forces, with subtlety, and purify the blood hour by hour, until you see those veins being cleared of the foot and being restored.
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	And beware that you do not lead the foot to the extremities of the spatula; and if your operation is in the middle of the day before the sun, and be very firm in your operation so that you do not insert except those veins.
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	And when you have completed it, then distill on the foot a clear green or red liquid, so that the sharp corrosive quality that is removed from the pus.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	But if it is not possible for you to collect it all at that hour, then apply a plaster with all that which reduces the pain of it, and leave it like that for some days until the pain of it is calmed and assured against posthumous abscess.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	And then iterate over it according to the method of manual manipulation until it is healed.
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	And this is the form of the poultices:
Capitol .xix.	Chapter 19.
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	About the reduction of aristocratic nose injuries.
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	When you treat nose injuries with a cautery or acute medicine, according to the narration that precedes it and it is not healed, then it is not engendered in it except that you place on the abscess until the maturity of it, and that you extract all the humidity which is in it and the pus until the bone is discovered.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then when the bone is discovered and there is corruption or blackness in it, then you scrape it with an instrument of which this is the form:
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	And it is named an asperry head, and it should be made of iron indeed, and the head should be rounded thus as to scrape what is pointed by lime or alum solution for subtle punctuation (thus as it is in the following form).
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	And stop that on the corroded part of the bone, and then revolve it between your fingers, and press your hand little by little until you know that the corrosion is reduced.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	And then some evacuations are made, and then restore the place with drying and astringent causes.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	Then if the place is consolidated and it is in good flesh and it is separated from the body of the wound and remains for 40 days, and it is not renewed and it is not abscessed and it does not fall into an accident, then you know that it is healed.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	And otherwise, then it is not in the engendering except to reduce the fissure according to the form of the nose, and according to this manner: and it is that you discover with iron or acute medicine, and when the bone is discovered, then you take tribute according to this form:
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	It is the extraction of the triangular iron, and its handle should be primarily extended until the extremity, thus as it is sometimes thus.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	And then stop that on the bone, and it is that of the lacrimal; and lengthen your hand a little from the foot, and then revolve your hand with the tribute until it penetrates all the bone, and the patient feels for as long as it reaches to there where you place your hand.
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	Then restore the place with astringent medicines that dry thus as they are customarily used.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	Then since the flesh and the place are indurated, then the matter which was poured out to the affected parts before returns to the nose, therefore it is less painful for the patient.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter 20.
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	About the reduction of the swelling of the foot.
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	When the foot swells in its entirety and does not fall into numbness or diminution, then you should cure the patient, and then follow it, and then place ventoses on the sensitive scarifications and suck for good suction; and then apply on the foot a liniment made from acatra and aloe and essences and sarcocolla, and then strengthen the plaster over the foot with many poultices.
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	And the manner of the poultices is that you take many layers of cloth, and each layer should be divided into four pieces; and make them from those cloths.
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	And then stop those on one another according to the quantity of which has been needed by the vein.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	And then apply strengthening remedies to those areas that are drained of strength during the severe constriction; and later use cups on the affected scarifications; and then remove the cups and let the vein flow strongly during the day and night.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	Maybe sometimes the ligament is softened, then it's necessary that it be strengthened.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	And then remove the ligament during the day and night as we have said.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	And if sometimes the vein has been reduced, well, then, it's necessary to apply the plaster to the pulses and constrictions and cups until it is healthy.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21.
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	On the inflammation of the prominence of the tunicate vein.
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	When you make an incision in the tunicate vein, and then it becomes prominent and proceeds outward beyond the eyelids like a grain of rice, and its shape is rounded for that purpose, and you want to insert it, then the operation is as we have recommended, that you introduce the needle at the root of the vein on the lower part below, and then place the other needle in the double layer of the lacrimal part, and make it penetrate and let the first needle follow according to its disposition; and then insert the location of the double layer and lift it out from the part of the vein in the circle of the needle, and strengthen it strongly.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	And then extract the needle and place it on the vein's languid infusion in a bath of warm water, and let it enter until the thread is in the vein.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And then treat the vein with that which comforts it until the wound is healed.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	And some vegetables gathered from the entire affected part around the circle of drained matter until the vein is greatly prominent, and then it should be perforated in the subtle spatium that comes to the vein's surface, and correct the albuneous humidity, and descend the vein and enter as soon as possible.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	And then strengthen until it is healthy.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22.
De curacio de alconati.	On the treatment of ulcers.
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	This ailment that is called ulcer does not exist, but rather it is a sane vein similar to descending water and it is not that.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	Maybe the manner of operating on it is that you make the ulcer sit upon the prepared and straight seat, and then take the dry cap in your hands more than two parts and mau it until you see the health coming to the lower parts, and then it is dried and does not descend, and it remains in the light, and the ulcer sees the causes as it was seen.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	And if it doesn't descend below, you know that it's water.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	Maybe if the descent to health is not prepared with water as we have said, then make the ulcer sit between your hands and take a subtle spatium and spin it over the panniculus surrounding a small part of the continuation of the conjunctiva in the corneal tunic in the crown (within the place where it can be seen), until the health is forgotten.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	Then when it is forgotten, then you distill in the vein of hot water, in which you have mixed honey or water in which you have boiled fenugrec and honey.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then it will be cured for other causes until it is healthy.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22.
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	On the treatment of descending water from the vein.
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	We have already said the species of water in the division and what is convenient to perforate in a declared sermon, then that according to the health.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	Then it's necessary that you make the ulcer sit between your hands over a warm tile and lift the vein strongly, with a very strict motion.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	And then stop near the eyelid of your left vein, if the vein in which is the water is the left vein; or with your right hand, if the vein is on the right.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	And then take with your right hand the almond, if the vein is on the left; or with your left hand, if the vein is on the right.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	And then stop the extremity of the almond near the crown for the greatness of the radius in the bath of the vein on the part of the lesser lacrimal, and then peel the almond in a circle and roll your hand around it.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	And then penetrate into the bath of the vein and feel that the almond has already arrived at the cause of the veil.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	And it's necessary that the measure of the path of the almond is taken to the measure of the space which is from the pupil into the end of the blackness, and it's the crown of the vein; because you will see in that pupil with the vision of the vein through the clarity of the corneal tunic.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	And then stop the almond into the place where the water is, and then you will attract it downwards once again, and so if the water descends soon, then you will see the ulcer just above where the vein's view is soon, and the almond in the vein.
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	And then rest for a little while; therefore if the water has descended, then you stop that other vein before the alum reaches the affected area.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	So when it is stagnant and does not descend, then you extract the alum easily, and revolve with your hand a little by little, and dissolve in the water a small amount of clear salt gemstone and in that wave the whole dentition; and stop for a while the whole coton or infused oil of rose and album of wolf's claw and ligature around that whole sore.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	Perhaps we, those of our time, place above that wound a compress saturated with wolf's claw album.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if you do not obtain your alum within the instrument of the wound through its hardness — because it is a quality of the homes where the wound is very hard —, then take the spatulum which is named the aluminum scraper, whose form is this:
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	And then pierce at that conjunction, and do not push your hand into the tract, and it is not so that you make a way to the alum location subtly.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	And then introduce the alum as we have said.
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	And give completion to your work, prepare the patient's dormitory decently made in which they sleep on their back with two pillows in a darkened room, and prohibit all movements.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	And wait on the nature of that water to clarify its nature, and do not move your head to the right or left side at all.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	And be the ligament according to its disposition within three days.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	And then dislodge that in that darkened room and expose the fresh air, and do see some causes, and then return the ligament within seven days.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	And do not think that you make this at the time of the cures or almost then introduce the infusion.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	You have thought that you remove this water for so long that the water can flow strongly and vehemently with great regard.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	Perhaps you will find an abscessed aposteme, then you think that you dislodge the wound within seven days, and correct that which has given up the abscess.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	Then you absolve the sight of it and stop on the face of its orifice for which the evacuation of its feces is regulated for some days, existing in the darkened room.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	And then you will be freed from that darkness gradually and converse with its causes.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	And you know that in the slate it is not excused to omit some veiled things, and then you will be ardent about the operation.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	And now we have arrived at some of those which are according to the Artach, and some said that they make fire in the Ayroch magazine, perforating with which the water is succeeded.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	Perhaps Emperor, I have not seen anything like this in our land which has perfected water, nor is it written in some of the ancient books; and it is possible that this is new.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	And these are the forms of the species of Ayroch magic, so that they are above those which ignore them:
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	And they are made of iron or their own proper material, and they are the extremities of their love in this subtle triangular shape, the sharp extremity thus as it is the form.
Capitol .xxiv.	Chapter 24.
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	About the cure of flesh wounds in the nose.
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	When in the nose there are diverse flesh growths adjusted to some of which is a cause assembled like a scorpion of many feet, or a many-footed polyp; and this disease is called polypus because it resembles that foot represented.
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	And of them is cancerous flesh, rough, of dark color; and of them is that which is not flesh of lion's color, not dark.
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	Therefore in that which is among these lion's flesh not fraudulent nor cancerous, you think that you make the patient sit between your hands and place them in the sun, and open their nostrils, and pierce the tender spot once in that flesh.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	And then extract that from the forementioned parts, and then inscribe what you have comprehended of those with a subtle spatula of one part within which you know that all the flesh is removed; because if it remains any cause from which the abscess is possible, then you will remove that with one of the subtle instruments facilitated within which none of the causes remain.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	Perhaps you will find an abscessed aposteme, then you stop at that which you think; or it is one of the malignant apostemes, then you touch and cauterize that within which it is abscessed healthy and all the cavities are removed.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	And then be cut in the nose, then make an incision with agreement of water or wine.
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	Perhaps the nose is opened and from it proceeds humidity into the palate, then you know that it is already healed.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	Perhaps the humidity does not penetrate as you think, then you know that it is flesh wounds in the purulent bones of the nostrils which have not reached abscess.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	Therefore, when one perceives that the patient's fever has reached a certain greatness, and there is numbness in their limbs, and pause between each movement to gauge the amount of pain or discomfort, and examine the patient and insert an extremity of the limb into the vein at the wrist or ankle or another possible cause.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	And then it will be seen that the aura has been made, which attracts the evil odor into the channels of the nostrils, and settles over the affected gums, because very many times this semblance is similar to that of children in schools, and it is a lighter cause for those who do not want to do it.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	And then pause the two extremities of the limb, one extremity that lies on the nose and the other that remains in the nose, and then administer a gentle closure of flesh in the limbs that are in the limb, and make it enter so that you know that the flesh is already in the limbs of the limb.
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	And then extract the limb, and pause in the nose to extract the blood's abstract, a kind of watery substance, and make it so for three days or more until the corrupted humor is entirely removed from the flesh.
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	And then at the end of the treatment, pause in the nose a tube of lead for several hours until it is healthy.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	More frequently used methods of cure that exist, use those instead.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	And this is the form of the instrument to make a cupping device that makes distilled oils and medicines in the nostrils:
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	And make it of silver or copper, which resembles a small lamp with a bent tube, and the middle part similarly.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	And if you want, make a closed tube like a reed, and the tube of the instrument to make a cupping device is flat, uncovered; which is handled in the back of it, with which you hold that when you scrape out oil or what you want from the juices and causes that are extracted.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	And this cupping device is precious: a recipe of infusion of castor, of white bladderwort, of ginger, and powder of saffron, of long pepper, of scabious, of petum of spicy anise an ounce. You collect the juice of bladderwort and of cabbage, and make small pills, and one pill is tempered with agua tibea, and it is given to the patient through the nostrils.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25.
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	About the cleansing of the extremities of the nose.
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	Many times it is necessary to cleanse the extremities of the nose, and it is magnificent and praised for several days until one sees the improvement in it.
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	And because of that, you should insert that at the beginning of the appearance of it, and eradicate all of that.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	And then pause on the spot where the cautery or burning medicine is, which was in the place of it.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	But if the insertion is delayed until it is magnificent, then consider if it is lapified, hard, of dark color and of little sentiment, then do not touch that iron instrument because it is an aposteme of cancer; because many times it is inserted to remove the great malice from the body which had it.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	And if the aposteme is of a tender touch and not of dark color, and sometimes the insertion is possible in all of it, then evacuate the patient and insert it without fear, and cure the spot with what exists and constrain until it is healthy.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter 26.
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	About the stitching of the nose and lips and ear when the continuity is dissolved by plague or by similar things.
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	You know that when you achieve solution of continuity in one of these cartilages, few confer with each other in that operation except in certain homes.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, when you encounter one of those causes, consider if it is fresh plague with the healthy juice, and then you adjust the two lips of the plague to stitching, and then cure it until it is healthy.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	And if the lips of the solution of continuity are already separated, and each one is made healthy, then it is necessary that you extract some part of its apparent code until it becomes healthy.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust the two lips to stitching and strengthen those, and on those sprinkle healthy dragon's blood and three times, and pause on the powder a piece of thin plaster for a day, or of another of the consolidating plasters, and leave that tied for two days or for three, and then dissolve that and remove the plaster and leave it until the flesh is well-absorbed, and then cure with an ointment until it is healthy.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	But the manner of stitching is that you add the solution of continuity or with threads as we have recommended in the stitching of the belly, or add the solution of continuity to the limb as you and make it known.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter 27.
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	About the extraction of those causes that come in the two lips in the divided parts.
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	Exhausted people are fed a mixture of home remedies in divided portions according to their damaged lips and ulcers resembling fat errors, and sometimes they are smaller and sometimes they are larger.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	Then you should convert the lips and wounds into each of those hard toughnesses throughout the entire part, and then make an incision with a full scalpel at the place where the blood flow is restored, and then wash with wine and treat the area with a styptic, until it is sanitized.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter 28.
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	About the incision of adjusted flesh on the gums.
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	A great many exhausted people place over the adjusted flesh of the gum, which the ancient doctors called albucus, therefore you should suspend that in an onion or hold it with a fork and pierce it with its own root, and let the healthy blood flow.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	And then apply a pause to the place where the blood flow is restored, or other styptic or excitatory powders.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	And if that flesh returns, then incise it secondarily, and cauterize it, so that the cautery will not return.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter 29.
De razo de dentz am ferr.	About the reason for teeth being iron-hard.
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	When on the surface of the teeth in the divided parts and those of the forehead and between the adjusted gums there are rough, scaly, and blackish spots, and some exhausted people are corroded and have citrine or green vertigo until the gum is corrupted and the loose teeth are corrupted.
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	And then you should make a separator between your hands and pause the head of it in the tie, and scrape the teeth where those rough spots appear and cause them to resemble arena until none of their roots remain, and that makes the blackness and citrinity and other things disappear so that they are mondified.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	Then if it is established that this is in those of the beginning of the reason, well; and if not, then you iterate the reason over those to another day and to the second and to the third until it reaches the last statement in what you want.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	And know that the teeth have needed various forms of roots and figures according to what is prepared for your operation.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	And for this reason the roots are such that the tooth is rooted in the divided part is other than the root which is ras between the teeth according to other forms, and these forms of roots are thus prepared as you will see soon.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter 30.
D’eradicacio de dentz.	On the eradication of teeth.
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	You should cure the tooth of its pain with entire intelligence and slowness in the entire eradication of it, because there is no cause that surpasses the exhaustion of it when it is eradicated, because it is a sublime substance until it is excused in the eradication of it.
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	You should be careful when the patient is forced to eradicate that tooth, because firmly you must be certain what the painful tooth is, because many exhausted people deceive the pain and think it is in a healthy tooth, and you eradicate it and then the pain does not cease until the bad and painful tooth is eradicated, for we have already seen this through the operation of the barbers.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	Then how do you certify what the painful tooth is, and what you know well, then you should scarify around the circuit of the tooth with spatula in which there is some virtue, until it is dissolved from the tooth to the gum of the entire part, and then mau that in the teeth says, or with subtle forceps at the beginning little by little until it concusses.
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	And then apply a strong force with big tenacities for good loquacity or strong estuption, and pause the head of the patient between the teeth that you hold so they do not move, and then draw the tooth according to rectitude in many ways so it does not tremble, nor to the major pain of the patient no harm is done.
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	And then if it is not forgotten, take one of those instruments, and place that there throughout the entire part to facilitate and force the removal of it thus it is done at the beginning.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	But if the tooth is traumatized or corroded, then you should complete the drawing of that trauma and strengthen it at the extremity of the subtle root so that it is not trapped during your construction on that with tenacities.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	And you should operate with expertise in the scarification around the entire circuit of the gum and guard much your strength so it does not tremble and remains parted from it, and return to the patient for the malice that is greater than the primary pain of it.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	And beware that you do not do what the ignorant barbers do in their foolishness and audacity about the eradication of them, it is not that they administer what we have recommended; because many exhausted people come to the bad homes with great difficulties that are more trapped, and the roots of them remain entirely, or some of those, or that you extract those from the osses of the mandible thus as many exhausted people have testified.
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	And then administer an ablution of his saliva by washing his mouth with warm or cold salt solution.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	If fluxes of blood flow for that reason, thus with moving veins, then try to expel a certain quantity of evil humors and aspersion upon the plague, and if they do not confer that evil humor, cauterize.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	The shape of the forceps and holding them subtly is what helps to extract the tooth at the beginning, with a long handle and short, thick fingers, so that they do not become doubled when one has to operate.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	And thus it is with thick-fingered hands that enter so that when one has them extended, they are not doubled, but rather short and extricated.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	And thus it is with iron instruments from India, expertly crafted to extract teeth, and in the extractions of those there are roots that enter into each other and converge by constriction, making a strong hold, and some veins of extraction have the shape of a bird's beak, which is called ciconia, so it is guaranteed, and they are of strong construction.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter 21.
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	On the eradication of teeth and extraction of bones from jaws affected by gnashing.
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	When you need to eradicate a tooth that is gnashed for some reason, then it is necessary that you pause on the spot where the border is tender for a day or two until the spot becomes mollified; and then insert the instrument or hold the extractions with which they are assembled in the shape of a bird's beak called ciconia or guarantee, the form of the forceps:
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	The extractions of theirs are expertly crafted teeth, thus with files or scouring stones.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	And if they do not obey your examination with these forceps or instruments, then it is necessary that you operate on the root and dissect all the flesh and insert the instrument called atali, which is a small lever of which the shape is this:
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	And let it be a short, thick extremity, small, and not be bent so that it is not gnashed.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	Therefore, if the root is forgotten, it is so; and if not, help yourself with these other instruments of which these are the forms: the form of the first instrument is a triangular extraction in which there is some thickness:
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	The form of the second instrument is that it is triangular and has a subtle, pointed extremity.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	And thus you will be helped with this instrument having two ramps of which this is the form, suitable for the following:
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	and with other instruments which precede in the root of teeth; because judgment is made with this instrument which is assembled on a large hook, and this is the form:
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	of the triangular extremity twisted or short, which has some thickness, and is not bent so that it is not gnashed.
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	And other wisdom that the instruments of teeth move similarly and resemble the other instruments.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	The skilled craftsmen are wise and subtle in their art, attaining mastery through the meaning of the operation and various ailments; for they are among the ailments which the ancients did not distinguish or pause to create proper instruments, according to the forms of diverse species.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	But if the bone of the jaw or of other bones in the mouth is gnashed, or if it is decayed, then it is necessary to operate carefully on that spot where it is convenient for the instruments and forceps which we have mentioned in the extraction of roots of teeth, and help yourself with gestures of which this is the form:
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	And let it be with some small thickness, little by little, and let it be held or tied in the mouth so that it does not escape or flee until the entire bone is forgotten; and then restore the spot with convenient medicines adapted to that.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if there is small decay in the bone, then remove that from the decay and its blackness, and cure it until it is healthy.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter 32.
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	On the care of teeth prominent above the others.
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	When the teeth are prominent not according to their natural course in shape, and more so when they grow in women, and more in venerable old people; therefore it is necessary that you consider: if a tooth is not adjacent to another tooth, and it is not possible to file or smooth it, then extract it; but if it is annexed to another tooth, then you separate it with this instrument of which this is the form; and it is similar to a pig's jaw, and let it be made of Indian iron of sharp extraction.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	And let your incision be in the place where you separate it in three days for the durability of the tooth, and that it is not joined to another of the teeth.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it is a prominent tooth exposed to filing, then file it with a file of Indian iron of which this is the form:
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	And let it be all of Indian iron and marginal essence; and let it be with many small points thus with a file in which they are expertly sharpened, on which the tooth is filed little by little in many days with facility, so that there is no other tooth joined and fallen.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	And also apply those lines on the faith, and scratch them with scissors-like tools.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	And if it is a tooth that has become loose and the tongue feels it, then take care to remove that which is infected from that fracture so that it does not fall out nor the speech becomes corrupted.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter 33.
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	About the restoration of decayed teeth with gold foil or silver.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	When teeth fall out due to concussion and removal by percussion or by chance, and the patient cannot hold onto what they are eating, and you have treated them with medications that stop the bleeding, and your treatment has not been effective, then so that no evil is generated in those that are strengthened with gold foil and not silver, because silver turns black and also falls apart after a few days, but gold never decays.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	And it is the gold in such subtlety and grossness according to the quantity that can enter between the teeth; and the form of the reception is that you take the gold and take its double between two healthy teeth, and then it grows with two tortuousities of the gold between two decayed teeth, or one or more, until it reaches the web to the healthy tooth of the other part.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	And then iterate the treatment until the affected part is restored, and strengthen your hand with facility and wisdom so that it does not become decayed.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	And it is your strictness in which you strengthen the gold, removing the roots of the teeth that do not evacuate.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	And then you incise the superfluous extremities of the gold with forceps or scissors, and add those to whatever place is suitable, and convert them into occult things between the healthy tooth and the decayed tooth, so that they do not harm the tongue.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	And then let it be thus strongly established, like a Roman column.
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	Moreover, if it is dislocated or broken, strengthen that or those with other gold in such a manner throughout all its time.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	And this is the form of the teeth and the figure of the correction of two healthy teeth and of two decayed teeth, thus as these are bound together:
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	And when it happens that one tooth or two are returned to their place, and they are firmly reattached thus as we have recommended, and they remain.
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	And do not do that unless you are a skilled craftsman and knowledgeable.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	And some ivory is suited to a certain cause of the cow's bones, and it is made in the form of a tooth, and it is placed in the place where the tooth failed, and it is strengthened thus as we have said, and it remains and serves for a long time.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter 34.
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	About the incision of the ligament which is in the tongue and prohibits speech.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	This ligament which is beneath the tongue sometimes has veins or is naturally connected to the one that men nourish, or accidentally and suddenly struck by a wound that has already consolidated.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	And the operation on him is to open the mouth of the patient, the existing scalp in the tie being; and elevate the tongue, and then incise that nervous ligament according to the latitude until the tongue is freed from its confinement.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	Moreover, if there is some hardness or denseness, and that has been standing for the consolidation of the wound, then you cut with an edge and separate it along the latitude until you have incised the ligament and the denseness is dissolved.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	And beware that there is not made a fracture in the pincer of the flesh and that you separate here artery and vein, and there comes a flow of blood.
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	And then wash the remains of the incision with warm water or wine vinegar or cold water frequently; and then pause beneath the tongue, thus it is necessary for you to hold the patient's tongue in any new way so that it does not consolidate another vein.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	Moreover, if there is a flow of blood, pause over the vitreous place treated; moreover, if the blood comes out, then cauterize the place with a gentle cautery that is convenient for this.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then heal it with the other causes until it is healthy.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter 35.
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	About the extraction of a ranula beneath the tongue.
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	Sometimes it happens that beneath the tongue an abscess forms, similar to a small boil, preventing the tongue from its natural operation; and for this reason it is magnified until it fills the mouth.
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	And the operation on him is to open the patient's mouth in front of the light and examine the abscess.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	And if you find it is of dark color or black, hard, which the patient does not feel sensation, then do not touch it because it is cancer.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if it has declined to whiteness, in which there is humidity, then you put the onguent on it, and incise it with a subtle spatula, and incise all of that part; and if blood comes out during your operation, then you pause above the treated place, thus it is vitreous, until the blood is restrained.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then return to your work within, so that you have treated him in a complimentary manner, and wash him in warm water and salt; and take care to cure the other affliction also, so that he may be healthy.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter 36.
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	The extraction of abscesses from both ears and from that which is nothing in the gullet and from other abscesses.
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When you find a swelling in the gullet, it is glands that are assembled together, which are called abscesses, and are named both ears, which when you treat them with what we have said in the division and they do not heal, then you consider if the abscess is hard, of dark color, of little sensation, then do not touch it with iron.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	And if it is of red color and the root is large, then do not touch it with iron for the flow of blood; beforehand let it mature within, and then you can operate on it, or it will rupture by itself.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	And if it is of white color, thin, and the root of it is subtle, then that is what needs to be incised.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the operation on it is what you consider, during your operation, if you have already repulsed the abscess with a complete repulsion or if it has diminished with some diminution; and then make the patient sit in the sun, and let their head be in the warm place, and open their mouth, and the servant takes between their hands before their tongue to hold an instrument of great nobility, which is the form of this.
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	And let it be made of silver or copper, and let it be subtle with a sharp edge.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	Then as you press it against the tongue and it shows you the abscess, and you see above that warm place, then take hold with your nails and fix it in the amenla, and pull it towards the divisions of the abscess as much as you can.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Or another thing that you pull out some cause from the tunics, and then incise it with an instrument of which this is the form.
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	and it is assembled to forceps, although the extremities of it are curved, thus that the orifice of each one of those is in the end of the other, very sharp, which is made of iron indeed in a hidden way.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	But if this instrument is not at your present, then incise it with a spatula of which this is the form of it: Let it be pointed on one side, not pointed on the other side.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	And after you have incised one vein, incise the other according to this same method of incision, and then apply the incision to the patient who gargles with cold water.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if there is a flow of blood, gargle with water of decoction of sage or of mint leaves and similarly to those of the stipptic causes so that the flow of blood may be restrained, and then take care to cure it so that it may be healthy.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	And some veins are hidden in the gullet and other abscesses besides those of both ears, and incise them according to what you have said and done in the incision of both veins simultaneously.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	And you have already medicated a woman with an abscess which was born in the gullet of hers, which abscess tended to dark color, of little sensation, which had closed her gullet, and the woman breathed with great difficulty, and had prohibited eating and drinking water, and had been perverted unto death if it had stood for one day or two.
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	And the abscess had pushed so much that it had made two ramps within, so that they would issue through two tracts.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	Then you carefully examine the fistula and find it in one of their nails, and pull it out, and extract from its great portion, and then you incise that which you comprehend of the other tract, and then you open their mouth, and comprehend their tongue, and then you fix the nail in that abscess.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	And then you abscess a great part of it, and there does not flow from it except a little blood.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	Then the gullet of that woman is absolutely free, and she begins to drink water, and then you prescribe a diet, so you do not cease to incise that abscess many times for a long time, and successfully incises the abscess in its place, which incision prolongs it.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	Then you will heal it and cauterize the gullet of hers, then you will stop adding; and then you walk around and do not know that God did that good deed for me.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter 37.
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	The incision of a hernia when it is abscessed.
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	When the hernia descends to the groin, and it is abscessed and long, then it is named perpendicular; and if it is in the thick and round part below, then it is called a bubo.
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	But when it is cured with what we have said in the division, and you do not contradict your cure, and sometimes it happens that the abscess is cauterized because it has been removed from it and is subtle, then it is fitting that you incise that which is aggregated round; and if it is at its length, and it is bloody, of dark color or black, and it is not in its sentiment, then it is fitting that you perform the incision of it, because there is fear about the patient.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	When you want to follow the method of manual therapy that you have heard about from the expert on white and long diseases, which makes you examine the patient and press their tongue with an instrument that processes its shape and then places it in the new nail, and pulls it down below and inserts it into one of the two instruments, which are mentioned in the description of two fingers.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	And beware that you do not insert it unless it is adjusted according to the natural term of its additions, because if you insert it in a bad way, you will ruin the speech.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And then the insertion, use that which we have recommended in the description of two fingers, and heal it from within so that it may be healthy.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	But if the patient is frightened by the insertion of it, beware that you use gentleness in the cauterization of its fear, and the manner of the cautery is not only acute water, and it is that you place the head of the patient on your thigh, and then press their tongue with the instrument which we have said, and then take the water which we have mentioned in the chapter on cauterization, and confirm that the cause is living, and pause there neither too much nor too little, and fill the concavity of the instrument in the form:
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	It is the extraction of the intestine from the cavity in which the medicine was placed, like the intestine of a ray, and place the instrument with the medicine on the valve, and the patient will spit or evacuate saliva or mucus from their mouth for the internal medicine, so that it does not descend into the gut of the patient and that it is led away from there.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	And then put your hand on the medicine, and express it onto the uvula for a space of half an hour within which it will be dissolved and settled by the biting of the medicine.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	And if you wish, take cotton and envelop it around the extremity of the ray, and submerge the cotton in the medicine, and then put the ray with the cotton into a canal above until the cotton adheres to that canal, and do so many times within which you achieve what you want from the cauterization of the grape, and then leave it alone for three or four days.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	And if you find that the medicine is not entering, iterate it, and then the cauterization will be sterilized in the circuit of the grape with cotton wrapped in border, and manifest what is in the circuit of it from the medicine, and it will be washed with cold water, and it will be cured beforehand by embrocation, and you will eliminate the bad humors so that it may be healthy.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	And this species of cure is more safe than insertion and less fearful.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	Some wounds are cured on the uvula with what is more subtle than cautery and insertion, because it is cured by subfumigation in this manner: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda and similar to those of the herbs, and adjust all these causes, or some of them, into a bowl, and they are submerged in vinegar for seven days, and boiled; and the bowl should be well sealed, and it is placed in a hidden place, on top of which is placed an instrument made of silver or copper according to this manner; it is made of silver or copper.
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	And then insert the extremity into the patient's mouth until the vapor reaches the uvula through the canal, so that the uvula is not too obstructed.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	And then iterate on those many wounds until it is dry, and beware that you do not make this cure at the beginning of the arrival of abscesses, because it would too much adjust in the abscess, and you should not do that, but rather declare the abscess of the patient to be cautious.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	But if you do not have this instrument present, then take a cane and compose it on the extremity of the patient's body near their throat, so that the patient's mouth is comforted, because the closure of the throat prohibits the vapor from entering the mouth.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	And this cure is good for health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter 38.
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	On the extraction of spines and of what adheres to the gut and other causes.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	Many wounds adhere to the gut or spine of the feet or some other cause.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	Then beware that you extract what is apparent from those, upon which the sight falls, because you take the tongue with an instrument alone in the sun, so that it may be declared to you what is in the gut.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	And what does not appear and is occult in the gut, beware that you make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach, because the cause annexed to the gut will be forced out by vomiting; or that the patient takes a piece of bread or radish or lettuce or a dry biscuit; or take a piece of dry marine sponge, and tie it strongly with thread, and then pass the patient through it, so that as they perceive the place in which the spines are extracted, then it will be forced out.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	Either take a small file and bind it firmly, and let it be placed on the table and carefully extracted; or take a porr (a type of metal tool) and carefully extract the swelling from the middle and carefully from the inside.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	Maybe it is not forgotten that those causes which have been said, then use an instrument of lead according to this form:
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	And let it be thicker where a small one is needed, and at the extremity of it let it be curved which you will insert into its throat to facilitate.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	And hold the elevated head of the instrument in them, and beware that you do not touch the bone of the throat with it, so that you do not injure the body or pierce the bone or the spine, or that the doctor puts his hand on it.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	Perhaps the patient will insert it themselves, according to their knowledge of the location of the cause and the pain they feel, and they will pull their hand back with the instrument in them, as much as possible according to the quantity that is prepared until it is forgotten.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter 39.
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	On the extraction of blood from the affected vein.
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	When bloodletting is medicated with what has been said in the division of the cure with medicines and not comforts, consider then the vein of the patient at sunrise, since you have comprehended the language of it with an instrument which you have recommended.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	Then if you practice bloodletting, extract it with a small needle or subtle gestures decently.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	And if it is not possible for you to extract it, then take a concave cannula and insert it into the vein of the patient, and place a ignited iron in the cavity of the cannula, and do so many times (until the bloodletting is dead and separated from the vein) and abstain from giving water to the patient all day.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	And then take a vessel full of cold water, and place the mouth of it in that, and wash the mouth with that; and do not transgress from any cause and let the water stay for an hour, then again with your hand, because the bloodletting is still sensitive to the cold water.
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	Maybe it is not forgotten that which has been recommended, then suffumigate the patient with cumin or asafoetida through the instrument which has been recommended in the suffumigation of the uvula.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	Do it thus, so that you will have four remedies.
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	And it is another manner of operation in the suffumigation of that, that you take a vessel in which there are ignited coals and the vessel is covered with a cover in the middle of which there is a tube; and then put it under the suffumigation; and place the patient's mouth at the extremity of the cannula, and close their mouth so that the suffumigation is not forgotten until you know that the suffumigation has reached the bloodletting, because the bloodletting still falls short.
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	And if it doesn't help, then you repeat the suffumigation many times, and abstain from giving drink to the patient, and eat salty foods and garlic, and don't drink water, and thus it is necessary that this regimen be forgotten.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	And this is the shape of the instrument with which bloodletting from the vein is treated when it is seen; and it is similar to forceps, but not because it is in some curved shape:
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	which is placed on the vein, and its extremity is similar to a beak of a stork, which is curved, in which there is a hole for a lancet, so that, when you comprehend some cause, it does not escape.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter 40.
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	In which is the summary of the sermon on the perception of abscesses and their sections.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	The abscesses are many species, of many manners, according to what you will remember about them, from each one in this book.
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	And they are diverse in their perforation and section according to two manners, of which one is for the species of abscesses in their mettle; and for that which you comprehend about the humidities.
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	And the second manner is for the places in which the accidents of the body occur, because the abscess that occurs on the head is different from the abscess that occurs on the buttock; and the abscess in the fleshy place occurs differently from the abscess that occurs in a joint; and each one of them has its judgment for operation.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	And maybe some abscesses are those which need to be matured, not perforated, but rather the ripening of the sap in them or their complement.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	So other abscesses are those which need to be pierced when they are crossed, and do not mature according to their complement, just like abscesses that are put near the joints, because an abscess when it is put near a joint, its essence is prolonged until you can pierce what is in its circuit, and forcibly corrupt the ligaments or nerves of that joint, so that it makes a cause of contraction of that member; or it is an abscess near a principal member, and if you delay the piercing of it until it is matured, you will not harm the principal member; or it is near the buttock, then pierce what is not matured; and do not need to pierce a crossed, incomplete digestion, but that which is near the buttock, so that you do not prolong the pressure of it and it becomes elongated to the deep parts of the buttock, and becomes a fistula, or it is made in the term of it which is not healthy.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	It's more important that you know the time of the rupture of the abscess, and this is when it matures.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	You know that it's matured when the pain and fever cease, and then there is a decrease in rigor and pulse, and sharpness at the head of the abscess, and other signs.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	And for that you know that the rupture will occur in the place where the pus has accumulated beneath the abscess and from which pus comes out in abundance.
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	And rupture sometimes occurs through the length of the flesh or body, if the abscesses are in the divisions of the hands or feet, and in the places of the tendons, of the nerves, of the arteries; and, later, in all swollen places where there is no reflection; because in those that reflect, use rupture according to that member.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	But when the abscess is in a fleshy place, it's better to delay the rupture of it until digestion is confirmed according to the compliment, as I have said; because if you rupture that then, it prolongs the body of the pus and increases its foulness, and strengthens the lips of the wound so they are indurated and deep.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	Some abscesses are ruptured according to the latitude of the flesh or body that needs it, or according to what the affected member indicates.
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	And you know that you administer small ruptures, and in large abscesses a large and ample rupture or many sections according to the diversity of the size of the abscesses.
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	And other abscesses are those in which you know that the code (or hard skin) is conquered and enclosed, when it's done thus and it's done in term of "ja stigua" (I think this means "already stitched"), thus like one who accumulates in drops of dubility and buboes.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	And of those that are incised in a section having three angles; and of those that are incised thus like the figure of a leaf of myrtle, thus like the abscesses of the angle-bones.
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	And of those in which a round section and a lunar section are administered, and similar to those.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	But that one which is not capable thus as are superficial abscesses of the lion, you know that you rupture that with a superficial rupture, or plane only so.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	And you know when the abscess is large and has already collected much sania, that you rupture it and do not hesitate to extract all the pus at that hour; having extracted from it a part, and then you open the abscess again another day, and then you extract a larger part, and then you make those many evacuations according to graduation until it is forgotten.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	And especially if the patient is of fragile virtue, or a pregnant woman, or a small child, or an elderly person in decline, because the animal spirit is much resolved by the exit of the sania, and it strengthens the death of the patient, and you open them.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	Be careful with this chapter, and then make your rupture in which you rupture these abscesses, knowing that you will clean the wounds and consider whether the wound of the abscess is small, or is a flat section, then you administer the remedies of oil or antidote; and if the abscess is large, and the fissures of the rupture are many, then you know that you pause in some traction until they come together.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if in the abscess a part of the code (or hard skin) has been removed or has concaved into the circle, then you know that you complete it with very oily cloth or thread made from the fabric of oil, thus as when one treats ulcers or razors, their humidity; and strengthen it until the third day; and then you process it and cure what you know of the wounds until they are healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	But if you accumulate a flow of blood during the hour of your operation, then you administer cold water and wine in those which mix a cloth of oil, and pause that over the place of the flowing blood many times.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	But if you preserve the flow of blood, then you know that you administer regimen and cure and powder those which have been recommended in many places of our book and division.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	But if it's in winter time, and the place of the abscess is a place of many nerves, then you know that you apply powders in wine and oil, and pause those over the places.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if it's in summer, and the places are fleshy, then you know that you pause powders moistened with water and oil or wine and oil, and all that is cold until the third day, as I have said, and then you dissolve the abscess and clean it and administer in the cure of what is convenient for it to be healed.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	And thus it is necessary for the cognition of the cure of abscesses universally, but according to the way of distinction I have already said about each abscess in which manner it is the way of its cure, specifically by chapters.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter 41.
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	On the section of abscesses that come on the crown of the head.
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	In the small head of the shoulder blades, there are special knots that contain tunics that are their own doing; and the species of them are very many.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	And theirs are swellings, and those that contain humidity similar to lime.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	And those that contain humidity similar to poultices, and they resemble them; and those that are lapide, hard.
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	And in the section of all, and in the extraction of those there is no fear, just as the extraction of those does not make contrary arthritis.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	And the operation in the section of those is that you separate them with an instrument in the form of which you approach thus, which is called entromes, until you know that it contains.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	Since it is known that it contains humidity, then you separate that in section according to the longitude for superficial section according to this form:
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	And it begins in the section of the line .B. until the line .G. Then, when the humidity is evacuated, then you excavate that which contains that humidity, and do not leave any of that entire cause, because many worn-out returns, if they remain from that entire cause.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	And then submerge it in Egyptian ink, if it is present, and if not, in water and salt; and fill that plague and leave it until another day, because I think it corrodes all that is scraped from that skin.
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	And then iterate over that spot with Egyptian ink secondly and thirdly if it is indicated for him, until you are confident that there is no remaining cause of that skin; then cure the plague with Egyptian ink until it is healed.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	And if the abscess contains fatty knots, then you incise it according to this form:
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	in the section having the form of a cross, and cut between two labia of the section and scrape all that part, and exert your virtue in the extraction of the tunic which contains it.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	Perhaps if your arthritis makes counter-contradiction, then do so that you first recount primarily.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	And similarly do in the lapified abscess of section and of cure according to what you have said; and the section on the lapified abscess is less grievous, because it is of little blood and of little humidity.
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	And some old men are some of these abscesses which are in the head of some men who have none of that humidity; this causes it because you will incise over an abscess on the head of an old woman and will thoroughly investigate the abscess thus with a rough, harsh, white, which could not be touched, and if someone touches that, they will plague it.
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	Perhaps in the other accidental abscesses on the head another chapter is not this capital, thus like the abscesses that come to the heads of children and have their roots in the ears, perhaps the section of all these should be superficial.
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	And stop the perforation of those from the lower part of their skin so that the body of the patient is alleviated at the lower parts.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	And then heal those in water that converge to that for cure.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter 42.
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	On the section of scrofulas which occur in the neck.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	Many worn-out lumps come to these abscesses in the neck and in the axillas and in the armpits; and some worn-out ones occur in other parts of the body.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And those that occur in the neck, and many that are engendered between them, and all scrofula of those is denting its own tunic, and thus like in the nodes and abscesses of the head, thus as we have recounted.
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	And the species of these scrofulas are many, because among those some are lapide, and among those that contain humidity, and among those that are malignant which do not obey cure.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	Then in that one which you see of good disposition in the Tocament, from which the color of that which is manifest is proper to the color of the codena, and it is mauled in all part, and it is not annexed to the nerve of the neck, nor to the veins, nor to the arthritis, and it is not swollen, so that you incise that in superficial section of the part above to the part below the body from line .G. until line .B., and scrape that from all part, and extend two labia of the codena on one side, or many small ones if there is need of those, thus as we have said in the abscesses of the head, and extract that little by little.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	And it is more cautious not to incise the vein or nerve.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	And it is the space not much agitated, that does not adjust to your hand in incision, or that it troubles the patient, and that you incise what is not necessary to incise; because if you incised a vein or artery and prohibited yourself from your operation, then pause in the vetriol plague treated with other powders which stop the flux of blood, and strengthen the plague, and leave it until it repauses the acuity of the abscess and the plague is mollified and begins to be putrid.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	When the blood is removed.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	Then return to your operation until it is completed.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	And then investigate whether there are any causes of the other small scrophulae, and cut into them and clean them out.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	And if it is in the root of the large vein, beware then that you do not cut into that vein at its root.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	Be careful that you do not make a double fold too strong and that you loosen it until it falls off by itself.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	And then fill the wound with a lot of oil which you have already submerged in Egyptian unguent, and then cure it.
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	And if you cut out the entire scrophula, then beware that you adjust the two lips of the wound and cauterize as much as possible so that there is no remaining superfluity.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	But if you see that there has remained superfluity because of the greatness of the scrofula, beware that you understand how to cut at the root of it, and separate it and administer a suture, and do what is said.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	And those scrofulae that contain humidity, make a superficial perforation there where it appears to you the place of maturation, and pause the perforation of what is the worst pus at the bottom of the body, as we have said.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	And then administer perforation, with a warm unguent and similarly to those, so that it corrodes what remains of the corruption.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	And then when you see the wound is already clean, then you cure it with an unguent of generating flesh until it is healed.
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter 43.
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	On the section of the pill of the accidental aposteme that is next to the gullet.
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	The ancient doctors wrote about this section in the epilhot, and we do not see anyone in our land who has made it.
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	And this is the inscription of the sermon of those.
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	But in the men who have equity, beware that the extraction of the epilhot is avoided, since for what it is not done gently, so that all the veins and major parts of the malady are not affected here.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	But in those who have apostemes caught in the mouth or gullet or two ears, when the malady is not in the cane, beware of using the section of epilhot to flee the loss which is done by perforation.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	Then beware when you want to do it, that you cut the epilhot below three circles of the circles of the epilhot, or four with a small section for the latitude in which it is between two circles by quantity, so that the section is in the cuff, not in the cartilage, and this place is convenient for cutting, because it is deprived of flesh and the veins of blood that nourish it.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	And if the patient is weak, beware then that you extend the cord of the gullet with an onion, and then divide the cord until it reaches the canal, but avoid the veins of blood if you see any of those causes.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	And then cut the cuff according to what we have recommended; and it is significant regarding the section of the canal for the flux that is from that exit into what is of the disorder and for the removal of the void.
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	And then leave the wound open for some time.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	Then when the hour is reached in which the perforation is tempered, add the two lips of the cord of the wound, and sew it only with the cartilage.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	And then administer medicines that make the flesh grow until it is healed.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	And thus says Albucasis that the sum of the sermon which we have recommended, is only an exposition that you see that some of these apostemes have already operated on the gullet of the malady, and the malady has come to a mortal point, and its wing is between the ribs, and some go to cut the epiglottis so that the malady breathes over the place of the wound for some respiration, and it is saved from death.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And for this reason, I command to leave the wound open until the malice of the malady is consumed; and its malice lasts for three days; and then I command to close the wound, and cure it until it is healed.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	And what I have seen through my meteors, is that a servant held a knife and put it in the gullet and cut out a part of the cane of the lung, and I was called to cure him, and I removed the mucus thus as it is removed from the dead, and discovered the wound and removed the blood which was issuing from the small wound.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	Then I confessed that it had not cut into a vein or guide, and the wind was issuing from the wound, and I cured it until it was healed.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	And I did not accuse the servant if he did not return to the void, and then some days returned to the administration of his own dispositions.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	And now I say that in the section of the epilhot there is no fear.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter 44.
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	About the section concerning an abscess that occurs in the groin area beforehand, and it is called a hernia of the groin.
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	This abscess called hernia of the groin is a large abscess according to the color of the body, and it is more common in women.
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	And it is according to two manners, because it is either natural or accidental.
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	And in the natural one, it is not possible to cure.
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	And the accidental one is according to two manners of which one resembles swollen nodes, and the other manner resembles an abscess that is made by inflammation of the artery, and in that there is fear.
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	And it does not cover the swollen area with a warm iron except in the case where it is small.
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	And you probe that and investigate with the aforementioned method, and if you find it resembling swollen nodes, and it is not suspended by any of the veins, then you incise thus like the nodes, and extract the fluid that contains the pus and bursectomy; and otherwise, then the whole wound is carefully examined, and afterwards you heal the place with a cure that is introduced until it is sanitized.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter 45.
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	About the section on the species of nodes.
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	There are many species of nodes and I have already mentioned all the species of them in the division.
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	And it covers how I recommend distinguishing between a node and an ulcer, as well as making a doubt about the difference.
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	Therefore I say that an ulcer is a quality of heat and fever and violent pains until the inflammation of the excess is reduced; and it is a complete putrefaction that then ceases the fever, pain, and heat.
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	But a node is not heat or fever or pain, and it contains a hidden humor that is in its own proper sac.
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	And it is according to the color of the body, and its beginning is like a cold and it is made thus like a vacuity, whether major or minor, and they are according to two species, because some are fat and contain humidity, and the colors of the humidity are many, as I have said in the division.
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	Therefore it covers, when you come to the cure of a node, that you expel that and inquire into its beginning with the instrument which is called an introstrument, according to what will be seen in the form in the chapter that is about to come.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	And it is the manner of inquiring into abscesses and all nodes, and it is that you take this instrument and introduce it into the place where you find humidity in the abscess, and you turn the threads little by little until you know that the instrument has penetrated the cavity.
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	And afterwards you place your hand according to the measure of the greatness of the abscess, and afterwards you extract the introstrument and consider what is left in the residue of it.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	And if the running humidity is forgotten, of whatever color it may be, then you incise on the surface section according to what I have said about other abscesses.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	And if from the residue of the introstrument there is no humidity, then you know that it is fat.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	And it cuts around the limb in a section having the form of a cross according to this form:
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	Thus you should instruct, and suspend that limb in a way that is convenient, and excavate the cavity of the entire affected part, and preserve the skin or sac, if possible, over that and extract the sania from the node.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	But if it is broken in the operation, it is not possible to extract the sania, and many veins are found there, and then you extract it by pieces until none of it remains.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	Because if none of it remains, little or much, the node returns according to its nature.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if you see that some small part of it remains, then complete the application of some corrosive powders and strengthen the application, and pause over that which is a cautious abscess, and cure it with another cure until it is sanitized.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	And if it is a large node, then you sew the two lips of it and cure it with what covers it.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	But if the pulse is against it, or non-pulsating, then you bind and fill the place of seven threads that are vetriol and let it stay for two days or three until the plague is cleansed and the inflammation of the vein is reduced; and afterwards return to incise what remains of the node.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter 46.
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	About the forms of the necessary instruments in section and perforation.
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	About those are the forms of the introstruments, and they are of three species, one is large, one is medium, and one is small.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	The form of the large introstrument is this:
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	The form of the medium-sized introstrument is this:
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	The form of the small introstrument is this:
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	Made of iron, of alloy, of well-shaped extremities, in order to hold the instrument firmly in the abscesses.
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	And these are the forms of experience, and they are not named explicitly, and one of those is called fervent.
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	There are three species, because two of them are great, greater and lesser.
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	The form of great experience, the form of it:
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	The form of milder experience, the form of it:
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	The form of slight experience, the form of it:
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	It is suitable that these are caused by abscesses and exits and fistulas and swellings, so that among those are those of the bones and other causes.
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	And these are roots, thick, rough, thus with large needles like those that are embedded in the seats, and they are treated with citrine iron, or iron, or copper, or silver. And the worst is when they are treated with citrine iron.
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	And they are the experiences of black lead, which ones are accustomed to believe that through those the abscesses burst out in the cavity of which they are reflected, that are reflected with their lightness in those reflections.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	And there are three species, because some of them are long, and others are milder, and others are brief, according to the quantity of the matter of the abscess and the strictness of it.
Forma del experient gran de plom:	The form of great experience of lead:
Forma del experient migier de plom:	The form of milder experience of lead:
Forma del experient petit de plom:	The form of slight experience of lead:
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	The forms of the ulcers are from many species, because some of them are simple ulcers, which ones have a single curvature only, and there are three species: great, slight, and milder.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	And some of them are round ulcers, and there are three species.
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And some of them are ulcers having two curvatures, and there are three species.
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And some of them have three curvatures, and there are three species.
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	And all these are necessary in their place.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	The form of a large simple ulcer, the form of it:
Forma de unci simple migier:	The form of a milder simple ulcer:
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	The form of a slight simple ulcer, the form of it:
Forma de unci orp gran:	The form of a large round ulcer:
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	The form of a milder round ulcer, the form of it:
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	The form of a slight round ulcer, the form of it:
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	The form of a large ulcer having two curvatures:
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	The form of a milder ulcer having two curvatures:
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	The form of a slight ulcer having two curvatures:
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	The form of a large ulcer having three curvatures:
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	The form of a milder ulcer having three curvatures:
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	The form of a slight ulcer having three curvatures:
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	And these are the forms of the scalpels which are those that cut and scrape the nodes and abscesses, and there are three species, because some of them are great, milder, and slight.
Forma de scapel gran:	The form of a large scalpel:
Forma del scapel migier:	The form of a milder scalpel:
Forma de scapel pauc:	The form of a slight scalpel:
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	The extremities of those are those that make a sharp section and the other extremities are not-sharp, and not so paused in such a manner, but rather because they are made newly in the excavation of the nodes, fearing the insertion of a vein or nerve, and for those to be healthy the patient and to bring tranquility a little for the adjustment which brings away the excoriation of the abscess.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	And these are the forms of emollients, and there are three species: great, milder, and slight, thus with true veins.
La forma de magda gran:	The form of a large emollient:
Forma de magda migier:	The form of a milder emollient:
Forma de magda pauc:	The form of a slight emollient:
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	They are treated with iron and similarly to the way that they make a kind of decoction.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	And it is in the punctured extremity hidden in the spatula and in that corrects the divided parts together and beforehand, when you wish, thus with veins.
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	The forms of spathes, which ones are hidden between the fingers for the perforation of the abscesses and do not perceive the patients, and there are three species: great, milder, and slight.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	And these are the forms of those:
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	The forms of bleedings which ones stop the flow of blood, and there are three species: great, milder, and slight; the forms of it:
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	They are treated with citrine iron, round ones with some length, and they are subtle.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	And it is necessary that these species of bleedings are great, milder, and slight, because for those stopping the flow of blood with velocity in necessity, and then when you first apply them, it is not medicine.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	However, one does not use those to stop blood in every part of the body, and one does not use them except in fleshy places, thus in the muscles of the arms and legs, and in the muscles of the breasts, and in the muscles of the belly and genitals, and similarly to their fleshy muscles.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	Some wounds are caused by other small instruments similar to thorns, according to this form; for which the blood is removed when it is done for phlebotomy, or there is an incision of a vein or artery.
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	Some wounds are round and flat according to this form:
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter 47.
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	On the treatment of men's breasts which are similar to those of women.
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	Some wounds are swollen in the breasts of some men who receive the compliment of sleeping with women as if they were pregnant, and thus their breasts are swollen, and thus similar to those of women, and we Roman doctors reject this.
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And to the one who has this, cover that you make an incision in the affected area according to this form, from line B to line G, and then remove all the ugliness, and then fill the wound with incarnated medicinal plaster, and then adjust the two lips of the wound with cosideration, and cure the one who is inside so that he may be healthy.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	But if the breast declines to the lower parts and is softened by its greatness just like in women, then it should be divided into two lunar-shaped sections, with each one containing the other, so that the major line contains the minor according to this form from line B to line G. And then remove the cord which is between the two lips of the wound, and stop the bleeding, and administer what we have said about the suture and powders that are necessary for the cure until he may be healthy.
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you do not complete the incision of that which is necessary to cut for the quietness of the patient, and for flux of blood, then you should fill the wound with cotton submerged in corrosive oil and let it corrode what is rough from the grayish matter, and then cure the one who is inside so that he may be healthy.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter 48.
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	On the perforation of abscesses that come from below the nipple.
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	These abscesses that come from below the nipple are of the species of scrophulae, hard, which contain a skin that is sacred.
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	And of those some contain humidity; and those that contain humidity it is necessary to incise them with a lunar-shaped section: from line G to line B. And when everything is evacuated from what is in the abscess of the sanity, then you complete the wound with much cotton and leave it inside for another day.
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	And then the cotton should be left in place and treated conveniently with what is suitable, until he may be healthy.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	And if the abscess is of the species of nodes and scrophulae, then you should section above it as we have said in the section on scrophulae, regarding the incision.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	But if the wound is extended in such a way that it becomes putrid, then administer to it a cautery according to what we have previously said about it.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter 49.
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	On the incision of abscesses that occur through an artery or a vein.
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	When an artery is broken, and the cord which is above it is consolidated, then many wounds occur with abscesses. And the signs by which it is known that inflammation and abscess are through the artery or vein: because when the abscess is through an artery it is long aggregated in the forepart of the body; and when you press on the abscess with your fingers, you feel a stridor in the veins.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	And that which is through a vein is round at the surface of the body.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	And incision on this abscess is erroneous, and it is especially so in those who are below the ribs, and in the groin, and in the neck, and in many places of the body; and it is very great, therefore it is necessary that its cure be eschewed, and one who is in the extremities, or at the head, should avoid it.
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	But concerning one who is suffering from inflammation of the orifice of the artery, incise in the cord section at length; and then open the section with an inch and then dissect the artery, and remove the tunics until it is discovered.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	And then put a thread on that needle and make it penetrate into the other side, and stretch the artery with a double thread in two places, — which causes you to have a double vision of extracting two arteries that are in the temples.
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	And then push the place which is between two ligaments apart until all the blood that is in it is evacuated, and the abscess is dissolved.
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then administer a cure in which it is generated poor until the ligaments fall; and then treat him conveniently with what is suitable until he may be healthy.
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	And if it is an abscess by incision of a vein, then you should hold the vein with your hand as much as possible from the abscess in the cord, and then introduce the needle below the place where you have held with your hand, and make it penetrate; and it should be in double thread until you extract it from the other side, and then tie the abscess with a good ligature according to what you have been told about the ligature of the grapevine, which has two parts in two extremities of the thread.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	More frequently, if you remove the thread, then insert the fiddle-shaped instrument at that angle below the entire aposterium, and stretch the four threads in four places.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	Then return the aposterium to its proper place within so that when it is seated, you examine the redundancy of the code, and thus you will see what is connected to it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then place a poultice over the affected part which has submerged in wine and oil, and then administer the cure which is made with warm blankets and bandages until it is healed.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	Chapter on the aposterium which affects through twisting of nerves.
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	Thus it affects the aposterium in the arteries and veins, and similarly it affects the nerves when it affects their percussion or excessive tension, and by resemblance.
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	And it is frequent in the places of the adjustors or the ankle, or in any place where the joints are weakened.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	And it is a severe aposterium, and it resembles the color of another body, and it is in the greatest dispositions of its own habit, and when it is stricken with vehemence, it feels like the patient has a similar stupor.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	And it is not an aposterium added to the chest of the body, and thus it is below the code, and it has weakened all parts and does not go to the anterior or posterior parts.
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	Therefore, since it is in the joints, it does not seem that it is invested with iron, because the strong contraction of the limb is opposed.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	More often, that which is on the head or forehead falls into a spatula-shaped code.
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	More often, if it is a slight aposterium, then you have the forces and remove that from its roots.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if it is great, then you suspend it with an onion, and scrub that, and then remove it; and adjust the wound with a suture, and cure it until it is healed.
Capitol .li.	Chapter four.
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	On the section of aposterium which affects the skin that affects the abdomen.
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	It happens to some people who have moist and damp abdomens and in other parts of their body that they are called fungal because of their similarity to fungi, whose roots are subtle and the head of which is large; and already their lips are altered, and it is of those who are small, and it is of those who are very magnificent.
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	And I have seen one, and in their abdomen there were two sores that were more like fungi, and there was no difference between those white, of small root.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	And already their lips were turned inwards and split, and humidity flowed from them all the time.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	Therefore I examined them and attributed it to the one in whose feet there were 18 ulcers. and the other who had six ulcers.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	And the operation on their examination is that you consider then if the patient is humid, and the color of the skin is white, humid, with subtle roots; then you examine it with a broad spatula, and you are in your presence with cauteries in the focus, because many damp matters of its section are expelled very sanctified; and if you want to sanctify it, cauterize that.
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	And if the patient is weak and timid, beware of examining with iron; more often then take a recently made leaden fiddle-shaped instrument, and stretch it on that skin, in the manner which is what we have said; and leave it there for two days.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	And then adjust it in the structure of the leaden thread; therefore, do not stop stretching the large leaden grain downwards into the skin, until it is removed and falls out by itself through its own effort.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	More often, if the skin is of thick roots, then in its examination there is some cause of fear and of pain, and especially in that which is in the abdomen.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	More possibly it is that you examine the quality of it, and then cauterize it so that it does not return.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	And then heal it until the wound is healed.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	And beware that you do not presume to examine the skin that is of dark color, of little sensation, of lax regard, because that is almost cancerous.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	And I find it in remembrance of cancer and also similarly.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter five.
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	On the cure of prominence of the navel.
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	Prominence of the navel is made for many causes; or for fissures of the ciphac which is above the abdomen, and thus the fabric or intestine bursts forth according to the other ruptures; or for a sanctified flow of vein or artery as has been said before, or for a constricted ventosity in it.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	More often, if it is for a fissure of the ciphac and for bursting forth of the fabric, then the color of the aposterium is similar to the color of the body; and it is a lion-like pain, and then appears in diverse situations.
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	And if it is for an egression of the intestine, then the situation of that in the body which we have recounted, of more vehement diverse variety, and as you press that in the ties it is occulted, and then returns; and strongly it is in the body thus, and it is magnified very much from the entrance of a bath and vehement effort.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	More is done through humidity, then it is lion-like and not hidden when you press on your hand, neither is it constricted, nor is it created.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	And if it is due to bleeding, then there appears an abscess with signs of decay, declining towards the black area.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	More if it is due to flesh wound, then it is a severe abscess, large and hard, and it is fixed according to a certain quantity.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	More if it is due to windiness, then the touching of it is lion-like.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	And the operation on it is that you consider then if the prominence of the navel is due to bleeding of the artery, or of the vein, or due to windiness; then it is necessary to prohibit the cure of it, because in that there is fear and anxiety, just as it was said in the chapter where it was written about the abscesses due to the artery and the vein.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	And if the prominence of the navel is due to the intestine or the membrane, then it is necessary to command the patient to hold their breath, and be standing extended; and place a sign on the circuit of the entire navel, and command them to stand turned between their hands above the back, and surround with a spatula flat in the circuit of the navel around the area where you felt the tension; and extend the magnitude of the abscess to the upper parts in an equal manner; and place it in the circuit with a strong or soft thread according to the decent method of the liar.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	And place the skin of the extended abscess on the ligament and insert the aforementioned tieu in that index finger and it will turn out the intestine; and if you have not touched or guarded by the ligament, then you extract the excess and push the intestine back to its proper place in the belly.
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	And if you have touched the membrane, then take that one out; and remove its excess fluids.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	More if it is contrary to your artery or vein, then surround that word, and return to your operation; and take two needles and put them in those two strong threads and insert the two needles into the circuit which you felt around the abscess in a manner of crossing, which makes them penetrate; and then strengthen the abscess into four parts over the needles.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if you want, remove the needles and leave the area inside where the extended flesh can fall back into place; or remove that which is subtle and falls away, and then cure that one which needs to be cleansed of the ulcers so that it may be healthy.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	And if the prominence of the navel is due to flesh wound in it or humidity, then it is necessary that you conquer the abscess as we have said and extract the blood or humidity, which you find in it, and then cure that one which needs it and consolidate the area.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter 53.
De curacio de cranc.	On the Cure of Cancer.
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	We have said, in the division, of a type of cancer and in what manner it is possible to achieve the cure of it with medicines, and that it is necessary to avoid the cure with iron so that it does not ulcerate; and we have said that cancer is generated in the marrow and caution of the cure of it.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	And I will tell you that some ancient doctors said that certain types of cancer are in a location where it is possible to eradicate it, just like removing the cancer which is in the breasts or in the thigh and similar to the members allocated to extract all of that, and especially when it begins small.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	More when it is ancient and grave, it does not matter that you appropriate it to him, because you cannot heal from that cancer nor have I seen another, nor has it been perpetrated to that.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	And the operation on it is what is allocated as we have said, that you precede and leave the patient and purge of black bile certain evacuated, and then bleed that one, if it is touched with evident replication.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	And then prepare the patient with preparation in which place is located for operation, and prohibit in the narrow uncis those that need to be done for that; and concave all parts of the code so that good perexcrutacio is made so that no root cause of it remains.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	And let the blood flow, and do not absorb that lightness, and express the places, and abstain from the thick blood all to your hand or to an instrument with which it is possible for you to use among the instruments.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	More if you have made a contrary flow of thick blood in the vein or artery, then cauterize that so that the flow of blood is stopped, and then cure that one with another cure so that it may be healthy.
Capitol .liv.	Chapter 54.
De curacio de ydropici.	On the Cure of Hydropsy.
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	We have already recommended, in the division, the species of hydropsy of water, and the signs of each species, of the cure of it with medicines.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	And that which is cured with iron is not except the species of altithas alone, and it does not approximate with iron to the species of tympanistris nor to the species of hypochondriac, because that is mortal.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	When you have medicated this special type of hydropic timpanist medicine and it does not conform to your medication, then consider that if the patient has achieved debilitation, or it is another bad hydropic condition, and thus as it is in all the joints and resembles a belly ache, then beware that you do not give them iron, for fear of exacerbating the condition.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	Perhaps the patient has an exuberant vertigo, and it is not another bad condition but only hydropic, and neither infant nor old, then the manner of operation is that you elevate the patient between your hands, and the minister places their extreme end on the belly with their hand, inserting water at the parting of the pentinilh, and takes spatum spinos according to this form.
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	It is of two sharp points, of sharp extremity thus as spatum; perhaps meanwhile it is in some brief smallness little by little, so that in the operation nothing passes into the intestine, and that leads to that.
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	And then consider if the generation of hydropic is from part of the intestines, because then it is necessary that you have sectioned alone at the navel for the quantity of three digits to the parting below, in the right direction above the pentinilh.
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	Perhaps the generation of hydropic is due to badness of the liver, then your section should be on the left side of the navel for three digits.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	And if the generation of it is due to the spleen, then your section should be on the right side.
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	And it is not necessary that your section be on the ribs above which you want to chase the pain away from that place, so that the superfluities do not corrode at that free location.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	And then perforate with the instrument the entire codeina, and then insert into that section, and elevate your hand with the spatum between the codeina and the siphac, and you excavate that; and if it is the quantity of an ounce or around.
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	And then perforate the siphac until you reach the spatum at the desired location, and it is the place of the water.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then extract that and insert an instrument of which this is the form:
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	and it is similar to a subtle silver cannula; it is made of silver or copper or golden tin, at which in the lower part of it there is a small tube, and on its sides there are three tubes: two from one side and one from the other side; and it is shaped like a feather's extremity according to the manner of plumage, thus sometimes.
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	And in the upper extremity of it there is a armilla, because when the instrument reaches the water, then it draws upon the instrument, thus evacuating the water at the proper time and quantity, because if you evacuate more than that, it does not converge at the hour, thus strengthening the bad condition by resolution of the animal spirit's siege, or hastening to the quintessence that is approaching death.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	Perhaps evacuate that according to the quantity of the vertigo and according to what the dispossession of the bad condition of the vertigo of the pulse and goodness of it signify to you.
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	And then extract the instrument, and retain the water which causes it because thus it is retained by the codeina which retains the tube that is above the siphac, of which I recommend to you that you perform it according to that manner.
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	And then iterate the instrument another day if the patient tolerates it, and extract a small quantity of water, and do it for several days above fear, and beware of error lest you don't remove enough water.
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	Perhaps you fear about the patient, and let go of a great quantity of water, then cure that one who is buried in hot sand, and move him to a bath, and expose him to the sun for a long time; and cure that one with desiccative medicines until he is healthy.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	And cauterize above the stomach, and the spleen and liver regarding the extraction of water, according to what you have recounted in that which is preceding.
Capitol .lv.	The end.
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	On the cure of children who are born with non-perforated urinary locations.
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	Some born children are thus from the belly of their mother and the head of their mixture is not perforated (or has a narrow tube or is not in its place).
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	Then it is necessary to perforate with an instrument as subtle as possible, according to this form:
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	And then pause in the tube with a subtle key of lead and tie it, and you will be successful for three days or for four.
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	And when one wants to urinate, it is retained and held back; and then return that.
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	And if you do not pause the lead, it is possible that the urine which goes above the location will not release this clarity.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	Perhaps that one whose tube is narrow is medicated with a lead key, thus as we have said, for many days until it is amplified.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	Those who have the hernia in their location, so leditz, which causes it because of those, that which is born and the tract is from the head of the bladder for they cannot urinate to the divided parts, until they elevate the bladder with their hand to the divided parts below; and it is not to their generation, for so that the sperm cannot penetrate to the majority according to rectitude, and it is a great malady often lagging.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	And the manner of operation is that the hernia should be placed on the back of the two seats, and then extend the head of the bladder with your left hand in a vehement extraction, and insert the head of the bladder at the site of the perineum with a spatula-like agut, as if it were an insertion of feathers, or that you do not grasp any part, so that the meatus of the bladder appears like the head of the bladder and the tract falls in its proper place according to covering.
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	And beware that in your operation of blood flow, because many times it happens accidentally; and stop yourself at the moment when it absorbs the blood, and cure the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .lvi.	Chapter 46.
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	About the white ulcer that occurs on the perineum at the head of the bladder and of corrosion and blackening and adhesion of the perineum to the head of the bladder.
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	Many times it happens that this white ulcer occurs on the bladder and is a sign of great worn-out flesh.
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	And of those, one is malignant and another is non-malignant.
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	Non-malignant, it is necessary to suspend them with a subtle hook and absorb that until it disappears completely; and then stop above the underlying skin with an Egyptian ointment; and then, cure the wound with a dialectic ointment until it is healed.
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	And if the ulcer is malignant, of bad color, then it is necessary that you administer cautery at the site of it and the root of it.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	If the ulcer is on the perineum of the head of the bladder in an uncircumcised person, and one part of the ulcer is inside the perineum and another part is outside, then it is necessary that you remove the ulcer which is inside from the beginning until it is consolidated; and then you cure the outer part, because when you cure the inner part, it is not assured that it will not be injured.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	And it often happens in the genitals and in the blackened and corrupted perineum, therefore it is necessary that you conquer all that which has been denigrated and that which wants to corrupt or that which is corrupted; and then apply liniments over that with good mel, which is concocted from flour of scorched millet and of errors and triturations and crivellations.
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	And then cure it with the other curation until it is healthy.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	If there is a flow of blood, then administer lunar cautery according to this form:
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	because juvenile cautery is in two dispositions at the same time, thus it is a flow of blood and a wound when it is corrupted.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	And if the head of the bladder is corroded and destroyed completely at that hour, then it is necessary that you introduce into the middle of the perineum a tube of lead so that the hernia urinates through that.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	In the adhesion of the perineum to the head of the bladder (and this adhesion does not happen except in that one whose perineum is sound, and on it no circumcision has been performed; and when adhesion occurs due to a wound or an abscess) it is necessary that you scrape with a blunt spatula until the ligament is dissolved and the head of the bladder is freed from all parts.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	And if it is difficult to disentangle those exquisitely, then it is necessary that you scrape with a spatula for any cause of the head of the bladder and of the perineum, and thus it is because the perineum, when it is subtle, is easily perforated by its subtlety lightly.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	And then separate between the perineum and the head of the bladder with a subtle drizzle, which has already been softened in lukewarm water so that they do not adhere again otherwise.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	And then it is cured with a stipetic wine until it is consolidated.
Capitol .lvii.	Chapter 47.
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	About the purification of children and the cure of that which happens to those who are circumcised.
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	Circumcision is not a solution of continuity thus like the other wounds: but however it is of our operation and of our will, and those of that are properly in children, it is necessary that we assign to them a better operation and a more gentle perdusion for their health.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	Therefore it is said that the ancients did not practice circumcision in any of their free laws, because they did not use them in their writings, and it is only because they have acquired it by experiment, which cause is that they have trodden the major part of the artisans and barbers using circumcision and purification with a novacula and with torture; and they used ligament with faith and incision at the nail.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	And you have already tried all these methods and did not get better, I lament that the inflammation has become worse, because many times the code of the prepucii under two tunics, and the tunic is removed, and it is forced to go to another insertion and pain surely.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	And in the inflammation that is caused by alphabetic, and it is digital, which uses the sabatiers, it does not guarantee the insertion of the extremity of the virile member, because it enters into its own trouble.
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	Maybe in the operation on the nail, it obstructs the iron and corrupts your operation.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	And the code of the infant is brief by nature, and many times seen in such a way that there is no need for inflammation, and you have seen that.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	Maybe from the inflammation that is made by forfexs and I lament in good faith, experiment describes it to me, because the forfexs are of proportional insertion, so that the acuteness that is underneath is also as the acuteness that is above; and thus as you press your hand so proportionally on both sides, and insert accordingly with a comparison in one time; and it is made by compressing the faith in a figure containing the code of the entire partition, in which no error can be caught.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	And the way of the first operation is that you make the infant stay in a major position if it is one of those who understand a little, that you do not make except to place the faith in its own partition just so, and that you let it enter into another day.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	And then you will be happy in all that way which is possible for you to receive its intelligence.
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	And then make it be between your hands well prepared, and do not let it be seen; and hide the forfexs in your hand or above the foot, so that the infant does not see those nor any other of the instruments.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	And then insert your hand into the partition of it and blow on the code, and pull that out so that the head of the partition is seen, and then inflame that which is added to it from the filth.
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	And then read the place signed in good faith double, and then tie below that one little finger according to the lament, and then tell me the said foot and indicate the place of the lament above in good retention, and insert between two laments.
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then lift the code above the ligament and extract the head of the partition; and then let the blood flow little by little, because it is better ; and sprinkle powder on top and over the powder put a cloth in which there is spread out mugwort of hot oil concocted with recent rose oil; and let that be on top until another day; and cure that with curative until it is healed.
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	The form of the forfexs in inflammation, this is the form:
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	Some are external and not-taloned and the others are taloned, so that it is not seen the branch of the claw, and it is the length of the two sides equally as the length of two manual extensions.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	Maybe the error in inflammation is because it strongly rejects the entire internal code, or part of it which has the insertion.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	So I think that you should extend that from your hour to your nail in front of the postulation of the place and insert that according to equality.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	And if you cannot hold it on your nail, then extract it in an inch and insert it.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	Maybe if three days have passed, and it has inflated below the partition postulated, then you let that enter until the postulated caution is seen, and excavate that which is facilitated, and insert according to your preparation.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	And beware of the head of the partition, because it will not be good for it.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	And then cure that with water that the plague consolidates from the powders which we have recommended in the treatise on powders.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	And if it is inserted from the code above measure, and it obstructs the parts underneath, that will not harm it.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	And maybe cure that with water that we have said until it is healed.
Capitol .lviii.	Chapter 48.
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	On the treatment of urine retained in the bladder.
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by obstruction made by stone or by congealed blood, or by poisons or by meat, and it resembles those things that we have said about the ways of treatment in the division.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	And if the urine is not dissolved, and it retains its essence because of a stone which is already in the neck of the bladder, then it is believed that the patient's illness is complicated by the sciatica.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	And then combine the feet of that patient on the sciatic nerve and extend the sciatic vein from the partition above the sciatic nerve, and the patient will stretch the sciatic nerve as much as is possible to him.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	Therefore, when the bladder's neck is constricted, it expels urine to the rear parts, because the urine is absorbed.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	And if it is not dissolved in water which we have said is vehemently made into the cause of the patient, then it is necessary to administer an extraction of it with an instrument called a syringe, of which this is the form: It should be of silver and very subtle, like a cane of palm and half a finger's length, so that it can be subtly inserted at the head of it.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	And the manner of examining the urine is that you take the doubled thread and place it at the outer edge of the wool or cloth for good liaison; and insert the outer edges of the thread into the back of the syringe, and if there are any superfluous causes in the wool, then introduce it into the cane with vehemence. And then insert the syringe into the container and album of urine.
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	And make the patient sit on a chair, and cover his belly with a warm cloth, and anoint his navel with olive oil and other unguents.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	And then insert the syringe to facilitate its entry into the root of the navel; and then double the navel above the umbilical area; and then empty the syringe there; and then empty it again until it reaches the bladder, and then the patient will be purged of the vile humor, and it is not done thus according to this order, but rather the meat in which it goes to tortuousness.
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	And then stretch out the thread into the small wool little by little, because the urine dries the wool.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	Then extract it and make a cure for the urine, and use the syringe, do not cease to make water and use the syringe until the bladder is evacuated and the patient has thorough alleviation.
Capitol .lix.	Chapter 6.
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	About the quality of cleansing of the veins with a clamp and similar instruments which are adapted to water.
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When there is ulceration or abscess in the bladder, or congealed blood in it, or it is constricted by pus, and you want to distill waters and medicines into it, then it is necessary to make an instrument called a clampcedra, and this is its form:
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	but on the outer edge of it there is a stopper, so it is closed.
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	And in it there are three channels: two from one part, and sometimes they meet.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	At the beginning it is a concave place, in which there is water that is impelled, and it follows according to the quantity that oppiles that, its addition, until when some cause is drawn from the humidities, it is drawn, and when it is expelled, with water it is drawn, and when it is expelled long, according to what makes the clampcedra phicate naphtha in the battles of the sea.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	Therefore, when you want to draw out humidities from the bladder, insert the extremity of the clampcedra into the humidity, and draw with that water which is impelled from above, because the humidity is drawn into the cavity of the clampcedra.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	And then insert the extremity of the clampcedra into the navel according to what we have recommended in the syringe; and then impel the humidity with water that impels it, because that humidity will soon penetrate the bladder, and the patient will quickly feel alleviation.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	Form of the subtle crystallizer in which the bladder is crystallized, and this is its form:
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	And it is made of silver or copper, of which the head is so subtle that it resembles a small feather, and below it has a channel for introducing the ligament.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	And then take the bladder in motion, and pause there the humidity that you want to crystallize in the bladder, and then tie it between two strong ligatures with a double thread, and heat that humidity over the fire.
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	And then insert the extremity of the crystallizer into the navel.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	And then stretch out your hand over the bladder with the humidity in structured descent until the patient feels that that humidity has already penetrated the bladder.
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	But if you do not have a bladder present, then take a piece of papyrus and make it into that circle; and perforate it with all its retentiveness; and then insert a strong thread into those channels, so that they revolve; and then add the circle so that it is added also to the sofatur, because you pause in that water which you want from the humidities, and oils and waters.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	And then you tie it to the instrument and make it like that, as if it had been made in the bladder, and express with your hand until the humidity penetrates into the bladder.
Capitol .lx.	Chapter 10.
De extraccio de peyra.	About the extraction of stone.
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	We have already said in the division of the species of stone and cure of it with medicines, and the difference between stone generated in the kidneys and stone generated in the bladder, and its signs.
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	And we have said that the patient should be placed on a bench where they can operate on them, and it will be a section.
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	The prepared bench is the one that is fixed in the bladder properly.
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	And you will now give a clear and concise exposition and summary.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	So it is said that the prepared bench is in the bladder of the patient; and of its signs it is that the urine that is excreted from the bladder is similar to water in its subtlety, and appears in this arena; and the patient's vein is affected, and many veins are filled with pain, and it is dressed accordingly; and I have seen that there is a hole in the colon of those.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	And it is rare to heal the children of that age who have reached 14 years; and it is difficult to cure in the veins.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	More often in the young it is mitigated because it is between those.
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	And about that of which the bench is bigger and the cure is less frequent; And if it is scarce, it is contrary to that.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	So when we come to the cure of that, it is necessary at the beginning of that which modifies the patient with Christ's cross, which extracts all the filth that is in their sick veins; because that filth prohibits the approach of the bench, and it requires the investigation of it.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	And then place the patient in their sick feet and let them be consoled and comforted until the bench descends to the region of the bladder, or jumps from place to some veins.
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	And then make that circle between your prepared hands, and their hands are placed under the hips of them, so that the whole bladder is made to decline towards the lower parts.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	And then ask for that and all that is before it.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	So if you feel the bench in the space, then you will soon find yourself in a section above it.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	And if you don't find the entire thing in the same touch, then it is necessary that you anoint with olive oil on the aforementioned index finger of your left hand, if the patient is a child, or the middle finger if they are a young adult, and insert it into their rectum.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	And ask for the bench to enter until it is below the aforementioned finger.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	And convert that little by little into the neck of the bladder.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	And then press above it with your finger, and expel it to the lower parts before you see the place of the section.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	And command the minister to press the bladder with their hand; and command another minister to extend their right hand to the lower parts above, and their other hand remains holding the code that is below the genitals, in the place where the section is made.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then insert the spatula beneath the incident of which this is the form of it:
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	and divide it into the water that is between the anus and the genitals, not in the middle place, but near the left hip; and let the section be above that bench and the finger is in the anus, and let it be a transverse section, so that the section beforehand is wide and direct according to the quantity that you will make of the bench as possible, and no more, because the strong compression of the finger that is in the anus on the bench prevents the section, and it is forgotten due to its difficulty.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	And you know that of the bench there is some corner and margins, because the evacuation of it is made difficult for that.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	And of that water it is like a lion similar to a ball, and it is round, and it is made of the easier evacuation.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	So if it is that which has corners and margins, adjust it in the crack.
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	And if it is not forgotten, then it is necessary that you generate over that, or that you strengthen over that with a decent gesture, the extremity of which is thus like a file on the one that strengthens over the bench, and do not evacuate from it; or that you insert below the subtle instrument of curved extremity.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	More often if you cannot reach that, then you amplify the traction a little, and if you see a flow of blood, separate it into strengthening that with glass tripped vitriol.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	More often if the bench is more of one, then at the beginning you thrust your hand into the mouth of the bladder, and then insert it above it; and then thrust a little above that water; and similarly make many motions more than two.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	And if it is a big bench, then ignorance is that you insert it into the big section, because it affects the patient with one of two causes: either death or it leads to the continuous distillation of urine, because the place is not entirely consolidated.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	More often administer expulsion of it from the inside until it is forgotten, or generate in the fracture of it with the forceps until it extracts that in pieces.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	So when you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with poultices of aloe and dragon's blood, and strengthen that.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	And stop above that cloth soaked in oil and wine, or in oil rosated and water refreshed, so that the postema can be cauterized.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	Then raise the patient up onto their back, and do not dislodge the limb within three days.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	And when those limbs are dislocated, soak the area in water and much oil, and then take care that it is treated with daily finicons and daily diaphoretic remedies until it is healthy.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	Perhaps in the plague, it is necessary to cauterize the postema, adjusted and corroded, and of this same sort as if the blood is congealed in the bladder, and because of this the urine is prohibited (and this is known through the egress of the blood in the urine), so then insert the hot iron into the plague and extract that blood, for if it remains, it will provoke the corrosion of the bladder and its putrefaction.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then wash the plague with wine, water and salt, and apply opposition to the entire affected area, so that it converges on the part of the cure until it is healthy.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	And take care in the hours of the entire cure that you prepare both thighs and adjust the medicines which are placed on the area.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if the stone is small and is in the midst of the bladder, and it is fixed there, and the emission of urine is prohibited, then cure that part which you recommend beforehand so that you may purge through section, for many vain attempts have been made for this cure and have been accused of section; and now you have experimented with it, and it is that you take a perforator of iron in the form of a spear.
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	of triangular extraction, pointed, fixed on a shaft.
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	And then take a thread, and tie it to that part of the bladder beneath the stone so that it does not return to the bladder.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	And then insert the iron into the bladder, perforating with facility until the perforator reaches that stone.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	And turn the perforator with your hand on that small stone little by little, and you will perform the perforation of it until you make the other part penetrate; for the urine is then absorbed.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	And then place your hand on that which remains of the stone from the partition before the bladder, because it is triangulated, and it is forced out with the urine, and the patient is healthy.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	Perhaps if this cure does not appear to you to be properly prepared for some cause that prohibits it, then tie a thread beneath the stone, and another thread above the stone.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	And then enclose the stone in that bladder between two ligatures.
E aprop extratz aquela.	And then extract it.
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	And then dislodge the limb and modify the congealed blood, which is done in the plague.
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	And it is not necessary to ligate with a thread beneath the stone, but rather so that it does not return to the bladder, and the other ligature above, because when you dislodge the thread, then the stone returns to its place and takes away the plague.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	And therefore it is necessary for you to ligate above, so that you elevate the stone to the upper parts, or it returns to its former state, and takes away the plague thus, as we have said.
Capitol .lxi.	Chapter 16.
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	On the extraction of stones from women's bladders.
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	A stone in women is rarely generated.
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	Perhaps if there is a stone in some of them, then the cure of it is difficult, and it is prohibited by many methods.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	One of theirs is because the woman's bladder is very weak.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	And the second reason is that you do not find a woman who knows how to describe her own symptoms to the doctor when she is cast out, or it is from women who have husbands.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	The third reason is that you do not find a woman who knows this art, mainly the operation with her hand.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	And the fourth reason is that the place of section on stones in women is far from the place of the stone, because it induces a profound section, and in that there is fear.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	Perhaps it is necessary to provoke you to this, then take care that you prepare a wise woman who knows the art, and few are skilled.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	Perhaps if you are deprived of that, then seek a wise and subtle woman who is experienced in the art, or present a mature woman who is skilled in the art of women, or a woman who has a part of the art.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	Therefore make that present, and command it to do all that you will order, from the inquiry about the stone to the beginning; which cause is that you examine if the woman's bladder is weak, then take care that you place your finger in her cul-de-sac and search for the stone.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	Therefore if you find that, cut it beneath your finger, and then command it to insert above that.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	Perhaps if it is not weak, then command the mature woman to insert her finger into the cavity of the patient and search for the stone, because she places her left hand on the bladder, and comprehends it with good comprehension.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	Therefore, if you have reached that point, then cover the orifice of the bladder with a warm poultice so that the urine can flow out smoothly and freely through the passage.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	And place a linen cloth over that painful area of the confluence of veins near the passage of urine, whichever part is affected, and bind the stone in that location, and make sure it does not move away from the stone.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	And the section should be small at the beginning; and then insert the rod over that section, and if you feel the stone, then adjust the section according to the quantity which you think the stone will be extracted from there.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	And you should know that the types of stones are many: some are small and large, and rough and smooth, and long and round, and have ridges.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	So you should know how many types of stones there are in it, for what you signify about what you want.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	And if you see a flow of blood, adjust the glass vessel in that location and hold it for an hour until the blood is absorbed, and then return to your operation until the stone is forgotten.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	And make sure you have prepared yourself with the instruments which are used in the extraction of stones in men, so that you may be helped by them in your operation.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	And if you see a flow of blood, and you know that the expulsion of blood is from the artery that is injured, then stop pouring powder on the location and remove those powders and structure downwards, and do not iterate this; and leave the stone and do not extract it, because surely the patient will die from the illness.
E aprop cura la plagua.	And then cure the wound.
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	Then, when the acuteness of the blood has ceased, then apply cooling compresses, and the location will heal, then return to your operation until the stone is forgotten.
Capitol lxii.	Chapter 62.
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	On the section about hernia and ulcer.
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	Hernia is not but an accumulation of humidity in the white membrane which is beneath the codename of the genitals containing the fluid, and it is named membrane.
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	And some veiled things are in the proper panniculus which prepares nature in the partition of the fluid, until it is clear that it is another fluid; and it is the codename of the genitals between the white membrane which we have mentioned, and it is not this but a tumor.
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	And the generation of this hernia is due to debility which affects the genitals, because at that point it is founded on this matter, and some veins are affected by percussion or a blow on the genitals.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	And this humidity has many colors, because the color of it is declining to citrine or sanguineous, or red, or it is black and fetid, or it is whitish, and that is what is worst.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	And the signs by which it is known are these: because if it is in the white membrane which we have mentioned, then the abscess is red and declining a little in length, thus forming the shape of a fluid, and it appears in the genitals, because the humidity contains all that part.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	And if the humidity is in the proper panniculus, then the abscess is red in the partition of the fluid and thus one estimates that it is another fluid.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	And if the humidity is between the codename of the genitals and the white membrane, then you will find the sentiment there.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	And as you wish to know the color of the humidity, then you will spread the color of the humidity in the abscess into the innermost circle of which the form is preceded; and according to what is written on the vestige of the innermost, judge that it is deduced from there.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	Therefore, when we come to the cure of the iron ferrum, then cover it so that you command the patient to take flea-bane if it is possible for you, and sometimes use the cost of the pleurisy.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	And then resume sitting on the two seats above some cause a little higher, and stop there for a few drops.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	And then sit on the left side of it, and command the minister to follow on the right side of it, which extends its rod to one of two lattes at the codename of the genitals and at the partition of the miracle of the belly.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	And then take a broad spatula and separate the codename of the genitals from my place for the length until you reach the peritoneum.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	And make the section according to the rectified engagement distant from the line that divides the skin of the genitals, until you reach the white membrane comprehending.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	And excavate that, and observe, and guard yourself for thus you do not injure that; and your excavation is the one which excavates for partition just as it is suspended in the fluid most subtly and carefully examined in the excavation according to the quantity at your possibility.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	And then perforate the membrane full of water with a wide perforation, and extract all the water.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	And you should separate the two labia of the wound with an unciform instrument, and extend the scapula to the divided parts above; do not touch the codes that comprehend the genitals, and insert the scapula in such a manner that it is possible for you.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	You should insert that in its entirety or in pieces, and moderately loosen the subtle siege, for if you do not precisely perceive the insertion of it, it is not a certain thing that the water will not return.
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	Perhaps it is better to proceed with that beforehand in the area of its code during the time of your operation, then when you have completed the section of the scapula, return inside, and adjust the two labia of the code of the genitals with a suture, and take care of that thus like the other wounds, until it is healed.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	And if you find the corrupted humor through another bad quality, then it is necessary that you remove the vessels which are suspended, and extract the humor, and take care of that in water as we have said.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	Perhaps the water is added in two equal parts, then you know that the two are hernias; therefore insert that part according to what you have done in the other engagement; and if it is your wish that it be an operation, then do it.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	And you should purify the blood, and enter into the sections of the submerged wound with oil or rose oil; and stop before another submerged wound which you have in vi and oil, and expand that over both genitals and the navel of the belly; and stop above double drapes and poultices, and place those above a lien which is according to this form:
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	And you should press two drapes and fill the submerged wound with a carmenade structure according to this similarity; and fill the extremities which are prepared from cotton or humid linen, and add structure in the breech of the breeches, and one of the extremities takes hold of the buttock within the two, and the second takes hold of the part of the perineum, and two extremities over two thighs below and two extremities over two angles, and the entire structure is adjusted in the breech of the breeches.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	And some veiled hernias are artificially medicated with a cautery in place of the section with iron; and it is that you take a subtle cutellar cautery and insert it into the code of the genitals, and ignite according to what we have recommended until the white scapula containing water is discovered, and then you take the cautery according to this form:
e es asemblat a letra greca.	And it is assembled in a Greek letter.
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	And you should perforate that scapula, and ignite until all humidity is expelled.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	And you should extend the scapula with unciform, and scrape with unciform, and scrape with subtle ignited cautery; and insert that according to what is possible for you until you eradicate all of it; and beware of the humor that the fire does not touch.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	And you know that this operation is more saving and farther from blood flow, and better than an operation on the section.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	Perhaps you have made a contrary apostema cautious in the hour of section or in the hour of cautery, or blood flow, then it is necessary that you cure which contrariety makes you sick for water, with a curative treatment that is convenient to him according to what has been said.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	Perhaps the patient is pauperous, and does not expect the second operation due to its horror, then administer perforation according to what you have recommended; and it is when it is certified by you, for water that we have said about the signs, that this hernia is watery.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	Then it is necessary that you place the patient on some elevated chair, and perforate the apostema in the lower part of the body with a broad spatula, and stop the perforation according to the length of the body.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	And it is the wide perception until all the water is drained.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	And then stop on the cotton place and lift that and let it flow, so that the remainder of the water drains.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And then take care of that until the wound is healed.
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	Perhaps the contrariety is at the edge of the water in that hour you perforate it: and this is not done except for the reason that the white pannicle in the orifice of the wound makes a contrariety and prohibits the emission of the water, then it is necessary that you put into the wound a painful instrument with which the water is extracted from the hydropits, in the preceding form; or adjust on the edge of the wound a small one.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	And you know that the water returns, and it is helped with approximately six months or near those; and as it is added, then it should be perforated according to that measure and manner, because the patient will thus pass the seven days.
Capitol .lxiii.	Chapter 63.
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	On the section about carnous hernia and its cure.
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	You know that in the section about this hernia, there is a lost fear of perniciousness in the major dispositions; because I have seen the dismissal of it and being saved by that better one.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	And you should remember the operation in that case and the species of the apostemes.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	So, it is said that the apostemes are born in the bodies of those who are composed of them and it is done for many causes: either for an acute sharp superfluity, which is poured into the genitals, or for percussion.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	And it is the color of the aposteme according to the color of the body, and it does not appear in the pain, and it is a severe aposteme.
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	And indeed it is a putrid aposteme, of which the color is dark, and it does not respond to treatment.
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	And some remedies are done for nodulation of the arteries, and for inflammation of those veins as well, which has already been perceived, or for inflammation of the veins.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	But that which is for inflammation of the arteries is known through the dispersal of the aposteme when it seizes upon those inner ties; and it does not cover what that touches.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	But that which is done for inflammation of the vein is not dispersed from any cause, unless it be compressed upon the inner ties.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	And it is possible that on this species a section was made and on the other carnal parts; and it is that you should cut the code of the genitals, and then stretch the skin to the upper parts, and extract that from the white cypress, and remove the suspensors of the veins, and tie them, and insert the suspensors so that you remove that from all the upper parts of the skin.
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	So if the skin is already consolidated on those carnal parts, then it covers what you extract from the skin and insert that.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	And if it is an adhesion between some cause of the cypress, or between what is between the veins, then it covers that you remove all that adhesion and insert it for a round incision.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	But if it is a nativity of flesh in the place of the adhesion which is behind, then it covers that you insert all that which is of it, and extract the skin thus as we have said.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	So when your operation is completed, then fill the wound with lanolin oil and rose water; and then take care of it in another cure until it is healthy.
Capitol .lxiv.	Chapter 64.
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	On the cure of hernia that comes from vitriol.
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	Vitriol is an aposteme enveloped by some envelopment similar to a broth with mollification of the testicles, and it is done with difficult exercise movement and walking on the affected part.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	And in the cure of this illness it is by fear for that which is preceded by remembrance.
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	However, it covers that I should describe operation according to what the first ones did.
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	And it is said that you should place the affected part on an elevated chair; and then apply the suspensors of the testicles to the lower parts; and then cut the code of the genitals in the inner ties with the veins that are probable to the verge; and hold those other ministers that you have, and extend them to vehement extension.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	And then insert the spatula wide enough for a transverse section in the right of the veins until they discover the hidden veins.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	And then scrape off all the affected part thus as you have said in extracting the arteries which are in the temples.
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	And then place in those a needle in which there is double faith, and bind it to the first of the places where you have extracted vitriol, and bind another remedy at the back of them.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	And then insert them in the middle place for a right section according to the length of the body, and extract what is aggregated from the foul and corrupt humors.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	And then cure the wound with a cure of the other wounds in which you want to be healed, so that the veins which nourish one of the two genitals may not be harmed, because it is not bad for that.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	But if you have extracted vitriol from all the veins, then it covers that the testicles are extracted or that the testicles for that are cleared of all nourishment for the incision of the veins, and that they are stabilized, or that is cleared so that there is no juvenile movement in those.
Capitol .lxv.	Chapter 65.
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	On the cure of intestinal hernia.
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	The occurrence of this hernia is by section that goes into the extended cypress over the belly on the part of the anguish of the miracle of the belly, so that by sending the intestines of that rupture to some of the intestines.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	And this rupture is either from the cypress or from the excision of it, and it occurs to these two species for many causes: either from percussion, or from wound, or from shouting, or from elevation of some severe cause, or from similarity.
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	And the sign of that, when it is from extension of the cypress, is that it occurs little by little over a long time, and does not occur suddenly, and it is an aposteme that goes inside the abdomen for so that the cypress compresses the intestine.
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	The sign of it is when there is an excess of bile in the body, because at the beginning it makes acute pain rise vehemently; and it is apparent that various abscesses appear beneath the protruding codena, and this is due to the inflammation of the intestine, and thus the body is divided into parts before the onset of the disease.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	Some swollen veins are outside the intestine, and this is called intestinal hernial whirlpool.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	Some swollen veins are in the ventosity, and some swollen veins run through the intestine, and here it is retained, and this is a great perniciousness of the disease, and some swollen veins bring about bad pain and worsen when it is premature.
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	And in the treatment of the species of this disease iron is used, because it is believed that it drives out the bad humor from the body.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	And the manner of operating on this is that one commands the patient to reduce the intestine with their hand at the inner parts of their cavity if they obey, and then it is invested over the hollow column between their thighs, and lifts their legs.
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	And then stop the codena which holds the codena of the testicles at the upper parts, and insert the codena of the testicles entirely for the length; and then fix the two labia of the section uncis according to how you intend to hold the section in those.
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	And if the section is according to the quantity that you can possibly do from it, then the hole may be outside.
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	And then scrape off that crust which is beneath the codena of the testicles, until the white hard crust of each part is discovered.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	Then you insert the finger into that which holds the testicle, in that which is between the white crust, which is beneath the codena of the hole, and between the crust according to it, and absolve the adhesion that is in the part behind the hole.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	And then move the hand to the codena of the testicles at the front parts, and also extend the white crust in its own sinew, and lift the hole to the crust at the part of the section; and command the minister to extend the hole downwards and you dissolve the adhesion that is behind with a complete solution.
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	And search in the fingers to see if there is no cause of the intestine wrapped in the white hard crust.
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	If you find some cause, then you inject that into the belly beneath.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	And then you take a needle in which there are eleven thick threads, and insert it from behind the crust, which is beneath the codena of the testicles, which holds the section; and then insert the extremities which come out of the thread until they are four threads, and then compose some of them over some figure in the manner of a cross; and attach it to the crust of which we have said that it is beneath the codena of the testicles with a strong ligament of two parts.
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	And then envelop the extremities of the threads and attach them with a strong ligament until some of the veins that you touched cannot transmit any cause, so that from here on, no abscess can occur.
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	And pause another swollen ligament according to the first ligament, three fingers from the hand; and then these two ligaments will be removed from the crust which is beneath the codena of the testicles, as much as the greatness of the finger, and insert all the remaining roundedness, and remove from there the hole.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	And then insert into the part beneath the codena of the testicles for the section from which flows pure blood and pure health, just as we have recommended in what we have said.
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	And then administer the submerged lancet in oil, and pause in the plague; and administer the ligament which we have recommended (and some swollen veins of the white crust are cauterized, which we have said, and then the insertion of the temen of flux of blood, because many swollen veins occur) and remove the ligament until it falls by itself.
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	If the evacuation of it is delayed, then hot water should be poured in, and pause over that until it falls according to what we have said.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And then heal the plague with another cure for plagues until it is healthy.
Capitol .lxvi.	Chapter 66.
De hernia ventosa.	Of Ventous Hernia.
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	In this hernia, it is not seen that anything has been hardened under the treatment of iron.
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	And the first doctors said that it is made thus as we have recommended in the hernia that is in vi; which is that you lift the veins to the section over that in fecility of the hand; and then you cut in the middle place around the abscess in what surrounds that, until the veins fall.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	And heal the plague according to what we have said until it is healthy.
Capitol .lxvii.	Chapter 67.
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	Of the disorder that is made in the veins.
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	Some wounds break open in the veins, as we have said, and empty the area.
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	And they do not seem to be the cause of the intestine in the genitals; and if they do, it is little; and it returns to them in all hours.
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	But if the time is prolonged in this way, an adjusted fissure is made in the cystic part so that the intestine is dislodged from the cystic part; and it happens for the extension of the cystic part which is in the veins, as we have said, which causes the cystic part to be stretched out, and then it becomes mollified and the area becomes apostematous and empty.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	And the treatment of it is with a cautery, as it has been described beforehand.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	And some wounds are cured in this way: the patient lies on their back between the two mattresses, and then the area of the rupture of the apostemes is dried with a gentle touch according to the quantity of three fingers.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	And then strengthen the white cystic part that is under the codena until it is discovered.
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	And then take the radish and place it on the prominent area of the cystic part, and apply it to the navel of the belly.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	And then kiss the two prominent places on the extremity of the radish of the cystic part, and adjust to the suture one with the other.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	And then extract the extremity of the radish, and do not insert anything into the cystic part at all, nor extend the humor, nor any other cause, as you will have understood in the treatment of intestinal hernia.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	And then heal that one in the treatment of wounds, and as you insert the fibers, purify that one and restore the wound until it is consolidated; because the cystic part is constricted and not adjusted to the prominence of rupture.
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	And cautery is better in this place, because it is more conducive to health.
Capitol .lxviii.	Chapter 68.
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	On the softening of the codena of the testicles.
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	Some wounds on the codena of the testicles in some men are softened in this way, because the flesh that is between them is softened, and it is necessary to observe their condition.
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	Therefore it is necessary for the one who is responsible for the treatment of it to make the patient lie on their back, and insert the entire softened codena over the natural codena; and then adjust the two lips to the suture.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	And if you want, then in the beginning, remove the excess of the softened codena with three or four stitches and make a firm suture.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	And then insert between the stitches; and then heal by healing of the other wounds until it is healthy and the fibers are restored.
Capitol .lxix.	Chapter 69.
De castracio.	On Castration.
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	I know that castration is forbidden in our law, but for a reason I am led to remember it in this book; and it is not necessary to remember it except for two reasons, one of which is that it should be in the science of the doctor when he is expert in that, who knows its treatment and what happens; and the other way is that we sometimes have need of castration of other animals for our young ones, such as mules, and goats, and pigs, and similar to those animals.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	And therefore I say that castration is done in two ways: either by attrition or by making a fissure with a gentle touch.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	But in that which is done by attrition, the way of the operation is that we make the animal drink hot water until its genitals are softened and relaxed and hang down.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	And then take those with your hand until they are resolved and do not appear to be touching anymore.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	But in castration done by making a fissure and gentle touch, it is necessary that you hold the animal and press the codena of its testicles with your left hand.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	And then tie the suspensors, and insert above each humor in a gentle touch until two humors are processed.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	And then insert those pus that you will have extracted.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	And do not leave any cause on the cystic part, but rather the subtle cystic part which is above the veins.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	And this way of castration is better than that which is done by attrition, because attrition strongly leaves some cause in the testicles so that the animal desires to mate.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And then heal the wound until it is healthy.
Capitol .lxx.	Chapter 70.
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	On the treatment of Hermaphrodite disease.
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	Hermaphrodite disease in men is according to two ways: one is because it appears in that which occupies the space in the codena of testicles, in which there are two testicles forming a figure like a woman's pelvis.
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	And some wounds of that kind corrupt the urine which is in the codena of the testicles.
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	In women, it is a special case: the conjunction of the woman on the pentenilh is like two testicles of a man with a little less in total and slightly different in shape, similar to the perineum of a man and two testicles.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	And the treatment is of three kinds: of two for men and one type for women.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	And it is necessary that you insert those adjusted carnals inside so that they expel the impression of that, and then that you cure those wounds with treatment for other similar plagues.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	And in the second kind of men, in which urine is produced in the codename of the testicles, there is no cure or operation for it.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21.
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	On fatigue and prominent flesh due to causes in women.
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	Fatigue is adjusted according to natural causes within, so that it is restrained and made light in regard; and some veins are magnified in some women so much that they spread similarly as in men and pervade unto the coitus.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	Then it is necessary that you hold the superfluity of fatigue with your hand or with a uncle and insert.
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	And do not ultimate in insertion, mainly on the region of the root, so that there is no undue flow of blood.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	And then heal it with treatment for internal plagues so that it may be healthy.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	A born flesh is a flesh that grows in the horrific of the matrix within to fill it, and for it is placed in the parts of the mother according to the semblance of a snake (and for this reason the first appellators called it "caudal malady"); therefore it is necessary that we insert similarly as we insert fatigue, and cure it so that it may be healthy.
Capitol .lxxii.	Chapter 22.
De curacio de alratica.	On the treatment of gout.
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	Gout is when the conjunction of the woman is not perforated, or it is a small passage.
E es o natural o accidental.	And it is either natural or accidental.
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	Accidental is due to bad mixture which has preceded, and that is made or by flesh not adjusted or by subtle or specific ciphac.
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	And it is made or in the region of the matrix, or in its costs, or in the upper pus of it, or in the lower pus of it, and prohibits coition and pregnancy, and for it prohibits menses.
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	And the knowledge of that is made by regard for the uterus, if the oppression is apparent, propdan; but if it is not apparent, then you seek that with the ties of the finger or with the ray.
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	But if the oppression is due to subtle ciphac, and it is propelled to the two labia, then you touch and disrupt that.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	And it is that which stops over the two labial pulvils, and then stops the fingers indicating from both hands in the same way.
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	And the woman is on her two knees, her two extended thighs, and then extends the two labia inward so that the subtle ciphac is broken and the oppression is lifted.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	And then take an ointment and anoint the affected area with oil and stop that on the spot, and let a man do it daily so that the spot does not consolidate.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	But if the ciphac is thick and specific, then it is necessary that you insert that with spatula or with a leaf of myrtle.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	But if the oppression is due to fleshiness, then suspend that with an uncle, and insert it.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	And these are the medicines that make cease blood flow with moderate biting, similarly as achaetia, and dragon's blood, and essences, adjusted to the white album of wolf'sbane.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	And then administer a wide lead cupping so that the plague is not consolidated lightly.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	And hold that for several days and administer cooling water of the third degree.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	And then it is healed with another treatment of consolidation so that it may be healthy.
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	And some veins are born in the native matrix of other flesh, and then it is necessary that you insert according to this manner.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	But if it is for cancerous aposteme, to the cancerous aposteme which is in the matrix not made contrary with iron in any manner.
Capitol .lxxiii.	Chapter 23.
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	On the cure of hemorrhoids and of tail and of red botch that occur in the conjunction of women.
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	Hemorrhoids are appreciated from the orifices of many veins within which they flow blood continuously; and as they are antique hemorrhoids, they are made tails.
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	And I have said in the division of the species of those and their signs, and I will say thus about those that receive treatment and those that do not receive treatment.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	Therefore I say that hemorrhoids and tails when they are in the region of the matrix and do not appear to the sentiment, then in those there is no made cure with iron.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	Those women who are in the horrible condition of being afflicted on those parts which have a sensitive feeling, thus those who are treated.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	And you should place the woman in a warm bath and then extend her arms along the forks, or grasp her firmly, and you will find those in the roots.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	And then powder over those wounds the flow of blood from one of the inwardly piercing powders its biting quality, thus it seems to resemble that.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	And then soak the swollen feet for an hour, and then stop that in cold water.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	And if the flow of blood persists, then make that one seize in decoction of herbs and of scorched grains and of walnuts and of similar things.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	And then take flour of barley and mix it with honey and wine, and make a plaster to apply over the back of the patient.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	And if the blood has been absorbed, it is good; and if not, make adhere two warm cloths, and to the affected parts their scarification.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then take wool and soak it in juice of colic or juice of arnagloss or juice of guarrievier with wine, and make adhere to the area; and then cure the area with an ointment until it is healthy.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	Those who have the worst regimen, you should inject that which appears to be of harsh treatment, because you seem to be far from that good health which I described in the previous engagement.
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And cure him until he is healthy.
Capitol .lxxiv.	Chapter 74.
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	On the accidental perforation of the uterus in the womb.
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	Various special types of abscesses that occur in the womb, such as cancer and apostema lapidum and ulcerations and adherent and erpetromenous and fistulous hemorrhoids and ragwarts and thigh and other abscesses.
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	And I have already said about these evils and the species of those and their signs and their cures in the division.
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	And you should know that I wrote in this treatise on abscesses about the one that occurs in the womb when it is of those abscesses that collect there, and if you want to know in what manner the operation of the iron is made.
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	Now you should consider if the pain of the abscess in the womb's commencement is acute with percussion and fluctuation and fever, and sometimes it inflates and presses on the sentiment, then it does not have perforation of it, and cure that one with what helps on the maturation until the acuteness of the accidents ceases.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	And then you should make the woman sit on a chair that has two chairs; and recline on her back with her legs adjusted at the part below the belly, and her thighs are expanded, and place her arms below her knees, and tie something to hold it conveniently.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	And then the midwife follows the direct path and administers the instrument with which one opens the horrible wound of the womb, in the form of which you will find in those causes that will be made.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	And you should know when you want to administer this instrument that you place it in the right place of the womb of the woman, and what is inserted into the womb should not be more than the right place of the womb and the affected part.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	But if the instrument is larger than the right place of the womb, then you should know that you pause poultices on the texture of the right place of the womb so that the entrance of all instruments into the right place of the womb is prohibited.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	And you should know that you pause the vertebrate that runs on the instrument of the path above and that the minister holds the instrument and revolves the vertebrate until it is opened into the horrible wound of the womb.
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	And when the extraction appears, and it is touched by the hand and it is smooth and soft, then you should know that you separate that which comes out of the head of the womb with a spatula.
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	And when the sania is evacuated, then you should know that you pause in the plague a submerged mechanism in oil rosat or oil vert in which there is some stipulation; and place the calcium in the section in the right place of the womb.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	And then purge the womb and above the navel a wool pad submerged in water in which there are swollen mumps.
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then it is cured in two days with an ointment that is convenient until it is healthy.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	And some women are washed with the womb and the plague in such a way that it is christened in water and honey, and then in water in which there is boiled root of iris or long aristology, and then returns to the ointment.
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	And if the plague is deeply rooted in the wounded womb, then you should know that you are prohibited from the cure of it with iron, because you have no cure for that which we have said in the division.
Capitol .lxxv.	Chapter 75.
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	To teach the midwives in what manner they should help the deformed embryos that are born against nature, according to an unnatural figure.
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	A necessary cause is that the midwife takes into account the beginning of the natural formation of the fetus, and it is so when you see the woman expressing desire for the lower parts and wanting to smell the air, and above this is inflamed because above it is part of it, and it strengthens the judgment of the embryo, then you know that this part is according to natural figure, and it is the judgment above the womb's cap, and the second is in suspense or pending from the navel.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	Therefore, when you see those signs, then it is necessary that the woman's belly be compressed so that the embryo descends more lightly, because when they are above the womb's cap, they descend to it in the second stage, and it is freed from those superfluous fluids with good moderation.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu .i., o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	Maybe that which is another part is unnatural and unlaughable, because when the embryo is situated above its feet and the body of it is situated in front of its head and its feet, and its hand is one, or at its foot. or it is situated the head of it and its hand, or at its belly, and it is strongly converted above the womb's neck, and resembling the unnatural figures of it.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	It is a necessary cause that the midwife be wise and subtle in all those causes, and that she guard against error and deception.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	And you show the entire figure of those, and what engine is in those so that it may be signified by them and established above them.
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	When the fetus is situated above the womb's cap by natural inclination, and that is vehement against the woman and makes a difficult part, and sometimes her virtue has already been debilitated, then do that cauterization, or what women have, and evaporate the confined humor of it with fenugrec oil and olive humectant.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	And then insert the measuring rod between the womb's sides of the spatium petit and find another in the second stage, or dry that with its own nail into what corrodes that which is in it of humidity.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	And press the woman's belly inward so that the fetus descends.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	Maybe if it doesn't descend, then it is necessary that the woman be crystallized with a poultice of ptili and a poultice of fenugrec with cizami.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	And then command it to her, and then the crystallizer, that it be compressed and do that stirring with condisi; and shut its mouth and nose for an hour, because the fetus will be forced out soon.
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	And if the two parts of the fetus are not yet fully expelled at the beginning, then it is necessary that you reduce them with facilitation little by little.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	Maybe if it doesn't obey the instrument, then stop the woman on a chair and lift her feet above, and then conceal the chair on the ground; and the woman should be held so that she does not fall due to the concussion.
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	And if the parts are not yet turned and the fetus dies, then insert those and extract the remnants of the fetus or tie the body to its hand with a drag and extract that with equality, because it will be forced out soon.
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	The judgment of the embryo above the womb's feet.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	When the fetus is above the womb's feet, then it is necessary that you impellicize those in them, and then convert the fetus little by little, and then that you should engulf that, and then that you take one of its feet and extend those little by little.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	Maybe when they are situated between the thighs, then you command it to emerge, and do that extraction with condisi, because it will be forced out soon if God wills it.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	And if it is not yet forced out in that which we have recommended, then you return the fetus little by little into its pause according to natural figure, because it will then be more easily judged.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	And if it is prohibited to do all that which we have recommended, then take a poultice of altea and dissolved goma, and percussion all in the mortar for good percussion, and then line up that with the confined humor of the woman, at the bottom of her belly.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	And then make that cauterization in boiling water, until you obtain the hypochondrias.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	And when the lower parts of it are lenified, then do the sub-fumigation of myrtle and pause that on it.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	And when you do the sub-fumigation for an hour, then make it settle on a chair, and then do that stirring and extract its mouth, and lift it from that, and press the lower part beneath its belly with gentle compression, because the fetus will soon be forced out.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	The judgment of the fetus above the womb's teeth and its hands.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	When the fetus is situated according to this form, then you ingeniously insert its hands little by little; and then the woman should be seated above the womb's neck, and her feet are bent beneath, and those are situated on the lying-down place, and complete with its hands.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	And then place a warm compress on the patient's stomach, little by little, and extract what is left in their feet from the golden rings until it is prepared for departure.
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	And if the foot is not forgotten, then take their feet and gently move them with vehemence, and place what is above the hypochondria little by little until the foot can reach the upper parts.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	And insert their hands and gently lift the foot little by little, and command the woman to exert herself until the foot is forgotten.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	Examine the foot longitudinally while holding one of its hands.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	Be ingenious in reducing the swelling of their hand, but if you cannot reduce it, then elevate the woman and make her walk.
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	And if she cannot walk, then place the mattress on the bed, and shake her thighs with vigorous concussion, and administer gentle treatments which you have experienced and recommend for muscle relaxants.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	And if the inflammation has come, then place the seizing on the celery, and study the reduction of the hand, and lift the foot according to its natural figure, and make the woman stumble and command her to compress herself until it is forgotten.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	Examine the foot on the expanded joints, its hands and the surface of its mother's back.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	So that the midwife holds the foot's hand and then revolves it little by little, and thus facilitates that.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	And when it is and how much it has been lifted, then pause on the joint of their hip which we have recommended for oil and muscle relaxants.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	And then command her to massage little by little, and when you have done that, then place the seizing on one celery and command it to be inclined over the right side, and then command her to be compressed; and make her stumble in condition.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	The prepared fetus exits onto the side.
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	When the mother's horrific state is seen according to this method, consider, and then you will insert your finger into the second vagina until it is evacuated of humidity.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	And if the foot is suspended over the face and neck of theirs, then you will insert that of the embryo, so that it is not retained and dies.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	And then you will apply the foot to the inner parts deeply until it pauses according to what is desired, and command the woman to compress herself with some veiled words, and it will be forgotten in the examination of the doctor, if God wills it.
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	The exit of twins or many fetuses.
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	You know that many veiled words are born naturally, and some words are not born three or four, but it is strange and bitter to understand; but I know the causes are not natural, and I do not live.
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And count those, already it is that they are multiplied, a second one, and they are separated by cipher, distinguishing those that enter the ligament in the navel of each of those; some veiled words are forgotten thus as a fetus for natural examination, and so some veiled words are examined for unnatural examination thus as we have recommended.
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	And if they are difficult to cure due to the devil's influence and come to what we have said about the unnatural figures, then you will care for them thus as we have recounted.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	And if the midwife is subtle and does what facilitates and subtlety, and takes time, and be ingenious according to the entire figure as it is prepared for the ingenuous coming to health.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	Remember that which is formed in the womb from embryos and are aborted.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	Some wounds are formed on the hand one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and more, and I have often verified that a woman aborts in seven, and another has all forms, which causes it to be done for measurement of the glorious savors.
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	And everything is covered because it is in the science of the midwife that they have strength to give birth to that small thing, and therefore stop at what I know.
Capitol .lxxvi.	Chapter 76.
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	On the extraction of the dead fetus.
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	When you care for the dead fetus with what we have said in the division of medicine and it is not contrary to the examined, and you are forced to use opposite operation on the hand, then it is covered that you consider if the woman is of healthy virtue and not among the accidents for which there is fear of loss.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	Then it is covered that the woman lies on the bed on her back, and her head is inclined downwards and her thighs are elevated.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	And the minister holds that of two parts or is tied to the bed so that the body of theirs does not extend beyond the extraction of the fetus.
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	And then you will anoint the mouth of their mother with olive oil and mucus from altaea and fenugreek and semen of them.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	And put the matrix on her hand with those oils and emollients, and put it in the middle to facilitate the movement in the mayor, and approach close to the area where the veins are located in the feet.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	In convenient places there: then you consider if the feet are prepared to be placed above the head of the bed, and then you place the veins in the heels, or in the neck, or in the mouth, or in the palate, or in the beard, or in the armpit, or in the proper places of the ribs, or in the hypochondria.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	Maybe if the deposition is above his feet, then in the perineum, or in the middle of the ribs.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	And it is necessary to hold the vein in the right hand, and pause the curvature of it in that place which is between the fingers of the left hand, and put the hand in a facilitated position and place the vein in some of those places which have fingers, until we reach the underlying cause.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	And then pause and place in the application of another vein, or the third if it is necessary, so that it is attracted equally, and not extended according to its rectitude only.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	And thus the entire part is affected, so that the deposition of it is alleviated also as it is done in teeth, to achieve the eradication of it.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	And it is necessary in that water which is between them so that the extension is mollified; and if any part of it is retained, then it is necessary to put the matrix under some fingers with oil and to anoint those expertly and revolve around that water which is retained.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	So if the part of the foot is forgotten, then the veins are permuted into a place where it was not put before; and do so until all the foot is forgotten.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	Maybe if the hand is ossified from the other, and it is not possible to reduce that by the contraction of it, then it is necessary that a bandage be enveloped over that; and then extract that until all is forgotten, and insert that or in the joint of the hand or in the hollow.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	And thus it is necessary to make points on the other hand and on both feet.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	Maybe if the head of the foot is large, or it happens to contract in the ossification, or it is in the head of the adjusted water, then it is necessary to put between the fingers spatula-like spines and break the head and extract the water, or that discovers with an instrument which is named "alundat", the form of which will be seen among the forms of other instruments in the chapter which is about to come.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	And similarly it happens if the foot is of large head by nature: and then it is necessary to insert that with an algometer, or to take that with an alundat as we have said; and then extract the bones with forceps.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	And if the head is ossified and contracted from the armpit, then it must be opened until the humidity which is in the feet is eliminated.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	Maybe if it is not complicated, nor ossified, then you insert the head as soon as possible according to your situation.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	And if the deposits of the stomach are apostemated or are in the hydropic, then it is necessary that you perforate that until the corrosion of the humidity which is in it.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	Maybe if the feet are above the shoes, then the attraction of it is lighter and the direction of it towards the mouth of the mayor is lighter.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	Maybe if it is contracted from the stomach and feet, then it is necessary that you extract that with a bandage which you have enveloped over your hand, and that you open the stomach and feet until the corruption of what is in those.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	Maybe if the other members are stopped and turned the head, then the matrix is put in the left hand; maybe if the mouth of the mayor is opened, then you put your hand in the prongs of the chair, and approach that to the head, and attract it with the fingers until the mouth of the mayor, and then put it in one vein or two veins, and attract it to those.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	And if the mouth of the mayor is contracted by apostema, because it happens to the urine, then it is necessary that it not be troubled over it; before then it is necessary to administer an infusion of humid, greasy causes.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	And administer emplasters; and follow the patient in waters that mollify and humidify.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	And if the feet are above the side of the rib, then if it is possible, it should be agitated: and administer what we have said in the living foot.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	And if that is not possible, then it should be inserted in pores, and extracted.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	And it is necessary that you do not leave any underlying cause of the disease.
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	And when you have completed all your operation, then administer what we have said about the cure of the apostemas caused by the mayor.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	And if there is an abundance of blood, then apply compresses in strategic places and administer another cure.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	You have already seen a woman with a dead fetus in her womb, and then apply a warm poultice over that area, and then apply heat to the dead fetus itself.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	It happens that you have applied a long time of postrema in the swollen belly; and swell up inside so that the womb opens, and begin to make a grasping gesture.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	You were called to cure him, and you treated him for a long time, but the plague is not consolidated.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	Then you should pause over him because of certain causes of strong attraction, and take out one of his bones, and apply a poultice for several days, and take out another bone; and you were too marvelous, as if there were no bones in the belly.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	And then you thought that they were from the bones of the dead fetus.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	Then you understood the plague, and extracted from him many bones, the woman existing in the many disposed milky breasts, and already visited in such a manner for a long time, correcting one of his little arms.
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	And you did not find it strange, but rather that it is science and help to what the artificial hand of the doctor has for administering cure.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	About the forms of the instruments that are necessary to extract the fetus.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	Form of vertebrae in which the matrix is opened:
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	This is the form of a stretcher on which the books are placed, to which stretching two vertebrae in both extremities of two feet.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	I will empower this vertebral cavity that it be made more subtle by the stretcher, and be made of ivory or wood of boxwood.
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	And it is the width of each wood that has two inches and a margin of each hand that has one inch, and the length of each is a palm and a half; and in the middle place of the two woods there are two adjustments of that same wood which were already fixed, of which the length is a palm and a little more, and the width of each is two inches, or a little more.
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	And these two additions are introduced into the mouth of the matrix so that it is opened among those when you revolve the two prescribed vertebrae.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	Another form similar to that one, made more subtle and lighter:
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	It is made of wood of ivory or boxwood according to the similarity of forceps.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	I will empower it at the extremity of his body with two additions like this, and the length of those additions is one palm, and the width of each is two inches.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	And when you want to open the matrix, then you make the woman sit on a sheet with her feet hanging, opening what is between his thighs.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	And you will place your hand on the instrument like this, making a grasping movement according to the quantity that you want of the aperture of the matrix, until the measurement is made so that you want.
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	The form of vertebrae which the ancients described:
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	Form of a propeller in which the fetus is propelled:
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	Form of an amulet in which the great head is contained:
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	And it is assembled like forceps which bite into the extremity, thus many times, and some poultices are made long thus like forceps according to this form, thus many times, which bite thus like the teeth of a saw in which it is incised and contained.
Forma de amesidat pauc:	Form of a small amulet:
Forma de unci havent una spina:	Form of a hook having a spine:
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	Form of a hook having two spines:
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	Form of forceps which bite into the womb in which the head of the fetus is contained:
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	Form of a spatula having two extremities in which the head is separated:
Forma de dos espatums latz:	Form of two wide spatulas:
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	All those instruments are exercised, and when I multiplied the species of that one and prepared them by the artisans, as it is lighter in its operation and more suitable for the men according to their quantity.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	And do not reject those instruments already, because they are necessary for you to prepare, since the necessity of those is inexcusable.
De extraccio de la segondina.	About the extraction of the secondine.
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	When the secondine is retained by the enfantement, then it is necessary that you command the malady to retain its siege, and apply to make that stirring in condition, and strengthen your hand over his mouth and over his nostrils, and if for that reason it is deformed, well it is.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	And then, you take a sponge and pierce through the covering with a tube and pause in that herb which opens the mouth of the matrix, thus like calm and rough and anet and chamomile and Arabic scammony and cassia lignea and santal.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	All these herbs or some of their kind are submerged in water in the sponge, and pause that over the flame.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	And then pause to insert a tube of cane into the mouth of the mother, and hold it there until the vapors go into the cavity of the mother.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	And then make that stormy thing calm down as we have said, and the second serum will be quickly administered.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	Perhaps the Roman method is not effective, then you order the matron to submerge her left hand in oil of sesame or in a mixture of other herbs, and then insert it into the container and heat it in the second container, and when the aura is found, then take it out and extend it little by little. Perhaps it is annexed to the womb of the mother, then insert your hand afterwards as we have recommended, and when you have found the second one, extract it little by little following the rectified method so that the mother does not feel the vehement attraction.
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	Before covering, make sure that the right and left sides are facilitated.
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	And then adjust it according to the amount of attraction, so that it obeys and evacuates from adhesion.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	And if the mouth of the mother is constricted, we have not recommended the treatment with stuttering and medication of the wound with herbs.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	Perhaps it is not forgotten among all the causes that we have recommended, then beware that you do not fatigue over that in iteration of abstraction, perhaps however it is clear that what has been emitted from it into the mouth of the mother lies in the cavity of the woman, and then crystallize it with gum and tetrafarmacon; because that will make it dissolve in a few days and will be forgotten.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	Perhaps when it is purified, it is of the elevated bad odor at the head, and in the stomach, and that leads to the illness; and then it is clear that they have been administered sub-fumigations and conveniences accordingly.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	Perhaps some of the Ancients already used sub-fumigation of nitrate and dry figs.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	Form of instrument with which the woman is sub-fumigated, avoiding retention of menses and of the second one.
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	It is made of glass or of copper.
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	And the subtle extremity is paused in the container and the broad extremity is above the focus, and the sub-fumigation is paused over the arms of the focus.
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	And hold it there until that sub-fumigation is consumed and then another one will be made.
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	Of the treatment of the unperforated anus of the infant.
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	Many infants are born with and their anuses are not perforated, which have a subtle and obstructed siphon.
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	Then it is clear that the matron should perforate the sieve said siphon; and if not, perforate it with a sharp spatula, and beware that you do not touch the ligament.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	And then pause over that woolen thread infused with wine and oil; and then cure it with gum until it is sensed.
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	Perhaps you fear that it is obstructed, then pause in the trajectory a caneula for many days, and wait until the infant wants to evacuate.
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	And then obstruct the anus for consolidation of plague or of abscess; then it is clear that this consolidation should be incised, and then cured with what we have said about the treatment and of the poultice.
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	Of the treatment of the fistulas that develop below.
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	The fistulas that develop below the perineum push downwards with a node and grossness, those which develop near the anus beforehand or in the space of one part.
E es una fistula o motas.	And it is a fistula or many.
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	And when that node is ancient and corrupted by the agitated white humidity or subtle pyridura, and some veins are derived from these fistulas, some penetrating.
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	And those penetrating ones are known for what has been emitted from them through the egress and ventilation; and some veins use the bad egress, and they have been emitted from those worms.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	And some of those fistulas have derived veins in the penetrating space into the bladder, and into the meat of the penis; and some of those penetrating ones into the junction of the thigh and into the node of the coccyx.
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	And that in which the penetrating fistula is known into the anus and non-penetrating, it is that you put the tie said endic in the anus, and then insert a subtle tent of copper or iron in the fistula when it is not tortuous.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	Perhaps if it is tortuous, then insert a subtle tent of lead or horsehair into that, until you feel the tent or hair in the said tie.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	And if you do not feel that at all nor does it proceed from the trajectory any cause of egestion or worm or ventilation, thus as we have said, then you know that it is non-penetrating, and then abandon the treatment.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	And when the fistula is penetrating into the bladder or into the meat of the penis, then the significance of it is emission of urine from that and prohibition of it to such that the place in medicine is consolidated.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	Most penetrating pain enters the joint of the hip or into the bone and causes pain in the circle, then it is understood that the tendon is pierced through here if not broken into the bone, and causes pain in the circuit of the part; and that the patient's eyes are cloudy at times; and that this medicine does not work, nor is it consolidated with a poultice.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	And in all those penetrating fistulas there is no complete cure, and the cure of those is troublesome and vain effort by doctors regarding which they are firm.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	Maybe in that which is not penetrating and not chronic, health is iron firmness spread according to what you have to recommend, and that which you have and proceed.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	And it is that the patient goes between their own hands over the back of them, and raises their legs towards them, their thighs are inclined towards their belly, and then insert a lead or iron tube, or if it is in the broken fistula, until you know the place where the tendon pierces.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	And if the patient feels it around the ankle, then cover that you insert your finger pointed in the ankle.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you feel in the pointed finger the tendon already pierced and discovered to penetrate, another thing that you feel between the pointed finger and the skin or flesh, then you know certainly that it is penetrating; and therefore do not trouble yourself with that, because there is no health in that, just as we have said.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	Maybe the Emperor's doctors said that some remedies are healthy for some people who are bitter.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	And the medicine for which you hope for youthfulness in him is that you ignite subtle cautery according to the width of the fistula, just as it is preceded, and insert that ignited thing into the fistula until it reaches around the ankle; and then repeat it two or three times until you know that all those adjusted, fistulated meats are like a feather of a bird.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	And then heal those calf muscles wrapped in bandages until you can adjust all those meats that are adjusted, and then heal with medicines that engender and consolidate the flesh, and if it is healed, good; and if not, then it is not healthy at any time for another cure.
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	And if the tendon goes in, and does not penetrate into the pointed finger which is in the ankle, and between that and the tendon that is only a small piece of flesh or skin, and sometimes the fistula is in what is the surface of the codena, then dry the codena from the beginning of the fistula, and you will see the tendon, and it is in the fistula until the drying reaches the place where the extremity of the tendon pierces, and by the tendon is freed and healed.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	And then cleanse those fistulated meats which are like a channel of bird's feather and do not break away from any cause.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	Maybe it flows many times that comes between you and your operation when you dissect those meats, then the thousandth time that is and of the pus lesser instrument is to cauterize with fire or acute medicine, because cautery with fire adjusts good habits: so it is adjustment of those adjusted meats, and removal of the blood's excess humidity.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	And then heal those calf muscles wrapped in bandages or in tight bindings until the place gets strong, and then heal the wound with hard flesh that engenders and consolidates.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	And these medicines are those which are stipulated and excess is removed; when then it is restored, already it is healed and does not fear relapse.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	Maybe the fistula has already pierced into the ankle's surface and is elongated from the skin's surface of the body, then insert the pointed finger into the ankle and examine it thoroughly.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	And then if you feel the tendon and it is only skin or flesh, and it is ready for penetration, then it is not an operation on him except by way of trust and hope.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	The cause is to administer in him one of three ways: either to cauterize it as we have said; or to dry it until you reach the cavity of the ankle so that it is possible for you to insert the fistula and the proposed cure; and do not process more than the drying, so that you do not irritate the contained fluid in the ankle, and that you ascend upon the patient's consent of their own free will; and then heal it as we have said because it is strong health; or to elongate the skin and remove the pus that dries it until near the ankle, as we have said, either with a tendon or another instrument of sharp extremity, and then cleanse those fistulated meats which are in the drying until one can make a crust; and then strive to do the restoration of all the wounds in the drying, and if the pus above is not consolidated, and the fistula remains open in the part of the ankle, and it will be lesser for the patient.
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	And the fistula is finished according to this method: it is when you insert the tendon into the fistula, and it is in the ankle's surface around the body's skin with the codena and on the edge of the ankle, then take the tendon of perforated extremity, which is like a needle preparing the veins according to this form.
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	And if you insert a finger into that closed space of the intestine or hernia, and if you insert it deeply into the fistula so that you can feel the cavity of the patient.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	Maybe if you penetrate the margin of the anus with your finger, then you extract the intestine from that narrow passage and you insert your finger into the anus; and you extract the extremity of the intestine and adjust both extremities together, and stretch each one, and leave it like that for a day or two, and when you feel the intestine in the flesh, stretch well so that those parts are inserted which are between the two extremities of the intestine and fall.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	And then cure the wound so that it is consolidated and healed.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	Maybe if the orifice of the fistula does not penetrate, then make it penetrate in some way, so that you are prepared, but do not move in the pressing, because it is not for you to do that lest you injure the liver; and then make it so that it is healed.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	The shape of the splint for the spine is such that it is bent towards the fistula: its curved part is very acute and the other part is not acute, so that you do not injure what is not necessary, thus sometimes.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	About the stitching of hemorrhoids in which blood flows into the incision of those.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	Hemorrhoids are treated in two ways, either they are between the buttocks, seemingly like charcoal, or those that are with a layer of rough skin.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	And those are small and large, and the blood flows from them at all times and it is one, and they are moved, and they are outside the anus, and in their extremities.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	Maybe those that are outside the anus are treated according to the measure of little humidity, from which flows yellowish water or a little blood constantly, and it is according to the color of the thing.
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	And the treatment of that which is deeply in the anus is that you order the patient to sit down and to exert themselves inside so that the anus opens up and the hemorrhoids appear to you.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	Then you take hold of them and suspend them in an unción or you keep them on your fingernail, and then you cut them off at their roots.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	Maybe if the nails do not hold onto them due to their humidity and softening, then take them with a rough cloth or a knife or a woolen thread, and extract them from their roots, and then you cut them off and powder over them some hot powders, so that they adhere to the place of cauterization; or cauterize them according to what is prescribed in the chapter on cauterizing.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And then heal them with another treatment until they are healed.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	And if the anus does not obey the exit, then you cristalize the patient in cristals where it is slightly numb, and wash them with that water which is in the anus and which helps the exit more easily when the patient exerts themselves.
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	Maybe if the hemorrhoids are in front of the anus, then the cause of them is easy, and it is that you take hold of them with your fingernail, or that you take hold of them with an unción, and cut them off, and then heal them with water as we have said until they are healed.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	And that which has an incision, it is necessary to administer stitching of them according to this method: take a wrapped intestine and insert it into the needle and then extract the hemorrhoids from the above-mentioned parts, and make it penetrate with the needle in the root of the other part, and wrap both extremities of the intestine around the part below the needle; and strengthen the hemorrhoid in a strong structure, and then sew up the intestine and extract the needle.
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	And make it whole, and leave one of them open and do not close it, so that the superfluity of blood flows from it.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	And then pause on the anus with a cloth infused in rose oil or in wax; and pause it on the anus and order the patient to rest.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then leave it until it scars; and when it falls, heal them with an ointment or another treatment until it is healed.
De curacio de fistulas.	On the treatment of fistulas.
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	Many things are done hastily for excess or for constriction of nature.
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	And since they are antiquated and do not have value in that medicine, then it is necessary to root them out with the point of a splint or with your fingernail until they are made humid and held back by the escar, which prohibits their consolidation; and then heal them until they are consolidated.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	Then you remove them with a root extractor, vigorously, at first until much blood flows and they are excavated; and then heal them until they are healed.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	On the treatment of piles, this is clear.
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	You know that piles, this is clear, and it is not if you do not notice the redness according to the color of the body, resembling a head of garlic, and it is made in all the body and mainly in the parts below the feet and the fingers, and it is caused by those painful humors.
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	And then it happens that the nail has grown into the circuit of the claw, and has held onto the forked [fork-like?] or hooked [uncial?] part, and has been eradicated from its root; and then take care of that.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	And if you want, cauterize the following segment that is located in the seventh chapter.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	More of a true eminence appears as a small, rough, rounded fistula on the surface of the body, and many veins come out in the hands of children.
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	And the cure of it is to extend and insert that, or to stretch that with a file or with a pelt entering into the cage.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	And if you want, cauterize that, according to what we have said, with fire or with acute medicine.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	And already eradicated inversely and non-inversely with the instrument which you call a director.
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	More of a ant-like eminence appears as a small, rough, gross fistula on the surface of the body, especially in the groin, and when it touches that, it is centred in the semblance of morbid formation of anthrax, and it is situated around the body.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	And the cure of it is to take a caneula of pea of owl or of pena of voltor, and make it strong, and place that over the anthrax until it contains the circle of the caneula with its parts; and then revolve your hand in the caneula until you insert what is in the circuit of the anthrax, and place that in the groin of the flesh, and eradicate the anthrax from its root.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	And if you want, make that with a caneula of iron or of ironwork according to this form:
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	The lower part of the caneula should be subtle, solid (not perforated), enveloped in such a way that on top of it the absorption of it is abolished and the revolution of that.
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	And if you want, cauterize the anthrax according to what has been said before in the chapter on cautery of atheya.
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	In the form of instruments that are administered to give crystallization.
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	Some veins are made crystalline with silver or gold or iron founded or molten; and some veins are made from those small and large instruments according to those that are administered, because the one that is administered in the cure of small children should be small; and of those whose veins are fragile or delicate, the crystallizations of those are small.
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	The form of large and small crystallization:
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	The head of the caneula at the bottom where the bag is tied should be wide according to this method; and it should be distinguished there where the bag is tied, thus sometimes.
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	And the extremity of it afterwards, which is inserted into the anus, should be solid (not opened) like a lion, and subtle; and on one side of the latz there are two channels, and on the other side one channel, and the width of the channel is according to the greatness of the roots and thus bigger one small.
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	And the bag in which are placed the medicines of bladder of beast or of sheep's skin, and its root should be a palm.
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	And it should be perforated for many channels thus as it is revolved; and if the space which is between the channels is too large.
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	And then insert into those channels a strong thread of crude iron which is of ten threads, or around those; and adjust it to the bag; and when it is placed in it the bag, it should be stretched at the head of the crystallization between two distinct and strong constrictions, and then crystallize in each channel: More, the quality of crystallizing in that is that you fill the bag with medicine, which should be heated according to the quantity of tolerance of the patient; and beware that it is not too hot nor too cold.
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	And then the patient should be placed on their back, and elevate their legs up high and place one cord above them on which already are the homes or a lancet; and then anoint the extremity of the cautery with oil or album of water or mucilage of fenugrec or similar; and then insert that into the anus to facilitate, and then the minister takes the bag and extracts it twice or thrice with vehemence until it is evacuated from the intestine all that is in the crystallization; and then extract the crystallization and the patient lifts their legs up high to the wall.
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	And if the medicine forces out that excess, it holds as much as it can; and if it sleeps for an entire night, it is more beneficial in juvenation.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	More, if you crystallize that in the maladies of solution of belly and evacuation of it, then you iterate the cautery until it is healed.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	And if in the anus there are emorrhoids or apostemes of painful wounds, then it should be crystallized with subtle and gentle cautery, among those crystallizations which children are accustomed to.
De curacio de las plaguas.	Of the cure of plagues.
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	I have already said in the division of the cure of plagues what is convenient to the book, and I have said thus the cure of those with me and with medicines according to the complement.
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	Therefore, it is said that wounds are diversified according to whether they are caused by cold humors and according to the location on which the wounds occur.
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	And the causes why many wounds are caused by cold humors are so gathered together from pebbles, or incision of space, or cutting of a strip, or percussion with a lancet, or with a fistula, or with a sagitta, resembling those of many causes.
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	Many wounds that are in the places of the body are also like a wound that bites on the head, or the neck, or the chest, or the belly, or the thigh, and resemble those of the limbs.
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	And I strongly recommend the cure of some wounds because it stops that rational thinking and rule over the other wounds.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	And I will begin with simple head wounds, because the recollection of compound remedies will come to the beginning of the third chapter.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	Therefore, it is said that when simple head wounds occur and are not fractures, then consider: if they are due to pebbles or resemblance, and you have already wounded the code so much alone and it is a great wound and you fear about that aposteme caught by the patient, then you should quickly cure the cephalic wound, and do not delay; and extract from the blood according to the quantity of its virtue if there is no prohibiting cause for phlebotomy, especially if the blood that exits from the wound is little.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	And it is phlebotomy of the contrary part of the wounded limb; and beware of the patient's relapse and of vicious and gross vices.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	Many times, because of the minor prohibition, then it is diminished by the vice and does not approach flesh nor vice.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	And stop on the wound, if it has caught an aposteme, as it becomes inflamed with olive oil or wine in which it is steeped.
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	Many times, if it is certain of an aposteme caught, then stop on the wound, if it is recently with pure blood and the air has not moved that powder which I recommend to apply little by little.
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	And if the air has already changed that, then stop on the ulcers and poultices until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	Many times, if the wound is great or is due to incision of space and resemblance, and the lips of it are not adjusted for pustules, then adjust them with suture according to what I recommend about the suture of those.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	Many times, if the wound has been discovered on the bone and skin, and it is not retained by it except for a small suspensor, then incise that and apply careful cure to the wound with medicines and restore the flesh almost in place of the code, and command the patient to be cautious of vices in which there is grossness: caps and forms are joined together resembling those, until it is composed.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	And if you find putrefaction in the code and it does not adhere to the bone, then you incise all that rottenness and remove it, and apply careful cure to it.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	Many times, if in these wounds there is an artery or vein from which flows blood that may come out, and it is not absorbed by medicines, then you inquire about the artery, and if you find it not incised, then you incise it with a spatula, or ligate it; and if necessary, provoke what we have said does not conflict, then you cauterize until the blood is absorbed.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	And if these wounds are simple and small, then the cause of them is lighter; in this way that you powder over them with this powder, because consolidated there before the air moves them.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	And the manner of the powder is this: take one part of oil of juniper, two parts of dragon's blood, three parts of unextinguished causes; grind everything thoroughly and sieve it, and from that let the wound be filled, and let it be constricted by good constriction until it be on that adheresca, and let it be coagulated with the blood.
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	And you strengthen that beneath with pules and lift it, and do not dislodge it while it is thus, so it does not become apostemed, because it is not eradicated from the medicine until it is healed.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	And some wounds make that alone with a sole cauterization, when it is not at your presence in juniper and dragon's blood.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	And I do this same operation in great wounds when it is convenient to stop on them and they are stretched, and the recent wounds with their own blood, which the air has not altered.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And if the air has altered them, and especially when it is in summer time, then it is not intended for the position of this powder, but rather cure those with what we have said, thus that you stop on those ulcers and poultices digested, or stop on those pores of the flour of the ordinary bread with water and honey until they get purged; and apply careful cure to them with another careful cure until they are healed.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	Many times, if it happens on a fracture wound in the bone, and it is small, then you extract that with gestures.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	And you must direct the treatment of fractures of the head in that which is incoming.
De las plaguas del col.	Of the sores of the neck.
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	But if the sore settles in the neck, then it is not different in medication, and between the sore of the head when it is simple.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	But if the nerves of the neck are cut or constricted, then it is nerve damage, not in the engine but rather it must be avoided and cure of the limb that makes vehement stiffness, thus as wine and vinegar that seem to help and appear similar to those nozes and contractions.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	And do not stop upon the sore for any total cause of all fever, because the substance of the nerves is fever and its continuation is in the brain, which is the source of all the members.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	And if it is that which is cured by gentle medicines, thus as it is caused by washing with warm water, some infused oil in rosated or non-rosated, and this when washed with warm water and the other minor pains are diminished according to this manner, and humidity is induced.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	But if the sore is great, then administer a suture, or bind the lips of it, and then take care to apply powder inside so that it may be healed.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	But if the sore is deep or reaches to the lowest part of the putrid flesh, then pierce it in the place most depressed.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	But if in the sore an artery is cut and a flow of blood is consequent, then separate or dry it, or bind it, or cauterize it if necessary to provoke a stop to it.
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	But if you have cut the vertebrae of the throat or all, and so saved the veins of the neck, then adjust the lips of the codena with a suture over the cane of the throat and do not touch it; meanwhile equalize it and return it to its natural figure, and then strengthen it in decent structure, and leave it for some days; and then take care to induce humidity in which there is stiffness and excitement until it may be healed.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	But if the sore has formed an abscess in the bone, then pierce it, and then if there are fragments of bone, extract all those that you can from there; and what you do not apprehend, leave it until the sore may ripen, and be separated and the edge of the bone may be alleviated.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	And if the sore is recent then powder over it with the powder that I have recommended to you.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	But if in the sore there is formed a fistula, then take care of it with the water of which I will remind you in the seventh chapter.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	Of the sores of the neck or of similar ones that form between the shoulders and are formed with a spatula or with a knife or with a lance or with similar things.
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If it is a percussion of a lance or of a knife, and sometimes of its depth, then consider that if the sore has been infected when the patient was weak; then you will know that the sore is mortal.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	And if it is not deep and the sore is recent with seven bloods, then you stop in it at the first hour of powdering, and do not strengthen it because the blood may be retained in the depth of it and return to the heart and afflict the patient, but rather pause in it an attractive humidity, and dissolve those two veins on the same day.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	And if the humidity is not present to you, then pause in the orifice of the sore as much as possible so that it may suck out what there is of humors; and make that the patient sleeps on the sore so that it may run what is in it adjusted.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	But if you see that the sore has passed three days or more and does not affect the patient with spasm or tremor of bad heart nor constriction of wings, and sometimes other good dispositions of it, then you will know that the sore is saved; and then take care of it with warm compresses and another cure until it may be healed.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	But if the healing of it is exhausted, and already all time has been occupied, then you will know that a fistula has formed; take care of it therefore according to the seventh chapter.
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	And if the sore is by incision of a spatula or of a knife, and is simple on the surface of the foot or of the back, then take care of it with water that precedes suture, if it is large, or with powder, if it is small.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	But if it has formed an abscess in the bone, and then you have cut out pieces of it, then twist the sore and collect to extract those pieces, if they are separated.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	But if they are not separated, then leave them until the sore may ripen, so that the extraction of them is alleviated.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	And of the other accidental sores in the other members, the treatment is the same as what we have said.
De las plaguas del ventre.	Of the sores of the belly.
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	The indisposition that affects the belly is either great, or small, or moderate.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	From the large and wandering veins of the intestine or nerve of the intestine, because it is a faulty introduction of theirs and the suture of theirs being more violent and more subtle.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	And the disruption of the small intestine is a difficult fault for another manner, and it seems that the reduction of theirs is more difficult, if you do not quickly counteract the introduction of theirs to their proper place, because it swells and becomes grossly enlarged, since the instrument of theirs is faulty and difficult.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	And therefore the lesser disruption is better, because in that case it is not difficult to reduce the intestine, just as it is difficult in the two species mentioned above.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	And we know that the suture of the belly is according to four manners, but two sutures are common which are convenient for sutures of the other wounds of the body.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	And two other proper sutures communicate with the other wounds, but especially they are more proper in the suture of the belly.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	And I recommend to each one an exposition and declaration.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	Therefore I say that when the wound is small and there is some cause of the intestine for that, it is very difficult to reduce it, then it is in one of two manners: either by shrinking of the disruption as we have said, or when the intestine has been inflamed by the coldness of the air.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	And therefore when it is so, then you should scald that in this way, that you submerge a humid sponge in lukewarm water alone, or that you cook in water with cypress, and spice, and embrocations, until the inflammation of the intestine is resolved.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	And some wandering veins make it clear that there has been stipulation, and it is better than water alone in resolving the inflammation.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	And therefore when the inflammation is resolved, then you should humidify the intestine with water in which there are cooked altaea and malvas, because by that the instrument of theirs is alleviated with little cause.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	But if it is excused from the instrument of theirs next to this cure, then you should divide the disruption into a small instrument in which there are inserted emollient roots.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	And the primary cure is better, when it is proper that there is no section, and there should be no occupation to section or fall into defect.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	Of the instrument, thus you see the form of it:
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	One part of the sharp-edged cutting instrument, and the other part not acute, and the subtle extremity, and it should not be in the subtlety of a spatula, unless it is obtuse by a little.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	And therefore when the wound is amplified and goes outside the intestine, then it is necessary that its reduction be according to the form of its natural, in its proper place, if it is possible above all, because better is.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	But when the disruption is large, and it is in the lower part of the belly, then you should make the patient lie on their back, and place their legs more upwards than their head; and if it is in the upper part of the belly, then you pause the head of theirs and the feet more downwards than the parts below.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	And similarly if the disruption is in one of the two parts of the belly, then you should pause your attention and consideration at all times on this, so that the part in which there is the wound may be more upwards than the other.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	And thus it is necessary that you administer this in great wounds and in lesser wounds.
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	And in small wounds, pause what is prepared for you, and prepare to make the minister among your most skilled attendants, who holds the entire disruption with his hand and adjusts the lips of it, and prepares to discover from that to him who knows the suture of some cause or another.
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	And this is the common method of suture: one that takes the needle, or counts the number of stitches according to the quantity of the amplitude of the wound; and prepare to release the extremity of the disruption with the ring finger, and strengthen the needle once, or you do not put faith in the two extremities of the cord, with two extremities of the ciphac which is below the cord of the divided parts, until you make it penetrate that part; and you have already added the two extremities of the cord and the two extremities of the ciphac, and so make four orders.
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	And prepare to strengthen with double faith in the circuit of the needle, and some wandering veins of two parts together, and prepare to add the two lips and the wound for decent addition; and prepare to release the grossness of the finger and fix another needle in that, and prepare to tie it with faith as you did with the first needle; and do not cease from doing this if it is necessary with the needles until you have completed the entire contraction of the wound.
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	And thus the lesser needles are between groseziness and subtlety, because the subtle needles move more easily in the flesh; and the large ones are of difficult instrumentation in the cord, and therefore it is necessary that they be lesser in subtlety and largeness.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	It is not good that the needle is stuck in both extremities of the spine, so that the flesh does not become inflamed quickly and the wound heals before its consolidation.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	They are not prolonged with stitches so that the wound is not prevented from healing.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	And then insert the extremities of the needles so that they do not loosen the patient's sleep; and place powders expanded from all parts, which hold the extremities of the needles; and thus you will know that the wound is already consolidated.
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	And in these species of stitches with needles, it is more convenient to use them in small wounds, because they have been fixed with a single needle or two around those.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	Moreover, the second stitch is communal: and it is that you administer stitches to the four extremities, of the spine and two extremities of the hip, at once, with a needle in which thread is wrapped in subtlety and thickness.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	And then when the needle has penetrated these four extremities, return the needle to that same part from which it began, so that the thread retreats in a subtle way from the wound, so that the stitch is according to the stitching of fabric with which the fabrics are strengthened.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	And stop between each stitch the amount of thickness of the small finger's mending.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	And this stitching is known to men.
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	And in this stitching I sewed up the wound which was inflicted on a man in his left belly, which had been wounded by a knife, and it was a disruption of the major wound of about a palm, and it was about two palms from the intestine near the navel, and it was a disruption in the middle of the limb; and then I sewed up that part where the intestine had been outside the wound for 23 hours.
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	And the wound was consolidated in the space of 15 days or around that, and I cured him and he was healed; and then he lived for many years, and it was converted into his natural dispositions.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	And the other doctors had judged that he could not be healed; and by a miracle it was done, because I did not cure him with ointment, because it was in a place where ointment was not effective nor any medicine, but I placed a compress on the wound for many days and nights, and I applied assiduous ablution with honey water until he was healed.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	Moreover, I described two special species of stitches according to the narrative of Pareula.
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	And it is that you begin with stitching on the spine, and you insert the needle from the front part to the back part.
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	And then as the needle penetrates into the spine and in that same place it is rectified and lengthened throughout the whole body, and thus the extremity of the hip is where you have inserted the needle; and make the needle penetrate from the back part to the front part in the other extremity of the thigh.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	And then when you have made it penetrate, then make it penetrate another way in the same extremity of the thigh from the front part to the back part; and thus the extremity of the hip is in this layer, and make the needle penetrate from the back part to the front part in the other extremity.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	And make it penetrate there your penetration, in which you make it penetrate into the hip in the extremity of the mirror, which is in the part of it within, until all that penetrates.
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	And then it begins from this same side and sews that extremity which is of the hip on the other layer, and extracts the needle from the spine which penetrated, and then returns it to the spine and body, and the extremity of the hip which is on the other side in this extremity of the mirror; and extracts it from the spine which is part of it.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	And make it one way and another, and make it one way then another way until you collect all that is before according to that example.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	And the sum of this manner of stitching is that you collect stitches of pellicles in which you collect the skins, thus that you collect the hip one way from the part of the extremity of the spine, and that you leave another way until it is completely joined.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	Moreover, the second species of proper stitching which Gualia recommends, and this is from serum of it and for its recommendation, it is that you collect it according to similarity with which doctors collect it, thus that they add all parts to their compared part conveniently by nature; and they apply the extremity of another to the mirror's extremity to another extremity of it, and this is done according to what I have recommended to you.
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	It is good that you place the needle in the extremity of the mirror at your propension from the front part, and make it penetrate to the back part on that sole, and leave two extremities of the hip; and then return the needle and make it penetrate from the front to the back in two extremities of the hip.
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	And then you return the blood flow, and make some penetrating points on the affected area inside to outside on two extreme parts of the mirror image, other than those in the opposite lateral areas.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	And this manner of suture is better than the common ligature, and it is a suture about which I previously mentioned remembering.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	This is the serum of Gualia
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	And the dissected ulcer, the abdominal suture is rectified with two needles, so it is that you introduce into these a few threads, and begin with an introduction of needle from what you have, and make them penetrate inside the other lateral area according to the suture of those which sew up the hollow places.
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	And you know that when disruption is in a middle place of the abdomen, then the suture of it is more difficult than those of other places of the abdomen.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	The judgment of medical treatment for plague is a judgment of the other plagues.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	The cause is that when you recently contracted the plague with bad blood, before the air altered it, and reduced the intestine and sewed it decently, then paused over that carnal powder.
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And if the air has already altered the plague, then pause over that ulcerated wound which is present within so that it makes hard and dry flesh, and consolidates the ciphac and mirror; and then heal it thus as is the healing of other plagues until it is sanitized.
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	But if you are not present with the medicines, then pause over that for the time being, because it begins to take a break, much effort, and exchanges those two vegetables daily, thus as you and teach, until it is sanitized, because you do not need other medication in many disposal positions when the plagues are simple.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	But if you fear that the plague communicates to the principal members, then cover that you submerge the woolen cloth in oil of triple quality, or in oil roasted, and pause it in the circuit of the places that are between the veins and joints.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	And if you feel pain or putrefaction in the small intestine, because many vegetables are needed, then crystallize that with six stippled black tar, and it will be better if the powder is pervaded into the intestine and makes a penetrating exit into its cavity.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	And you know that what is of the large intestine is of more ligature sanity than what is in the subtle intestines.
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	And it is of difficult sanity because the intestine which is called "gegunu" does not receive sanitation from plague that falls into it entirely; and this is due to the great multitude of veins that are in it and due to its magnitude, and due to the subtlety of its body, and due to its proximity to the nature of nerves.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	But if what proceeds from the plague is the web, and you obtain it recently, reduce it according to your correct treatment with which you reduce the ulcerated intestines.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	But if it has passed to the space and already is green or black, then you stretch it with a thread over the place that is denied of it, so that healthy fluxes come, because in the web there are veins and arteries.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	And then you insert what is another ligament, and pause two extreme parts of the thread pending from the affected area below the plague ulcer, so that on your part there is alleviated the attraction of it from the web's emission and breakage of the plague's branch.
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	Remembering the plagues when they occur in the intestine.
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	When disruption occurs in the intestine and it is small, then it is possible that it can be restored in some homes, for thus because you saw that which was plagued in the upper abdomen with percussion of the lance and it was the plague of the right part of the stomach, and the plague was ancient and made a fistula, and thus of its gestation and ventilation.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	Therefore you understand the healing of it that was not confused in its sanity, but rather you continued to subtley introduce it until it is sanitized and the place is consolidated.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	And you then saw that the place was consolidated, and you thought about the patient who encountered an evil accident in the upper abdomen; and you did not encounter any evil accident and remained in their many dispositional manglings, and you entered into a bath and it is exercised in its own ditches.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	And you have experimented with ulcerated experiments that when an ulcer occurs in the intestine, and it is small, then cover that it is tied according to this manner: and it is that you take threads of large heads; and then adjust the two labial lips of the ulcer and pause a thread from those that has its mouth open over the two labial lips of the ulcer; therefore when you take hold of these and stretch its mouth, you remove the head of it, because it adheres and does not dissolve.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	And then pause another thread for the primary way, and do not cease from making threads one by one according to the quantity of the entire ulcer.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	And return that plague; and remove those adjacent parts from the intestine so that the intestine may be healthy; and do not aggravate the patient's discomfort with unnecessary movements.
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	It is possible that the intestine may be lightly tied with subtle threads, which are made from the intestines of beasts, since it is more in harmony; and you should take the extremity of those subtle threads of the intestine, and make them not too thin, and tie the extremity to it with a thread, wrapped around, and insert that thread into the hollows and thus into the intestine, and return it to its proper place.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	And this manner of suturing with formiculas is not based on confidence and hope alone.
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	But if the plague is great and widespread, especially if it is in one of the subtle intestines, then it is not just a slight injury, but a complete disruption of the entire intestine.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	About the treatment of ulcers and fistulas.
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	You know that every plague and aposteme, when they become inflamed and old, it is called an ulcer, and if it is not consolidated and healed for a long time, then, in whatever member it may be, it is universally named fistula, and we call it that abyss.
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	And fistula, according to truth, is a nodulous, hard, white and painless formation, which is conquered in the same way as it is conquered by the pain of the abscess; and for this reason it is named "rizatus", that is to say, pain.
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	And it is in a moist ulcer, which gets worse; and for a long time the moisture is absorbed in certain hours.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	And some of these moistures are thick, and they are few, and they are large, and they are subtle.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	And you have already stated it in the division, then when you described the plagues, that every ulcer that is not healed nor is on naked flesh, is not due to one of these nine causes: either because of little blood in the body; or because of evil intent; or because between the body and the lips there is hard, prohibiting the growth of flesh; or because it is of thick legation; or because that ulcer in itself is putrid and the matter that is transmitted is of bad quality; or because medicine is inconvenient in its treatment; or when corruption settles in the region, and it is pestilential; or because of the property of the region, just as it happens in Saragossa, where difficult digestion of the evils occurs, and healing from aposteme is slow by nature; or because there is one bone, or many bones.
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	You have already shown all those causes, and the signs of those and their treatment with medicines in the division.
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	And thus you have done it to make you know the treatment of fistula, which is done by way of operation with a hand.
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	And you know that fistula occurs in all the members of the body; because among those are fistulas that penetrate to the great veins and arteries, or to the nerves, or to the diaphragm, or to the intestine, or to the bladder, or to some of the ribs, or to some of the vertebrae of the back, or to some of the composite joints composed of the hand and foot; and among those that give proximity to the principal member and similarity.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	And therefore that of these fistulas which is according to this manner is one of the evils of difficult healing, and does not receive treatment, and occupation with it is trouble and ignorance.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	And if it is one of the fistulas at a depth that does not penetrate to those places that I have said, and you hope and confide in its treatment, and you want to come to knowledge of it, then take hold with iron or with steel, and if the fistula goes straight, and you acquire it in the hand.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	But if the fistula is twisted, then investigate it with a subtle lead probe, because lead in the elevation of the body is alleviated and curved away from the twisting.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	And if the fistula has many horrible openings, it is not possible for you to signify over it with a probe.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	Then crystallize the openings for their own openings, because the moisture through which you crystallize that goes away from the other openings and corrects them.
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	And then inquire exquisitely, according to which manner it is possible for you to know if there are bones or nerves, and it is the conquest of the long-distant fistula or propinquous, or it is a fistula with many openings and this is all about your total strength, in your introspection, in which you introspect the evil, and the invention of the pain away from your compression on the hand over the location, and similarly to the signs and accidental causes of the abscess.
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	And since you have stood over all these causes in a stationary position, then go to the treatment with confidence: and it is that you consider then if it is an apparent fistula near or in a salty location, distant from a joint, or of nerves, or of arteries, or of veins, or of one of the places which you have and said.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	When you dissect the fistula according to what is said about the narrative of the patient, and you see that it is in that filtration and corrupt flesh, and that which is born from the orifice of the flesh, or of the vein and of similar things, and cure that interior so that it may be healed.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	Perhaps the fistula is of long and profound depth, and it is according to rectitude, then you should cut into that in the surrounding area as much as possible, and thoroughly clean that from all its corrupt flesh; and administer wrapped bandages with acute medicines, and introduce them into the cavity of the fistula, which has comprehended amidst the iron.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	And do so that some vegetable remedies enter into the acute medicine to corrode all that which is rough in the cavity of the fistula from corruption.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	And then restore it with ointments that generate healthy flesh until it may be healed.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	Perhaps if it is not healed by that, then you should cauterize it according to what we have recommended.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	Perhaps the cause of the fistula is bone and it is necessary for you to certify that, then you should inquire into that and dissect it according to what we have recommended, if you do not prohibit any cause of vein or nerve or principal member thus as we have said.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	Perhaps the bone is discovered by you and it is in some corruption and blackness, then you should scrape that thoroughly so that the corruption may be held entirely; and then take care to encarnate it with what will make it healthy.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	And if it is not healthy and throws out arm thus as it was doing, then you know that you have not attained the total eradication of the corruption; and therefore you discover again secondly and exquisitely the reason for it and the purification of it with the last strong fortification, and then restore it.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	And so if it is healthy, good; and if not, then you know that the corruption is in the profound depth of the body, which has not been achieved, and therefore you should not generate anything but leave it alone.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	And if the corrupted bone is small, or it is possible for you to extract that, then you should extract it with subtle forceps which are convenient for that.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	And if there are many bones, then you should exquisitely make the extraction of all those, and of those do not leave any cause in your fortitude.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	Perhaps if you have made opposition to some cause of the humidity, and in their incision there is no fear nor error, then you should dissect those ligaments or flesh if they are here, and remove the bones.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	Perhaps if you have not prepared to remove the bones of your hour, then pause over the plague that may worsen the plague, and leave it until it is around those bones of flesh and ligaments, and guard against the plague that may not be consolidated, and the section which you have made in your operation may be constrained.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	Meanwhile, if you fear, pause over the submerged bone above the tristful oil, or submerged bone in Egyptian angular vertebrate, or in some of the green vertebral angles, because when they will pierce those ligaments, and the bones are separated from their ablation, and from that attraction is alleviated.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	Perhaps it is a large bone thus as the bone of a chamber or thigh or similar to those, and that which is corrupted is the face of it so solitary, then scrape that with resolution so solitary finally until the blackness and corruption are removed, and then restore the plague.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	Perhaps that which is corrupted is a great part, and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to close that and entirely dissect into the place where the corruption has arrived, and then take care to consolidate it.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	And I recommend to you that which arrives at home in its thigh so that you pause that and exemplify and assist over your operation.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	A young man of about xxx years, to whom pain occurred in his thigh, and from the parts of his injured hip it is above the matter that affects the body until the matter reaches the thigh, and it is a matter of apostema with great apostema, and I do not find an extrinsic cause.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	And then I extended the time with that for the error of the doctors until the apostema was opened, and I corrected the matter of the moved materials, and its cure was paused until the thigh was fistulized, and they were in the motif of the orrific tissues which all got purified and the humidity of the body.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	And then I, a multitude of doctors around for two years, and I did not find in those wise men anything in the art, until I was called.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	And I saw the thigh of it and the materials that flowed from it, those orrific tissues for a great body; and already the body of that man was entirely stabilized and the color of it was citrine.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	And then I inserted the tent into one of those orrific tissues and reached the tent to the bone.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	And you have examined and scrutinized all the orifices and thoroughly cleansed those that come out of all parts of the leg.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	Then you have touched and felt around on one of the orifices that enters to uncover a part of the bone, and you have probed that corrupted place, and it was already decayed and corrupted and blackened; and it was already corrupted in a part of the leg where it had penetrated into the marrow.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	And then you have cleared away what was discovered and prepared from the uncovered bone.
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	And you have judged that it was not in the bone but that corruption which you had cut away and cleared, and you had already destroyed.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	And then you have paused the restoration of the wound with consolidative medicine for a long time, and it is not consolidated.
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	And then you have iterated and uncovered the bone again according to the primary discovery, and you have found continuous corruption in the bone.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	And cleared away what appeared to be that corruption, and then you have tried to perfect the cure of it and the restoration, but it has not been restored.
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	And then you have discovered it again and did not cease to investigate the small bone little by little particularly and perfect the restoration of it, but it has not been restored until you investigated around an inch of it, and that extracted marrow from it, and then you have restored it with medicines, and it is consolidated and healed completely.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	And it is not necessary to iterate in the operation of it and sectioning of it except for the disposition of its fragility and scarcity of its tolerance and fear of its death, because it accelerates at all hours due to an excessive evacuation syncopation malfunction.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	And so it is healed entirely, and nothing remains in the place of hard carnal flesh; and it is well-disposed in its own body and returns its virtue; and it is converted into its own dispositions and does not make any contradiction in walking nor nuisance in any cause.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	Maybe it is the bone that emerges in the place of the body already torn apart, then it is necessary to sew up that second wound in this manner: and it is that you take a ligament and strengthen it at the extremity of that emerging bone, and command someone to extend it in its own; and pause that ligament of wool which is thicker than the primary ligament; and then bind it over the flesh that is beneath the bone, and extend the extremity of it so that you attract the flesh to the parts beneath, and you discover the flesh over the place where you want to saw so that the saw does not harm the flesh.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	And pause or place a table beneath the bone decently, because when you do that it is not prohibited to saw so that it does not cut into the corrupted flesh.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	And it is necessary to saw over the corrupted place little by little, because if it is in the cavity of the corrupted bone and does not appear in its appearance to the feeling, and forces a second sawing.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	And if the bone is corrupted and does not emerge, therefore it is one continuous part with the other, and the corruption is in the middle place or in a part of it, then you discover the entire flesh; and then pause the table beneath, and then saw that from the primary part where the corruption is until the sawing of the other part is continued.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	And the sawing is according to the place of the corruption a little, as we have said.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	And if the corruption is in the joint, you investigate that corrupted joint, and saw the bone where it is continued from the other part.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it is not in its reason but rather in its nature.
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	And if the corruption is in the cavity of the hand or foot, it is very difficult; however, it is necessary that you inquire into the corruption in whatever manner appears to you, and that you grasp it, and mend it according to any disposition which is possible for you, and in case something is not rectified for you, when it does not make contradiction or nervousness.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	And you know what instruments are necessary to saw into these bones, and the preparation of them, and their thickness, and their subtlety and greatness and smallness, and their hardness and their rarity; because it is necessary that you prepare a whole species of operation and convenient instrument for that operation.
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	And you know that this operation signifies to you the species of instrument which you need; when you have great study and long experience in the ways of this art, and testimony of ways of maladies, because then you have them for yourself to measure what is convenient for all maladies.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	And you have formed in the end of this chapter the number of instruments which you will pause with as simple as those which proceed to your prohibition, which you have experimented on the others.
Forma de serra:	Form of sawing:
Forma de autra serra:	Form of another sawing:
Forma de autra serra:	Form of another sawing:
Forma de autra serra gran:	Another type of great wound:
Forma de ray:	Form of a crisis:
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	It has the head of this crisis according to the form of the head of a star-shaped nail, and its points are according to the form of the points of a fleur-de-lis.
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	And it does not converge unless that crisis is broken with the heads of the joints when they are corrupted, or it is a large wide mouth.
Forma de razori major dels autres:	Form of a major razor of the others:
Forma de razori menor:	Form of a minor razor:
Forma de razori lat:	Form of a broad razor:
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	Form of another wound decently made: it is made with an arc of its pus above and the sharpness of its iron, and the member of its boys decently made below.
Forma de lu:	Form of it:
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	Form of a razor in which there is a concavity:
Forma de razori autra subtil:	Form of another subtle razor:
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	Form of another razor with a curved extremity:
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	Form of a small razor resembling a probe:
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	Form of an incisor where it is inserted into the bones:
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	Form of another minor incisor:
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	Form of another incisor; this resembles a crisis, and the extremity of it is like a saw, and it is exhibited in many places in the ratio of the bones:
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	Form of a crisis that converges to a ratio of that which is perforated through the bones:
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	And its extremity is triangular and of sharp extremity.
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	And it is made of iron from India, and similarly covered that all the causes that we have mentioned about razors and incisors and saws.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	About the incision extremities and the sawing of the bones.
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	The extremities are weakened either due to an intrinsic cause or an extrinsic cause, or as you have medicated that corruption with the cure of those medicines and the cure does not concur, or sometimes the corruption goes away from the member which does not perceive any cause, then it is covered that you incise that member within which the honor accuses the corruption, so that the evil escapes through death or malice which is a greater defect of the member.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	And the sign of that one to which it happens, is that the member becomes black within until it is judged that fire has already burned, or it is weakened near the blackness within which the weakness enters into that member which is its own and which takes all the body; and therefore you will find the incision of that one.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	And similarly if it is a cause of corruption perceived by certain venomous causes, such as scorpion's sting or viper's bite or rue's and similar things.
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	And if the corruption or percussion is in the extremity of the finger, then you incise the finger and do not give space to the corruption so that it enters into the hand.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	And similarly if it happens to the hand, then you incise that from the root of the forearm, and do not give space to the corruption until it takes hold in the forearm of the arm.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	And if you find that, then incise the arm up to the elbow at the joint.
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	And if the corruption passes beyond and sometimes surrounds the elbow, then in that case it is the death of the patient; and to administer another cause in cure is a quantity of virtue.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	And similarly it happens to the foot when corruption reaches the toe of the foot, then you incise that up to one of the nails.
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	And if it takes hold in the skin of the foot, then you incise the entire foot.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	Moreover if it spreads into the knee, then you incise the leg up to the joint of the knee.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	And if the corruption has already spread over the knee, then in that case it is not possible to do anything except to dismiss, and leave the patient to death.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	And the manner of incising the member or sawing it is that you stretch a ligament in the affected part below where you want to incise, and stretch another ligament over the area; and extend the minister one ligament to the parts below, and extend the minister another ligament above; and you separate the flesh which is between two ligaments, even if it is hidden, until all the flesh is discovered; and then it is incised or sawed.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	And it is covered that it has been placed far from all parts so that it does not touch the area there, and that the patient's lesion is adjusted and the abscess is carefully opened.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	Moreover if it happens to flow with blood when operating, then you cauterize the area carefully, or pause with some powders that restrain the blood; and then return to your medication until it is completed.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then bind the member plagued with a ligament at a convenient time, and cure it until it is healed.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	And I recommend to you that which happens to a man in his own foot, this kind of accident which you and I have recommended, which is four times likely to happen to the blackness in the foot at the adjustment that was assembled for combustion of fire.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	And that corruption affects primarily in the sieve-like tissue between the toes.
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	Then that man prepares himself to put the remedy on the affected member with the vehemence of it, so that he attracts away the pain and discomfort of it, and inserts that foot into the joint, and it begins to heal.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	For a long time, that corrupting disease had been affecting his hand.
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	And then I came to myself, and I began to thoroughly purge that superfluous matter which had accumulated on my hand through the medicines, according to the purification of his body; and it did not retain the superfluity and began to pass into the other joint until it began in the hand.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	And I applied myself to insert my hand into his, and I did not want to do anything that would hinder the purging of that superfluous matter, and perhaps I should have waited for the insertion of his dead hand, because the virtue of the remedy was on the point of being lost.
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	And since he departed from me, he returned to his own land and it became clear to me that the man had prepared and inserted his whole hand, and he was healed.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	And I have not added this narrative except to be of assistance regarding what is written about this illness, and that it may be significant for which it is signified and according to which it is operated.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	About the treatment of joints and the quality of cleansing with medicines.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	When abscesses occur in certain carnal members and the space of the abscess is prolonged until it makes a collection of pus, and then it bursts and perforates, and the pus is evacuated from it, and one finds the place where it was, as if it were void, and the cord that is above it like a subtle drain, and it does not reach the inner corruption, and it does not impress on the bone or nerve or ligament, it is called a sinus, and it is not named fistula.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	Perhaps instead the space is prolonged until the corruption penetrates into a certain member, then it is called fistula and not sinus.
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	And the treatment of it is that one inserts the entire cord thus as it revolves, and especially when it is subtily drained and made like a subtle drain, and one makes sure that it does not adhere to the place due to its corruption.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	Perhaps you think that the cord will adhere and that corruption will not have been achieved by further consequence, and in the cord has spread from head to toe, then you treat that with a syringe.
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	And it is that you consider the sinus, and then if it is large, and the arm which you have is of fetid odor, then you syringe that with Egyptian medicine oil, which is of olive oil and vinegar and zinc, receiving divided parts equally, and they are adjusted in a vessel, and they are cooked over the fire until the medicine becomes red and penetrates to the affected part.
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	And then you take of it what is necessary and dissolves the arm in water and honey; and syringes the arm into that sinus, and strengthens its orifice, and leaves the medicine in it for a quantity of two hours.
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	And then you extract that arm with precision; and do it for so many days until the sinus is purified and the putridity is removed.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	And some vegetables are syringed with water of ash, when you do not have this medicine present; and it is that you take the ash of vitriol, and mix it with the water; and then you collect that and syringe it into the arm until you confirm that the sinus is then closed.
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	And if the patient does not have tolerance for the Egyptian medicine or the water of ash, then you syringe it with water and honey and zinc mixed together, and you syringe it with vinegar and honey mixed together, because the property of honey is that it purifies and cleans, and the vinegar makes the sinus adhere, and especially when in the vinegar there is superfluity of stypticity and dryness.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	And when you do this with some vegetables and you confirm that the sinus is already removed, then you syringe it with water that makes the flesh grow in it.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	And it is that you take of the dyaphenic unguent and dissolves it in oil of rose and vinegar stiptic; or that you syringe it with some medicines and other unguents that have the properties which I have already written about in the treatise on unguents.
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	And if the orifice of the sinus is straitened in which the cannula of the syringe is not received, then you amplify it with iron little by little, and pause in the calque enveloped in Egyptian unguent or in basilicon unguent until it is amplified.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	And similarly if the orifice is wide, then you add the lips of it to suture and leave a quantity in which the syringe is introduced.
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	And if the orifice of it from which the arm is elevated to the upper parts, then you dry it in the pus below the place that is in it, so that the arm may flow into it, because when the arm is constricted at the entrance of the sinus, the flesh will be engendered in it.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	And if it is not possible for you to drain the sinus within the environment of the lower back according to what you wish, then perforate so that you prepare the member in preparation for which the corridor flows more lightly according to what is apparent and that no cause of the arm remains retained.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	Take consolidating medicines that are placed conveniently on the sinus, suitable for what you want to extend those onto the cloth of the skin.
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	And the cloth is of such great quantity as it makes the communication with all the sinus; and then insert the forks into the right orifice of the sinus through a large enough tube, and extend onto another cloth of the joints according to the quantity of the tube, and place it on that position far from the orifice of the sinus so that it alleviates the swelling of the arm and does not obstruct the cloth greatly unless you insert some days a week.
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	Those that are on the orifice of the sinus, which remain there for a whole hour so that you extract what is adjusted in the arm.
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	And to know if what flows from the arm is much or little, whether it is digested or not digested.
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	And also you consider the place of that sinus, if the patient feels pain there or not, and if it is in the abscess.
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	And when your medication is prolonged in such a manner, and you see the matter that is deposited on the orifice of the sinus has already adhered, or it has proper adhesion, then you may dissolve it on the third day, and when you dissolve the plague, then change the cloth for another and renew the joints.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	But if the sinus has a subtle virus in it, then do not despair of its adhesion, because health is being prepared, because some homes are in those which delay the generation of flesh in the aforementioned plagues, and of those that are in those where the opposite of it is done.
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	And if the sinus has many days of indigested arm, then you know that the sinus does not adhere; and if the adhesion of the sinus is delayed and is a prolonged cause, then you adjust in the desiccation of the medicines, and if the medicines are humid in their substance and in their virtue, they are dried also with the joints of the divine confection, when it is in the adjusted superficies of additional zeal.
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	And the last thing in which it is cured, is that you take of the divine confection and dissolve it in rose oil, and put it on the wounded area with its own substance, and then comfort yourself with that, and use it.
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	And it will seem similar in that action, when there is no arm, divine confection, but rather it is caught within so that it is absorbed, and use it; or take myrrh and aloes and grind them, and sprinkle all over the mel which is under the focus, and then smooth it out over the cloth and strengthen it over the sinus; and then smooth out that over the mel which has been caught within so that it is absorbed, and sprinkle over the cloth and strengthen it.
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	And some weeks you administer it in the long aristology and roots of heavenly lilies (and they are heavenly lilies) and ferns of errors and centaury, and use those simples or adjust them, sprinkle them and grind them over the mel which has been recommended; and take advantage of it.
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	And if the sinus is prolonged, and it is not healed by this cure, then you know that the corruption is in the marrow of it, and it makes inquiry into the bones or other hard members or ligaments; then you treat it with a fistular cure, as has been said before.
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	Of the cure of paralysed hands and worn-out nails and incision of toes added to the section.
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	Paralysis is an abscess that sometimes occurs on the finger or toe of the hand or foot, and it strongly affects the other fingers, and as it is prolonged and its cure is less prepared, either it is abscessed by a cautious abscess, or it is corrupted, and it throws out arm inside so that it corrodes the root of the nail, and it corrupts all of it, and it perverts its corruption to the bone inside so that it has a foul odor, and it makes the extremity of the finger lame, and the color of it becomes darkish.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	And therefore when you will have that which we have said in the division and do not confirm your cure, then it is necessary that you insert iron all over the superficies that remain of the nail and cauterize the plague properly, because cauterizing is not helping in this way.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	But if the bone is sound and the nail is healthy, and the additions of the nail grow back together with the flesh at the partitioned places, and they begin to form a pungency and lead to that, then it is necessary that you pause subtly under the angle of the nail that forms the flesh, and impel it onto the bone and insert it into the flesh to facilitate, and place it over what remains of the flesh of the medicines that burn corrosively so that it is all removed; and then cure that with divine confection until it is healed.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	When corruption has already taken hold in the bone, then it is necessary to extract the bone and remove the decayed part, because at no time is it healthy for the corrupted bone to remain within.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if sometimes the corrosion and decay spread to the finger, then you cut off that from one of the nails according to the measure of its memory, and afterwards take care to heal what is inside.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	But if the nail ends in percussion or attrition, and ends in that vehement pain, then it is necessary to begin to fleubotomize the patient, and afterwards to cut the nail with a spatula-like instrument transversely from below upwards, and be careful that the cutting does not penetrate into the flesh that is beneath the nail, lest you aggravate the patient's vehement pain, and will be the cause of the superfluous production of abnormal flesh in the location; and afterwards take care to heal that place with water that relieves pain.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	But said adjusted, which is born in the marrow of some men, for it is entirely carnal, and entirely so in the bones, or entirely so in the nails.
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	And some of them are born in the root of the joint, or it is the birthplace of them in some nodes of the fingers.
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	But that which is born in some nodes of the finger does not get worse, and this that is born in the joints is entirely bad.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	And of those that are born fleshy, the cutting is easier, and it is necessary to cut off that which has its root with a broad spatula.
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	But of that which is born in the root of the joint, the cure is difficult; and therefore beware of its amputation.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But in that which is born in the fingers with nodes, it is necessary to cut off at the beginning the flesh of them with a round incision into the bone, and afterwards to close with one of those convenient sutures, and afterwards take care to heal what is inside.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	But consolidation occurs when it happens to the fingers among the worn-out joints or by birth of the man who is thus, or by consolidation of a wound or by combustion of fire, or by resemblance; therefore it is necessary to cut off that consolidation so that the fingers return to their natural form.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	And afterwards pause between the drapes of the inflamed joints with rose oil so that they are not consolidated too quickly, and separate them, or place between them a thin layer of lead so that it is consolidated according to what is necessary.
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	And similarly if consolidation occurs in the nodes of the fingers at the palm, then you cut off that consolidation according to how it is prepared and conforming to the shape of the limb.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	Of cutting of veins, they are varicose.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	Veins are varicose, and they are gross, swollen, full of melancholic superfluities which come from the members of the body, and the greatest misadventure of them is in the legs, and especially in the legs of travelers, laborers, and carriers.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	Therefore it is necessary to administer purification of the body from black bile accumulated in worn-out joints with strong expulsion, and afterwards to bleed the patient from the basilic vein.
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	But the cure of their iron ferments is in two ways: one is that it be cut off and the black blood be attracted, and the other way is that the vein be elevated and all be extracted.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	The cutting of it is in this way: at the beginning, inject warm water into the leg until the gross blood is resolved, which is filthy in the leg, and afterwards strengthen the patient's leg to the superior part of the thigh up to the knee, and afterwards cut the vein in one place, or in two, or in three with a wide incision, and afterwards elevate the black blood in its own tie above the knee, and from below upwards, until the quantity that you want is extracted, and which tolerates the virtue of the patient.
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	And afterwards bind it, and command it to abstain from the black choleric winds that generate.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	And continue the cure by fleubotomy when the veins are full and water does not reach the patient.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	But the elevation of them is in this way: you raise the patient's leg, if it has many joints, and afterwards put it in a bath and inject warm water into the leg until it becomes red and the veins are exuberant; or exercise strongly, if the bath is not at your present, until the limb is scaled.
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	And afterwards cut the cord in the right of the vein for cutting in the loin or in the back of it below the knee, or in the lower part of it at the ankle.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	And afterwards uncover the cord with an incision and thoroughly clear the vein of all parts until it appears to the sense, and it is necessary for that which sometimes declines into blackness.
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	And therefore when you evacuate and clear the cord, you will see that white thread which was a cord.
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	And then you place your hand under that area where it is elevated and turned away from the spine, and suspend that in an inclined position with one finger.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	And then you section another section there for three digits, and then you scrape the spine from the top of the vein down to where it appears.
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	And then you elevate it and insert it into the rear section of the ankle, and then you extract it and elevate it until it is freed through the second section, and then you extract it from the section that is above it.
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	And make it so that you extract it from the section that is above or below all the sections, until everything is freed; and then you insert it.
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	And if it does not obey you to extract and elevate, then introduce a strong double-threaded needle and tie it and extract it, or introduce underneath the radius and rotate your hand on all parts until it is grasped.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	And be careful that it is not inserted; because if it is torn, it will be difficult for you to elevate the affected limb and it will come back over the patient for that injury.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And when the entire affected area is freed, then pause over the place of the wound with lanolin submerged in wine and rose oil and non-rose oil, and cure it until it is healed.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	And if the life is constricted having twisted to the one that is enveloped in the parts, and it is not according to rectitude according to what we have said, then it behoves that you confine upon that entire part of twisting of it and the places of its envelopment, and then suspend it with an inch until it elevates the entire thing.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	And beware that your section does not insert the vein and does not injure it, because it will be difficult for you to elevate it; and preserve your prudence in this.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	Method of incidentally piercing the life-giving vessel:
Forma de unci orp:	Method of a single finger.
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	It is not to the accustomed finger thus with the fingers nor of sharp extremity so that it does not injure the vein; and it is of coarse flexibility, because if it were subtle, it would pierce the vein due to its subtlety; but instead it has a superfluous coarseness thus as we have said.
De extraccio venae cruris.	On the extraction of the veins of the leg.
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	This vein is generated in the legs in dry and cold lands, just as in the land of the Arabs and in the lands of India, dry and arid with little fertility, and in which there are neither herbs nor trees.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	And it is often generated in other places of the body besides the legs.
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	And the gestation of it is of putrefaction that comes from beneath the spine, just as venomous dents are made in the body of serpents and worms and scarabs and worms generating between the spine and the flesh.
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	And the sign of the suspicion of the advent of it is from this vein that causes inflammation violently in the leg; and then the place is blistered; and then the vein begins to issue from the place of that blistering, which seems to sprout like a plant.
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	And then it appears that the extremity is covered, so that you envelop it with a piece of lead of which the weight of one drachm is inside two drachms, and afterwards suspend the lead from the leg.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	And as many times as the flow of it from some cause to the affected parts beforehand, you enfold it in lead and leave it.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	And if the motion is prolonged, then you insert a part of it and enfold the remainder; and do not insert it by roots until it is fully freed, because if you insert it, it is constricted and enters into the flesh and causes apostema and pus in the place and bad ulceration.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	Because it behoves that it be treated gently and be extracted little by little, until it is freed from the root of it and none of its cause remains in the body.
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	And of this vein it is said that some men are in their longitude of 5 palms and of 10, and already I have found one that has reached 20 palms.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	And if it is inserted at the time of its medication, then introduce the radius into the trajectory of it and perforate it with a long trajectory in the body, until everything that is in the matter is evacuated, and administer putrefaction of the place for several days with medications; and then cure it by curing apostemas.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	And this vein sometimes has many ramifications, and increases especially when it appears at the joint of the foot or in the foot, and comes to its many horrific ramifications, and is said to be from some horrific root.
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	And then cure it thus as we have said in the division and with what has been mentioned above.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	On the sections generated under the skin and it is called cow's disease, or bovine disease.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	This disease is named in some land as our bovine disease, because many ramifications come from the veins and it is a worm that is born between the spine and the flesh, and goes throughout all the body, weakening and debilitating, and shows the sentiment of the sick animal, member by member, until it disarticulates the spine and comes out.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	And the generation of it is due to putrefaction of certain humors, thus accumulating worms and serpents and roundworms in the belly.
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	It is feared for its malice, because when it goes into the body and rises to the head, and is poured into the vein, then it strengthens the umbilical region in it and destroys the veins, and that ends with worn-out movements.
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	And so when you want to cure it and extract it, then it cannot be done unless you have the certain ambulation and application of it to the sentiment, and therefore it is necessary that you strengthen what is above it and what is below it with ligament and strong constriction, and then you will extract it from above it and pull it out.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	And if it has penetrated into the flesh and does not come out, then you apply a cautery iron to the area until it dies, and the main cause that is feared is corruption of the limb, which corrupts the area as we have said.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	Perhaps it has penetrated to the head near the vein, then strengthen above the eyebrow with a strong structure, and then extract it; and it is necessary that the patient use medications that evacuate putrid humors, and beware of foods that generate putrefaction.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	On the treatment of sudden feverishness.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	This disease is named "nafir" in our land, and it is pain that appears in certain members, and then it spreads from member to member.
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	And I have already seen that according to what I recommend to you.
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	I was called to a sick woman in a village, and I uncovered her arm and saw a small inflammation in the superficial vein of the arm, and after it had been warm for an hour, I saw that inflammation go away like a worm disappearing, more quickly than it would be possible for it to be, as if it were silver, I saw how it went from place to place.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	And then the pain remained in that place and settled into the muscle, and then I stayed there for an hour.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	And then I ran to the other side of the body until I reached the other arm.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	And then I recommended to myself that I should turn it around the whole body according to what I had seen; and it was too marvelous about the permutation of it and the velocity from member to member.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	And I had already seen that in my own veins according to that manner, however I have seen many things which cause pain to be transmitted from member to member.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	But I did not see it in the veins as it was in the woman.
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	And I did not think it was that unless it was because the woman was of vile nature, with dry body and uncovered veins, and in this way it appears to the sentiment that altered viciousness is transmitted.
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	And it is necessary that it does not appear according to this retrograde action in those who are delicate and have humid bodies with veins that are weak.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	And when you want to cure it, and the patient feels that pain, then it is not for you to appear at the vein as we have said, then you strengthen above it and let it slide gently and settle over it until that altered viciousness is driven out, and cauterize the area.
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	But if you do not find it in your own veins, then you cure it by excision of the body and with what expels viciousness, and burn those foul pills and pills of serpent's skin and similar things.
De extraccio de sagetas.	On the extraction of arrows.
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	Arrows are diversified according to the species, and according to the places of the body in which they fall, because their diversity is that some have large points, and small ones, and concave ones, and rough ones, so they are solid; and of those with three angles, and of those with tongues; and of those with astelas (probably a type of arrowhead).
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	And that which is according to the members and the places in which they fall is according to two ways: because the members or main members are concave, such as the brain, heart, liver, lung, kidneys, intestines, and bladder, and similar things; and then when you cut into one of these members and appear to you signs of death, which cause I recommend to you, then it is necessary that you avoid extraction of that arrow in those places where death would be more likely, and when you do not appear with those evil signs, and the arrow is not lodged deep in the member, then you extract it and cure the wound.
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	And of the signs of the arrow's effect is when it strikes into the brain, and crosses the bone, and is situated in the cypheac which is above the brain, because it accumulates with vehement soda, and scotomia, and vertigo, and rigor in the veins, and inflammation and rigor of the tongue, and spasm and permutation of understanding and vomiting of cholera, and the voice is absorbed and the speech is destroyed, and it is situated in the place of the humid white wound similar to a boil, and it seems to be affected by the flesh.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	And so if you appear to be without sensation in your legs, then abstain from the treatment and extraction of the blood, if it is not outside.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	Perhaps the veins of the blood when they are in the heart, so that it is near the mamilla on the left side, and it seems that there is a fixed cause due to hardness, and it is not a vain cause; and for them the movement of the blood seems like the movement of the pulse, and corrects the plague of black bile, and dries out that coldness of the extremities, and frees the flow, and synchronizes; and so you know that death descends to its entire depth.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	And the veins when the blood has infected the lung and makes spumous sputum of the plague, and the vessels that are near the collarbone apostematize, and the color of the patient's skin is changed, and they exhale great spirit, and demand attraction of fresh air frequently.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	And if the blood is in the wrapping which is in the chest, and the pain then is near the small ribs, and it makes great anger and vehement pain and breathlessness, and it does not move all the members of the muscles.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	And if the blood is in the stomach, then it makes the eyes of the plague victims look towards some kind of indigestion.
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	And if the blood is in the abdomen, and it is fixed in it, eyes show some sign of the plague, or the fabric, or hernia which is disrupted, and there is no hope in the treatment of its extraction.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	And if the blood is in the bladder, and it is obstructing the urine, and it processes some cause to the previous parts, and it makes pain over the patient, then you know that it is mortal.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	Perhaps the other members are also affected like the face, the neck, and the gullet, and the shoulders and the hips, and the vertebrae of the back, and the ribs, and the leg, and their similarity to the limbs, are saved according to the major dispositions when the blood does not attract a vein or artery and is not venomous blood.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	And I recommend to you that you have seen the essence of these bloods, so that they signify something about the treatment you are undertaking.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	The cause is, because in one case the blood flows from the lacrimal duct of his eye to the radix of his nose, and I extracted it from him to another part, leaving the gray matter of his brain, and it is healthy, and does not happen in the eye of his document.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	And I extracted another blood from a Jew whose blood flowed into his gray matter of the eye, behind the eyelid and also behind, and the blood was hidden and not found in that except for a small extremity which adhered to the wooden stick, and it was a great blood of the acute bloods of the Turks, like iron leon in which there were no golden threads.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	And the Jew is healthy, and it does not happen in his eye a bad accident.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	And I extracted another blood from a Christian whose blood was fallen into the gullet, and it was Arabic blood, and it is that which had golden threads; and then I inserted it between two guiding channels, and it was submerged in his gullet; and then I subtly drew it out, and I extracted it properly, and the Christian is healthy.
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	And I extracted another blood from a man whose blood was fallen into his abdominal cavity, and I thought that he would die from it; and therefore, since he had passed thirty days and did not change regarding any of his dispositions, I inserted it into the blood and engaged with it, and he is healthy, and it does not happen to him a bad accident.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	And I saw a man in whom a blood flowed into his back, and the plague was consolidated over him, and because he had lived about seven years, I extracted the blood from the radix of his thigh.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	And I saw a woman in whom blood flowed into her abdominal cavity, and the plague is consolidated within him, and it did not change in his dispositions indeed, and the woman does not attract document in any of her natural operations.
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	And I saw another man in whom blood flowed into his face and the plague was consolidated, and they removed the blood, not attracting here much pain, and many similarities to these.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	And I extracted the blood of the man of the princes of the king which was fallen into the middle of his nose and had declined to the right side a little, and all the blood was hidden.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	And I was called to treat him immediately after the falling of the blood within three days.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	And then I attracted the plague of the blood very strongly; and then I inquired about it with a subtle touch, and did not feel it; but I felt it a little behind the right golden thread, and then I suspected that this point was for the extremity of the blood.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	And I applied the remedy to the place where it was attractive and digestive, trusting that the place would be appeased by me, so that it appears to me as the place of the blood, so that it succeeds over it.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	And the pain does not occur at the significant accident site where the arrow has reached; and you will continue to apply the plaster on it for many days without an accident occurring; and the plague is consolidated in the meantime, and the patient's extremity is freed from the extension of it for many days until one day feels the arrow in their nasal passages and reacquires that to me.
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	And then you will apply the acute corrosive medicinal plaster on the plague for many days until it is opened, and you will attempt to remove that, and you will treat the extremity of the arrow's subtle point, which adheres to the foundation.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	And then you will adjust in the opening of the plague for that acute medicine until it appears visibly to me the extremity of the arrow, and I will pass the time for that space of time until four months.
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	And then because the plague is amplified, and it is possible for me to insert the forceps into it, and I will maintain that, and do not obscure the judgment, then you will no longer subtly ingratiate and ingeniously work on that in many ways of skill, until one day you begin to descend with forceps skillfully, according to how you will find the form of those at the end of the chapter, until you extract it; and then you will restore the plague.
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	And some doctors judged that the cartilage of the nose is not restored, and you will restore it and the plague is consolidated, and it is healthy through entire sanitation, and it does not bother them in any case.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	And you recommend to yourself the quality of extraction of certain arrows because it pauses that rule and significance about what has not been said, since the parts of this art and the definitions of that are not understood in the narrative nor do they comprehend those freely.
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	And the artisans know how to compare few about many; and it is present about what is absent; and they seek a new operation and novel instrument to remove the descent of the external causes of the art when it happens.
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	And therefore you say that arrows are not forgotten in the members where they are fixed, but rather according to two manners: either by attraction of the location where they enter; or by contrast with the other party.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	And that which is forgotten by the location where it entered, or it is an arrow proceeding from a carnal location, and it is attracted and forgotten.
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	And if you do not obscure the judgment of the hour in which it happens, then it is necessary that you leave it for some days until the flesh that is around it becomes healthy, and its attraction and egression are alleviated.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	And similarly if it is fixed in bone and you do not obscure your judgment, then leave it for some days and repeat that in attraction and motion on any day, and already it is forgotten.
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	And if you do not obscure your judgment for some days, then it is necessary that you perforate in the circuit of the arrow in that bone of the entire party with subtle travel until the location is amplified by the arrow, and then extract it.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	And if the arrow is fixed in the bone of the head and has proceeded into one of the ventricles of the brain, and it appears that the patient has some of those accidents which you have said, then abstain from the extraction of the arrow and leave it until the patient's condition is equalized for some days; because if the arrow reaches the cerebral seat, then death is not prolonged to him.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	And if the arrow is not fixed but only in the body of the bone itself and does not pass into the cerebral seat, and the patient remains for some days, and no accidents occur to him from those causes, then you will ingratiate yourself in the attraction of the arrow and in the attraction of it.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	Moreover if it is much fixed and you do not obscure its extraction, then you will administer travels in the circuit of the arrow as we have recommended, and then cure the location until it is healthy.
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	Moreover if the arrow is already embedded in the location of the body, and it is embedded in the sentiment, then you will inquire about that in tension, and if you feel it, then you will attract it with some convenient instruments for its attraction.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	And if you cannot operate on it due to the constriction of the plague and the length of the press, and here there are neither bone nor nerve nor vein, then you will feel over the plague until it is amplified and it is possible to extract the arrow.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	And if you have the auricles which are held, then you will deliver the flesh in which it is fixed from the entire party with all the ingenuity that you can do; and ingeniate about that, if you cannot operate on the evasion of the flesh in the fracture of the auricles and in twisting of those until it is obscured.
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	And when you administer the extraction of the arrow in any location where it is, then you will use a twist of your hand with forceps on all parts until it makes that obscure; and subtly remove subtle subtlety so that the arrow is not broken and it is made difficult for you to attract it and its extraction.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	If you cannot stand on your own hour, then lie down for some days until the parts that are in your circulation can recover, and then attempt to move that joint which has been alleviated.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	Perhaps you have made the contrary flow of blood, then you administer what we have said about the cure in the seventh chapter.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	And guard your virtue of insertion of vein or nerve, or cord, and administer ingeniously in every manner possible to facilitate the evasion of the arrow; and make that which is facilitated and tranquilized and delayed and firmness thus as you and your recommendation.
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	And thus you make the arrow counter to the disease, so that the patient is according to the figure according to which they receive the removal of the arrow in them, because it is more youthful.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	Perhaps that is not possible for you, then you administer what is possible for you according to the figures.
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	Perhaps the arrows that are forgotten by the contrary of another party, or that they have proceeded to some party from outside, or have made the extremity of the arrow gibbous by sentiment of the party above the code of propension and sometimes that eminent; then you section about that; and it is the section according to the quantity in which they take the forceps; and then you attract that, because it is made lighter to the judgment.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	Perhaps it is retained in the bone, then you twist the lame according to contrary flow until the arrow takes root in the bone, and amplify its measurements, and then extract that.
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	And so, leave that for some days, and then attempt to move that joint until you are healed.
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	And if the residue of the arrow is in there, then you remove it from the body.
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	Perhaps the residue has fallen and you want to administer an impulse, then you introduce and into that, if it is dull, strengthen concavity for the purpose of entering the cavity of the body with the point of the arrow and then remove it from the body.
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	Perhaps the arrow is concave, then you remove it from the body with strong instrument entering into that, because the arrow is alleviated by that.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	And if the arrow is poisoned, then you should hollow out all the flesh in which it is, if it is possible for you, and then cure that with what is convenient.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the arrow is lodged in the chest, or in the belly, or in the bladder, or in the ribcage, and it is near for you to touch that with your hand, and it is possible for you to section about that, then section about that and guard yourself from insertion of vein or nerve, and extract that, and then heal the plague if it is indigent, and cure that until it is healthy.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	The type of forceps with which the arrows are extracted:
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	Thus, the extremities of theirs are like the beak of a bird that are made sharp when they take hold of the arrow so that it does not slip.
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	And of those, there are many special types, large, small, and medium-sized, according to the quantity of the greatness of the arrow and of its slight weakness, and of the amplitude of the plague, and of the constriction of the body.
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	The form of the instrument is concave to adapt to this extremity, thus like a bird's claw, in order that the entrance of the arrow into the body may be alleviated, and impulse is given to that dullness.
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	The form of the instrument for dull extremities:
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	thus like a radius, in order that the entrance of it into the arrow may be alleviated in the concave arrow and is impulsed with that.
De fleubotomia de las venas.	On the phlebotomy of the veins.
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so .xxx., de las quals so en le cap .xvi., so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	The veins of phlebotomy, which customarily run to be phlebotomized thus... of those that are in chapter 16. There are two pulsating veins which are near the aurelia, says Galen; two herbs that are in the two temples apparent; and two veins that are in the two lacrimal ducts of two eyes that are called aspicientz; and the vein prepared in the middle place of the forehead, and the vein that is in the extremity of the nose; and two guideges that are at the neck; and two veins that are above the lip; and two veins that are below the lip; and — these are the veins that are called algelic —; and there are two veins that are beneath the tongue.
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so .v.; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	Perhaps the veins that are phlebotomized in the arms are thus. because among them is a cephalic vein, and it removes the wild lactation; and the people call it "the vein of the head", and it is dull, and it is a medium-sized vein, and it is composed of one branch of the basilica, and another branch of the cephalic vein; and the people name that "vein of all the body", and the basilica is a vein which is placed in the wild domestic lactation, and it is named "citillar", and the commoners call it "vein of the belly"; and the funis of the arm, and it is placed above the focus, and it is that one which is phlebotomized, and it is that one which appears above the thumb for manifest appearance; and salvatella, and it is the vein which is between the said auricular and the small digit, and thus in both ramps.
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	In the foot and leg there are three veins; one of them is beneath the curve of the outer thigh of the wild boar; and the second is subtle, and its place is beneath the thigh of the domestic boar; and the sciatic vein, and its place is beneath the thigh of the wild boar; and in the leg there are other similar veins to those.
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	The youthful arrangement of the veins that are close to the ears is to counteract ancient and migrating ulcers and sores on the bad heads of old people.
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	And the quality of bleeding from those is according to what you have recommended to you: it is that the head of the patient should be raised, and the head of the patient should be rubbed in the occiput, where the two veins are, with a gentle friction; then strengthen the patient's seat with a bandage between which appears the two eyes and their places close to the ears in two predetermined places on the head; and if you feel the pulse of those in the said place, then it is a sign.
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	Then take the cutting lancet, and it is that which is incident, and then introduce it beneath the vein in the hollow of the knee so that the flow of blood comes out.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	And then lift your hand to the vein and the hollow of the knee at the upper parts and incise the vein in an incident angle.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	And let the length of the incision be two fingers' width adjusted or around that; and make the flow of blood as much as you wish.
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And then strengthen the poultices and apply them to the wound so that it heals.
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	And now I have preceded in the beginning of the book the incision of those and their cauterization.
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	More of the two arterial veins that are in the temples, the youthful arrangement of phlebotomy is an ancient and badly governed and persistent eye disease and body of excessive acute overflowing fluids in the wheels.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	And the quality of phlebotomizing those is according to what you have recommended to you: constrict the patient's seat with a motive towards appearing the two veins at the sentiment for apparent manifestation and demonstrate the pulse of those in the said place; and then it is a sign.
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And then lift the hollow above the vein to the upper parts in the said place indicated, and introduce the phlebotomy incidentally beneath, and lift the vein upwards; and incise it thus as you have done on the other two veins; and let the blood flow according to the quantity of your need.
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And then release the constriction of the patient, and pause for an hour on the vein, and then pause on that spot with poultices and strengthen it from above with a strong constriction, and apply it so that it heals.
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	And now the reminiscence of them is preceded, and of those the incision, and the attraction in the beginning of the book.
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	And so the youthful arrangement of phlebotomy of the vein of the forehead is close to the phlebotomy of the cephalic vein for ancient evils of the face and for migrating and rough and fetid ulcers.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the quality of phlebotomy of it is according to what you have recommended to you; thus it is that the patient strengthens their seat with a bandage between which appears the vein; and then take the instrument which is named fossor, of which this is the form of it.
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	Pause at the eminent point which is at the head of the fossor on that vein and pierce it with a prick or another cause in the manner of it, and let the blood flow according to the quantity you wish; and then release the perforation of the patient and strengthen it so that it heals.
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	And some veins are opened in phlebotomy later, however it is not covered that the phlebotomy is of acute extremity thus as the other phlebotomies, unless it is of a delicate extremity, and phlebotomize it according to the transverse, because the bone is propitious and strongly treads on it in the phlebotomy when it is subtle.
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	More of the youthful arrangement of the two veins that are as lacrimal of two wheels for scabies of the wheels for roughness and fetidness in the wheels, and for the evils of the face.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	And the quality of phlebotomy is that the patient strengthens their neck with a bandage, and then phlebotomize those, and you stand still over the head of it.
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	And it is done phlebotomy according to the transverse at a length of a few fingers in phlebotomy a few, because in the place there is no flesh; and if the phlebotomy is subtle, strongly tread on the extremity of it is wounded.
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And then let the blood flow as much as you need, and pause on that spot, and strengthen it for a night, and then release it.
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	More of the phlebotomy of the vein of the nose is conducive to acute fever and violent sweat, and to the evils of the face and migrating roughness that occurs in the face, and worsens when it is ancient.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	And the quality of the bloodletting of the patient is that the patient's vein strengthens the right eye and then you take the subtle vein under the tongue and place it in the middle of the nose on the right side, according to rectitude, because the vein does not appear to the sensation here, and because the blood begins to flow soon.
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	Collect the blood that you have drawn from the small vein little by little and let it flow according to your need; and then leave it alone for a new night, because it is restored lightly.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	The juice of the bloodletting of the two guiding veins leads to a constriction of the wings and commencement of the leprous disease, and to many evil ulcers, corrosive and also herpetic.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	And the quality of the bloodletting of those is that the patient strengthens below each vein in the column with a ligament; and it is the artificial devices on top of the patient, and the patient sits on a stool.
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	And then bleed the vein at length with a small bloodletting little by little; and then extract blood according to tempered quantity or according to what is needed, as it is seen that there is need for it; and then make similar to the other vein.
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	And then release the ligament and strengthen the two veins in a mild stricture so that the patient is not affected, and lay him down at night because the wound is healed.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	And the juice of the bloodletting of the Algerich veins causes small apostemes and pustules on the mouth and corruption of the gums and evil ulcers and fissures, and to evil ulcers that are in the nose and in the circuit of it.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	And the quality of the bloodletting of those is that you make the patient cease within you, and strengthen his neck with a bandage, and then revolve his lips and look at the two veins, one of which is on the right lip and the second on the left; and the demonstration of each is for the blackness of each of both, and it is because in the circuit of those small black veins; and therefore you will inscribe each for an incidental inscription.
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	If you have doubts below you, and do not know which one is of those, then you will understand the inscription of the greater part of those, and of the most manifest part of those.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	And make similar to the two veins that are on the lips above.
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	It is customary to correct by inscribing the two veins that are in the lower lip.
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	It is because of the two veins that are below the tongue, the juice is then the bloodletting of the cephalic to prevent those that are in the throat, and to evil diseases of the uvula, and to evil diseases of the mouth.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	And the quality of bleeding those is that it follows the patient between his hands within the sun, and raises his tongue, and looks below the tongue, from one side of the vein and from the other side of the vein, and the color of each is declining to blackness.
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	And then bleed each one; and beware that you do not exceed your hand in bleeding those, because below those are arteries.
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the veins that are bled in the body are those in which it is customary to correct in all homes, and the bleeding of them is done according to two manners, either by putting on the subtle bleeding mirror or olive oil with declining subtlety; or by anointing with bleeding cutlery, and applying to the needle, and this is their form.
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	And this needle is that which converges to the section and of those special sides and subtleties according to the amplitude of the veins and according to the stricture of those.
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	Form of subtle bleeding:
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	It is the side of it also as times, and converges to open the concave full veins proceeding with apparent grossness, and to those that contain gross turbid blood.
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	And this is the form of olive oil bleeding:
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	And this bleeding is of lesser latitude and of more subtle extremity, and converges to the bleeding of subtle veins that contain subtle citrus blood.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	It is because the juice of the bleeding of the basilica vein, which is one of three veins: it extracts the blood from the evil diseases that are below the throat and neck, and from there it seizes the chest and belly.
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	And it converges to the bleeder, when bleeding that one, that he should guard himself from that and be above-fear in that, because below it has an artery, and if he errs and adjusts at the point of the bleeding, he will inscribe that artery and cause flows of blood, so that he knows not to bleed that with a pungent bleeding, unless it is sectant with the needle.
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the basilica does not appear for manifest appearance, then it is known that you should leave that one and that you move to another, or that you seek some other vein; or that you bleed at the end of the arm, because that one is manifest; and search that one with a needle, just as we have said.
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	If you want to perform the phlebotomy of the patient's thigh, then place a strap around the structure of the arm that touches the area inside so that you can constrict the area of the pulses, and apply a bandage over the arm and tighten it in a concave manner next to the phlebotomy site as we have described; and be careful not to cause a percussion on any space of the artery.
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	And when you do it, with the strength of the ligament, an inflammation occurs at the site where you have tightened, then that inflammation is inflammation of the artery, and therefore avoid that.
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	And if the blood flows in the phlebotomy like the aurora of an infant, and the blood is subtle red, then you know that it's from the blood of the artery; and then you touch and pause the string mentioned above for a long space; and apply the mentioned string, and if the blood is absorbed, because many veins are absorbed, then you tighten the arm and release it.
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	And beware of the patient's mood, and be above-temperament with them and do not upset them for several days until they are healthy.
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	But if the blood does not absorb, and it seems that you do not have a present medicine for that, then you incise the artery, if it appears to you; because the extremity of the patient is constricted, and the blood is absorbed; or take a thread of fistic, and finish that, and take one vein and tighten it over the site of the vein with a descending structure next to the ligament and pulpils until another day.
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	And then if the blood is absorbed, it's good; and otherwise, then cure that with water from which it is preceded by the remembrance of the site of the powders that absorb the flux of blood.
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	And the absorption of the patient's blood is difficult in many dispositions for the small site of the wound and the possibility of the ligament of the arm.
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	But the dark vein phlebotomy is a juvenation that extracts the blood from the subterranean part of the head and the lower part of the body; therefore, because it is composed of branches from the basilica and cephalic veins, as we have described.
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	And beware the phlebotomist that they are above-temperament in the phlebotomy of the patient, because below that is a nerve; and then if you adjust on the puncture of the phlebotomy and touch the nerve, it will cause stupor to them, and healing is difficult for them, and far from being completely healthy. And this nerve has many veins appearing at the sentiment; and if it is hidden for several hours and is subtle and does not show, then beware that you pause the phlebotomy in the way you phlebotomize in a concave manner, and avoid the nerve with your forcefulness.
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	And if the vein is between two nerves, then you finish the vein in its length.
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	The juvenation of the phlebotomy of the cephalic vein is that it attracts the blood from the head and comforts the illnesses of the eyes.
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	And beware in this proper manner, if you want the phlebotomy to puncture an olive phlebotomy or a myrtle phlebotomy; because it is the safest of all veins, because it is not below the artery nor nerves.
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	But Emperor convenes to you that you should beware of the phlebotomy that guards that with the phlebotomy you do not puncture the head of the lacert so suddenly, and seek a site more gentle, and do not touch it, if it is not touched by the first percussion that is above that phlebotomy in several veins.
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	But Emperor strongly advises you that it is postulated in several hours, when it is not phlebotomized on the first percussion, but rather does not touch in response to that postulation.
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	But the quality of the phlebotomy of that and the accidents of the patient are so many, in which you should beware to think about their correction.
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	The first of the patient is that you should know that phlebotomy is not administered except in conservation of health and for the hope of their recovery and caution against the occurrence of illnesses, and that it be done phlebotomy on one of the veins that are in the cord, so it is: cephalic, dark, and basilic; and that it be done phlebotomy at the beginning of spring, above fasting in spring and autumn, and in winter near the digestion, when apparent signs of replenishment appear.
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	And phlebotomy should be done on the third day or at first light after three hours have passed since the morning sun.
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	But phlebotomy that is administered, but when it provokes convenience and necessity at any time, or of night or of day, in every hour and in every time.
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	And beware that if the infant is not phlebotomized until they are 14 years old, and a woman who has not been phlebotomized except for four months within seven, and the old ones who have passed 60 years.
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	And since you want to be a fluid botanist for some manual therapy, it is necessary that you mundify the swollen veins within the botany of the intestine, so that if there is stagnant retention, the veins do not attract superfluous fluids in the botany of the intestines, which are purged, and do not disturb the principal members.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	And you do not find the passive nauseous sacration and cramps, nor evacuation of bad digestion or introversion until it is remade into its own, nor bad digestion of hydropsy, and more because botany is tempered by colic passion and vomiting, and belly pain, and multiplication of coitus and trebal exercise of vigils or total cause that dissolves the virtue, either in a corpse or an animal.
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	And you should consider the subtlety of humors within if the blood is gross, in food and drink, and in medicines if it is possible to adjust them to the patient.
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	And you should enter into a bath if some cause does not prohibit it, or be excited by some exercise so that the blood is subtly purified.
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	And stop the botany of it in the foot of the day, so it is around the third hour, thus as we have said.
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	And be careful that the foot of that one is guarded on that day from all bad accidents, animals, thus as it is anguish, anger, fear, and all bodily accidents, thus as it is labor and excessive pain and coitus and similar to them.
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	And at its session, the surface should be present with the causes in the use of that which corrects customarily in men with aromaticity and odorment and balms and similar to them according to the quantity of possibility.
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	And follow the botanist over a cushion that is put above the cushion of the one who should be botanized.
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	And you should extract the liquid vein, and touch the hand to the botanist's hand with two or three fingers; and you should strengthen the ligament in the correct way and involve those two fingers.
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	And it is the tempered structure, because the structure when not engorged, or the structure is superfluous, then it prohibits the flow of blood; or it is mollified, and then it prohibits the body of the blood's essence.
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	And you should temper the structure, because the one who should be botanized touches their hands together between them so that the veins are inflated, and are declared to the sentiment.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	And you should anoint the botanist with a little oil of anti-inflammatory properties; and you should stop the liquid indicator on the left hand over that vein, below the place where you want the botany, so that the vein receives a little, and the percussion is seated because the veins are the ones that attract fugitive cord of the botany, and of those it is full of windiness and when you stop the botany on that one it is contracted against the botany, and it is discovered by the botanist; and the botany does not overcome the vein, and if it overcomes, that one is stretched.
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	And therefore, because of this, the botanist should be firm and solicited in all these causes.
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	And you should pause the botany, more if the vein is huberated in a way, then it is good; and if not, you iterate another way below that place a little, or above them with festination, if the place is not apostematized.
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	And if the place is apostematized, or the bad digestion spreads, then you leave it for a day or two, and do not strengthen the ligament, because it would fortify the apostema's caution, nor enter into a bath.
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	And you should iterate the botany if it is loved.
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	And if the perception is small and corrects blood subtly, and you fear that it does not reach the quantity that you want, then you iterate the botany in that tract according to rectitude and adjust in the perception a little, and do festination within so that the place is apostematized, because the place is apostematized in many homes due to little perception.
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	More if the one has already been apostematized, then you do not iterate over it, because it does not excuse any cause for you; and stop on that certain part of the wound with oil, because it alleviates the body of the blood.
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	And it is better in this place with oil than with other oils.
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	And similarly, you administer the wound of oil in all botany where the botanies touch the veins due to the prohibition of bodily blood, and make a tyriacal alfadol and sagzenea when it is stopped from one of those over the place, because the blood is subtly purified and revolved when it is gross.
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	And if in the place of botany a great apostema is engendered, because many veins accumulate, and it is majorized to that one which has not been washed except for that vein, or in the perception of little vein, and then you touch, and stop over the place spongy infused with water and salt, a little scaled, and strengthen it for an hour, because it is dissolved.
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	It seems that you're dealing with an archaic medical text, written in a language that shares similarities with Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. I'll attempt to translate the given sentences line by-line into English:
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	Here's my attempt to translate the sentence:
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	Here's my attempt to translate the sentence:
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	Here's my attempt to translate the sentence:
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Here's my attempt to translate the sentence:
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	Here's my attempt to translate the sentence:
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	Here's my attempt to translate the sentence:
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	Here's my attempt to translate the sentence:
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	Here's my attempt to translate the sentence:
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	Here's my attempt to translate the sentence:
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	Here's my attempt to translate the sentence:
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	Here's my attempt to translate the sentence:
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	Here's my attempt to translate the sentence:
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	Here's my attempt to translate the sentence:
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	Here's my attempt to translate the sentence:
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	Here's my attempt to translate the sentence:
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	Here's my attempt to translate the sentence:
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	Here's my attempt to translate the sentence:
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	Here's my attempt to translate the sentence:
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	And do not cover when you want to free the arm and evacuate the second vein, since it is already closed the orifice of the vein and it is very difficult to remove the blood, that you press underneath with vehemence and encircle, because it is too bad.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	Having the lancet enter secondarily; or it remains there in the acuity of the fleubotomi that is coagulated blood in the orifice of the vein; or pause on that of tyriacal alfarach, or of sagzenea, and compress underneath so that the blood comes out gradually.
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	And if the vein is inflamed, then lance it and do not touch it until the inflammation is calmed.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	And if it is necessary to provoke the evacuation of the blood secondarily, and there is no excuse, then prick that spot or on the other arm in another vein.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	And the vein called "funnel of the arm" is fleubotomized in the place of the fuse or of the basilica, when they are not constricted or narrowed, because it is composed of those.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	And the quality of the fleubotomy of it is that the patient introduces their hand in warm water so that the vein becomes more prominent and appears manifestly.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	And then tighten above that limb with a strict ligature; and then fleubotomize according to the small transverse, not longitudinally nor according to the length.
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	And it is a broad perception and it is your fleubotomy that you fleubotomize above the joint of the hand, a small one.
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	And if the blood flow is prohibited, then you iterate with the hand in warm water and let the blood run into the water until you achieve your necessity.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	Moreover if you were in the summer days, then you are excused from the iteration of the hand in warm water, and the month is placed, the body of the blood in warm water at winter time.
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	And the fleubotomy of this vein is more salvageable than all the other veins, because there it has no pulsating vein, nor nerves.
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	And the fleubotomy of the little vein of the right hand is convenient for the diseases of the liver.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	And the quality of the fleubotomy of it is that you tighten the hand with a ligature or with your own hand, since you have put it in warm water, until the vein is inflated and is well demonstrated at the moment; and then fleubotomize transversally; and if you insert it all the way no one will know what you are doing.
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	And be careful not to ultimately hurt your hand in the fleubotomy, because there the nerves of the fingers are exposed and denuded of flesh.
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	And then iterate the hand in warm water and let the blood run into it, because if you do not iterate it in warm water, the blood will coagulate in the orifice of the vein, and the flow is prohibited.
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	And when you extract the blood according to the quantity of necessity, then pause on the vein with oil and salt, so that it is not consolidated too quickly; and similarly cover what you do in all tightly bound.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	Moreover the benefit of the fleubotomy of that vein of the left hand is that it is convenient for the diseases of the spleen.
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	And do similarly in the fleubotomy of it as you have done in the other one.
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	And the benefit of the saphena vein in fleubotomy is for the diseases that are in the lower part of the body, such as those of the mother, and for retention of menses, and for the diseases of the kidneys and ulcers of thighs and legs, and for their similar diseases.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	And the quality of the fleubotomy of it is that the patient introduces their foot in warm water and makes friction on that spot until the veins appear; and he places it above the joint of the foot with a cord; and the place of the vein has a visible thread, and from there it ramifies into the surface of the foot through many routes.
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	And then fleubotomize the largest branch or below the leg where the thread of the aggregation of it is, because it is better and more healthy.
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	And if you fleubotomize that on the surface of the foot, then you beware of the nerves that are below it on the surface of the foot, and pause your fleubotomy at the place where you fleubotomize transversally, lest you want to insert them.
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	And these are your fleubotomy rules.
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	Moreover if the blood flow is prohibited; then you iterate the foot of it in warm water and let the blood run into it until it is evacuated.
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the fleubotomizer errs in the first vein, then iterate with the fleubotomy in its own pace, because the place is salty; and do not fear the evil of it, more than you beware of the nerves as we have said.
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	It seems that the similar language is a mix of Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French.
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	"And from the sciatic vein, the place has thus been said to be below the heel, near the hollow of the Silvester's division."
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	"And the juice of the fleobotomy of it is a remedy for when it is for bloody flux."
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	"And the quality of the fleobotomy of it is that the patient goes into a bath, and tightens and strengthens the thigh of their ankle below the sole, under four fingers in a long subtle bandage, because it does not appear except for that."
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	"And then when it appears, then you fleubotomize that according to each engineer who says it is possible and according to the transverse, and it is better; or insert it for injection or section it for secretion, because the place of it is healthy."
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	"And it is in many homes somewhat alleviated; and if you touch it, and it does not appear to the whole sentiment, then fleubotomize some root of it, and it is that which appears on the back of the foot in the auricular and ring fingers."
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	"And beware of the nerves, and make the blood flow with the quantity that you want."
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	"And then release the structure and pause over the place of the fleobotomy, and strengthen the place, because it will be healthy soon."
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	"By ventilation and by the qualities of using those."
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	"They ventilate with horns, or with iron, or with glass."
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	"And ventilation is done according to two methods: one of them is with scarification and blood extraction, and the other is ventilation without scarification."
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	"And this ventilation that is without scarification is according to two methods, because either it is with fire or without fire."
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	"And the ventilations that are administered with scarification and blood extraction are 13 places of the body, among which one where pauses are made is in the underarm, and it is the last part of the head; and the middle place of two parts of the neck together; and ventilations below the mandible, below the mouth; and ventilations of two spatulas; and ventilations of alohoster, and it is on the end of the thigh; and ventilations of two focils, and they are of two arms; and ventilations of two cavities; and ventilations of two hips."
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	"And ventilation does not extract blood except from the small, sparse veins in the flesh, and therefore it does not catch virtue through them, just as it is done for fleobotomy; nor does it cover that ventilation is done with fire or without fire in any bad condition made for replenishment until the entire body is evacuated."
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	"However, if it is necessary to provoke ventilation for illness or for continuity, administer it every hour at the beginning of the month and at its end, and in the middle place of it and at some time."
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	"The cause is that in those homes where blood is multiplied until it indicates extraction of it through ventilation and touches the heavy and swollen head; and from those, it touches replenishment and rigor in their face and in the heavy head, and in the heavy neck; and from those, it touches prurience in their face and in the heavy forehead, and darkness and dullness in the heavy wheels; and from those that throw the place of their ventilation; and from those, their blood is multiplied; and from those, they taste blood in their mouth, or the tongue is apostematized and spits blood; and from those, their sleep is multiplied, and from those who vomit blood in their sleep, rigor and antics and plagues and other causes similar to them."
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	"And then when it happens for some cause of those, and properly if it is in the third or middle of the month, then command ventilation to be done after two or three hours have passed from the day."
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	"And the remedy of ventilation of the nuca is that when it confers gravity on the head and to that which is founded in the wheels; but it covers that it should be a proper evacuation of the entire body."
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	"And this ventilation is at the place of fleobotomy of the cephalic (head)."
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	"And it is not lawful to use it on that which is of complete fragility, or in which there is catarrh, because it gives great nuisance."
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	"And therefore it does not cover that the use of those old things is in the heads of which there are frequent illnesses."
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	"However, to the one who continues above it is done forgetfulness; and therefore it covers that you command the ventilator to pause his hand a little at the ventosa on the lower parts, fearing the generation of forgetfulness."
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	"However, ventilation of alkehel is at the place of fleobotomy of the dark vein and of the basilica: and therefore it confers asthma, and to the constriction of the wings and to the scission of the instrument of the wings, and to all, and to replenishment."
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	"And it covers that the ventilation of alkehel is weakened a little, because if it is paused below, it generates debility in the body and in the stomach."
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	And the inflammation of the galle bladder causes accidental pains in the head and obstruction of the eyes, and migration, and foreboding, and pains in the roots of the teeth; and it is in the place of bloating of the basilisk vein.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	And be careful that you do not press your hand on the scarification so as not to insert the artery and stop the flow of blood.
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	And inflammation of the galle bladder causes fermentation in the mouth, and corruption of the gums, and resemblance to those bad things that are in the mouth, and it stands in the place of bloating of the astringent vein that is in both lips.
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	Moreover, the inflammation of the galle bladder that is made on both spoon-shaped (organs) causes a deposit, which is made by replenishment of heat.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	And the inflammation of both divided parts of the focus causes juvenile bloating of three veins, namely the basilica, fusca and cephalica, because it attracts the blood from all those veins plus many small ones that are in the flesh, and those small veins are connected to the other large ones until they bring attraction to the three veins.
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	And command the one who inflates that he should not proceed with scarification, because the place is denuded of flesh, and there are nerves and arteries.
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	And it is a type of inflammation which is inflated above the hips and causes hemorrhoids in the backside and ulcers as well.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	And be careful that you command the one who inflates to have a great inflammation, and that it is of wrath, because the place indicates strong dryness; and strongly those subtle inflated veins are scarified in scarification.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	Moreover, the inflations of the thin membranes are manifest through minimal effort, because they attract the blood from the whole body, and cause ancient pains of the joints and of the matrix, and of the bladder; and they provoke the menses, and cause bother and trouble; and it stands in the place of bloating of two siphons, and of the astringent vein, and of two cavities.
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	However, I will not belittle the whole body and do not concur in synchrony with many homes.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	And of the inflations, the astringent vein is propelled to juvenation at the inflations of both membranes.
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	And the quality of the position of the inflations is that it stops the inflammation at the beginning of the void and sucks for temperate suction, and does not prolong the position of the inflations, but rather pauses those ligaments, and remains in those quietudes, and that the humors come to the place for adventitious ingression.
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	And do not cease iterating that and continue until you see the place already inflamed and swollen, and that appears the rigor of the blood.
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	And then you scarify and iterate the suction little by little, and properly consider in the disposition of the body.
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	Because that man who has tender flesh from rare pores, be careful that you scarify him gently and not too much, so that the place is not ulcerated.
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	And command the one who inflates to amplify the scarification and press a little, and temper the suction to facilitate.
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	And if the blood is thickened, then be careful to scarify two gentle times, because in the first gentle time it opens the way of subtlety to the blood and to its acidity.
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	Moreover, in the second (time) there is precise scrutiny acquired from the extraction of thick blood.
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	And if the blood is very feculent, then make a third scarification for that it purges the worse.
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	And finally, when we want to extract the blood little by little or a small amount, it is enough for us to make one scarification.
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	And if we want to extract much blood, we make a lot of scarifications; and if we know that the blood is thick, then be careful to make deep scarifications.
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	And the term of scarification in which is the profundity of the codena only so much.
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	And if that of which the codena is thick, hard, fusca, and the six pores are so strait, be careful that the places of the inflations are not too lenient, opened resolutely; if it is in summer time, thus as it is oil of aloen or oil of violet, or oil of amellas of dossas, or oil of cemensa of coja; and if it is in winter time, then oil of narci, or oil of liri, or oil of camamilla, or of blood, and to those that resemble.
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	And if the superfluity is thick, cold, then the oil should be amaranthine, or oil of balsamite, or oil of aloen, or oil of anet, and to those that resemble.
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	Moreover, if the one who inflates is of many pores of tender flesh, then be careful that it is prohibited from oil, and be careful to apply those places of inflations with their proper inflation, whether it is washed with warm water or cold water of solatrum, or water of coja, or water of bordolaguas, and resembling those.
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	And if that which has blood of much humidity, wash their wounds with agreeable wine, or with water of myrtle and sumac and similar to those.
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	And if that which has gross surplus, wash their wounds with agreeable vinegar, or with water of sanzuc, which is marjoram, or of decoction of anise, or of chamomile, and to them it seems similar.
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	And let the wound be kept away from bath; have care that it is administered its own dressing of bath for an hour or for two, and let it sleep with its own dressing.
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	What is it that needs to be governed so that the wounded one is not blood-let before wound-curing.
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	You should consider at the beginning: then if the wounder or he who needs to be blood-let is choleric and wounds above the agitated and inflamed blood, then you should take causes of cooling, thus with milky acetoses, and endive in agreeable and laxative, and scammony, and julip, and it seems similar.
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	And pause their food thus with poultices, and remove the swollen veins, and prepare their food with wild herbs, and it seems similar.
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	And if the complexion is fresh, you should take in drink essence of wormwood, or essence of scammony of sesame seeds, and sumac, and put much odorant miger among viel and noel; and it is commanded that he use few drinks and little eating, and pause their food of poultices and canabir and pissers and small veins and doves.
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	And you should ensure that on the day of wounding and blood-letting, the drink is more abundant than the food.
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	And you should ensure that it is given to drink at certain hours to certain men tyriaca alpharac, or medicine of musk, so it is musked, or alkalized away from the wounding or away from blood-letting or at a distance, so that the principal members are comforted and the blood is subtly; and do not ensure that they take that scalping.
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	The wounds that are scarified are wounds that are paused on the feet, and on the knee and gout, and on the navel, in the places of the joints, and the pustule of the hip, because these members do not suffer scarification upon themselves.
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	And it is not sought for those except attraction of blood from member, thus with paused wound on the mamilha in malady of flux of blood of the blood of the veins; and use that for dissolving fresh and viscous wound of member, thus with paused on the belly and navel; because that rarefies the member and scalps it and removes the pain as it resolves wound.
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	And already it is paused on the joints when they accumulate in their operation or pus, because through virtue of strong attraction the humble operation and eradicates the pus from its place.
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	And similarly it happens when it is paused on the feet and knee, then wound pain is enclosed in those.
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	And these wounds are administered with suet as solvent only; and some vegetables are administered at the focus.
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	And some vegetables are administered full of water steeped in teas for the maladies of the knee.
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	And that is why the wound should be filled and should be large, thus it is warm water alone or water in which are cooked suitable herbs for that convenience.
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	Form of wound administered at the focus: let the amplitude of the orifice be two fingers, according to how we have formed it; and the quantity of the poultice should be the width of a palm; and let it be in the fat of it, in the place that is in the circuit, its width, the thread being small according to the quantity that enters into it with a needle.
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	Let it be made of raw rose or citron, of thick margins, lion, eagles and tertiaries so that the member does not leave its position above it.
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	And let it be in the middle of the vertical stick of raw iron or of ferrous, where the candle is paused at the focus.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	And already this wound is much greater than that which we have recommended; and the little remedy of that according to the maladies and the state of him who uses that.
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	And the wounds of the elderly and weakened are different from those of the young and of thick corsages.
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	And the quality of pausing this wound at the focus on the member is that it extends the wax decently away from a small candle of tallow, and pauses it above the middle of the vertical stick in the middle place of the wound, so that the focus is kindled around the partition below, lest the body of the patient be burned.
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	And then it is paused on the member of the patient, and the finger is on the thread that we have said, until when we have the wounds and do not indicate that they open the finger and let the vapor rise over that thread, then the wound will be almost dissolved.
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	I apply gentle friction according to my manual skill, and I repeat this if the said limb shows signs of inflammation.
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	Maybe in a ventosa that is administered on the surface of the blister, with water, in which there is no transverse or oblique pressure, and it is not administered unless it is filled with water, and it is placed over the member as long as possible.
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	And this is its form: This ventosa is better when it is larger, so much the better, because it can receive a large quantity of water.
Capitol .xcvii.	Chapter 147.
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	Blood-sucking cups are not administered on most members unless on those members where it is not possible to position ventosas, due to the smallness of those, such as the lip and gum, which resemble them; or on a member denuded of flesh, such as the nose and gums, which resemble them.
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	And the quality of using those that you have found blood-sucking cups which are on the dirty, muddy waters of a polluted world.
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	And then lay them in dirty water during the day and night so that they become foul-smelling, and that no remaining cause stays in the belly of those; and then evacuate the body at the beginning with fleabotomia and ventosas; and then cleanse the member of the patient until it is red-hot; and then place them on it.
E cum son umplidas e caso.	And when they are full and fall.
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	And if it is possible to suck from the place with a ventosa, it is better to do so in youth.
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	And if not, then wash the place with a gentle touch and then apply a lot of water; and be cleansed and purified.
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	And if the body of the patient is prolonged due to the removal of blood-sucking cups, and it is residue, then you soak a piece of linen in cold water, and place that on top until the residue is absorbed.
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	And if the blood is multiplied, then powder over it with triturated vitriol, or gall and similar to those of the stiptic causes, until the blood is absorbed; or place on the spot the crushed heads of roasted broad beans, and leave them until the broad beans adhere to the spot, and the blood is absorbed.
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	And be careful, if it is necessary, iteration of blood-sucking cups, when it is possible to move them.
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	And if the blood-sucking cups are prohibited from suspension, then cleanse the spot with recent blood or fix a needle in the spots until blood flows; and then place them, because they sense some blood as soon as possible.
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	And when you want them to fall, powder over them a little of triturated aloe, or salt, or cinder, and it will happen soon.
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	Thus begins the third part: on restoration.
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	This chapter is very necessary in the art of medicine; and it is about the restoration of fractures and accidental dislocations in the bones.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	Oh, son, you should know that I have taken from this chapter the foolish doctors and the common people, and those who for a long time did not regard the books of the Ancients nor read a letter of them.
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	And for this reason it is done that this manner of the scientists in our land is private; and I have not forgotten anything in a long time being entirely abandoned; and I have not acquired anything afterwards, except through the length of reading the books of the Ancients and studying with understanding of them, until I extract the science from them.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	And then I will direct my experiment and study throughout the length of my life.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	And I have already described in this chapter all that contains my science and about which I have passed my experiment; because here I have abbreviated to you others and delivered it from the occupation of lengthiness; and I will abbreviate it at the end of abbreviation; and I will show it at the end of declaration; and I will form it in many forms of the instruments that are administered there, as is done by addition of declaration, just as I have done in two previous chapters.
Capitol primier.	Chapter First.
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	Summary and collections from being fractures of bones, from which a necessary premise is, before we begin the recollection of fractured members and diverse ones, each one individually.
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	I will therefore set out in the prohemium of this chapter the summaries of the sermon; and the chapters to the understanding of those which at the beginning were forecast by the artisans and stationed on the truth of them; so it is you and those who are prompt that they may know or learn this noble art, other than you.
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	And then I say that when accidents occur, such as fracture or dislocation or twisting or breaking, then it is necessary that you return to the beginning with fleabotomia or to lift up, or to whatever extent, if no cause prohibits it, just as debilitation of virtue, or it is that to which accidents occur frequently, or in decrepit state, or it is a time of vehement heat, or of vehement cold.
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	And then I am content with a diet of fresh herbs and of lean meat from birds and crabs; and I prohibit gross meats and filling up on diets and all diet that fills the veins with blood, until you are secure from apostemic caution, and if you do not fear effusion of matter to the member.
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	And then return the patient to their first primary regimen, which they were accustomed to following.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	And then when the broken bone begins to be restored, then it is necessary that the patient be fed with nourishing foods rich in nutrients and not heavy or greasy, such as light foods made from flour, water, rice, and vegetables, and fresh fruits, and similar to those, and according to this regimen, it is done for coagulation of fracture pus, easing and softening.
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	And it is known that the broken bones, when they are in the old men who are in the primary weakness and in the decrepit states, it is not possible for them to be continued and consolidated according to their nature due to the dryness of their limbs.
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	And they are continued and consolidated according to their nature all the time due to the dryness of those limbs, and they are continued and consolidated in the end of the frailty, just as the bones of the small children's fingers.
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	But the Emperor Nature adjusts and connects above the broken bone of the whole affected part any similar cause that grows into a mass that adheres and strengthens until it is fully consolidated and united, until they reach the end of fortification and firmness, just as at the beginning, until no cause prohibits their own works.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for this reason it is necessary to avoid the foods of the patient, foods in which there are gravity and viscosity and grossness, just as we have said.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	Many varieties of fracture according to the variety of the limb.
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	And it is known that the species of fracture are diverse according to the diversity of the limbs, because a fracture of the bone of the leg is different from a fracture of the bone of the head; and a fracture of the bone of the foot is different from a fracture of the bone of the back; and similarly all the other limbs are diverse among themselves.
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	And I have come to remember all species of fracture, explained in their distinct chapter, separate from the others.
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	Many varieties of fracture in the same member.
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	And the species of fracture of the bone are diversified in their members; because there is a curved fracture other than that which occurs in the stars; and some veins are made into a fracture according to the length of the bone: and so the fractures of the sagittal and stellar and additional proceeding and not-proceeding, just as it is done in the pain when it is prepared to write, and it is a fracture with plague and disruption in the head, and it is a small fissure fracture.
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	And to each species there is a proper torment in the restoration of it according to what will come to remember distinctly in their places.
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	Many signs of fracture of the bone.
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	And for that reason, a fracture of the bone is recognized: it is the twisting of it, and of that eminence and appearance of it to the sentiment, and so of it when one comprehends it with their hand.
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	And then when there is no apparent twisting in the location nor does it feel deviated from its proper place when one touches the bone with agitation and the patient does not experience great pain, then there is no fracture here.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	However, it is possible that there is a twisting or small fissure, and one does not feel it with their hand and with compression of all; however, pause over it from the medicines of which you have remembered to apply at that moment what is convenient for the location; and then it will be straightened by subtle stricture.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	And it is known that the location where it is curved and not separated into two or another that does not occur in the sagittal, just as it is remembered from all parts of its comparison, then it is necessary to begin from your hour to rectify it, since it has occurred with apostema caution.
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	And if it has occurred with apostema caution, then leave it alone for some days until the apostema ceases; and then wrap it according to whatever manner you can of elevation and of ingenuity.
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	And it is known that the restoration of it and the union of it are more legitimate than those of the bone in which they occur sagittally.
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	And then strengthen it according to what will come to remember about it.
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	Many times in the bone there are sagittals, then it is necessary to extend this broken member from two parts, whether it is the hand or the foot; or with your hand if the member is small; or with two cords or with one cord and the hand.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	And it is your position in which you hold the member in place according to its natural figure, while the parts are extended from the broken member, then you perform that they return to their positions ingeniously and according to whatever manner you can put them in their places.
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	And beware that you do not fall upon the patient through your operation of the limbs nor lesion; and perform yourself according to your true power that you apply one bone with another as a companion according to their best forms.
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	And it is necessary that at that hour you profitably touch with your hand, and if sometimes there is a different cause here, rectify it and bind it according to the quantity of your virtue.
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	And violent extension and compression, thus with many foolish doctors who vainly try to accelerate the aposterior cautious operation, or accelerate counter-action in the member, thus as we have seen through the operation of their vain endeavors.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	And you connect, equate and perform a decent operation and structuring of that member, and rest and tranquility; advise the patient about this and make them understand that they should not move during their watchfulness and sleep, and observe their revolution and agitation, and remove their evacuation, and remove all their movements to total vertigo; and beware that the position of the member is positioned in a way that ensures the pain, which causes it because of the disposition of the member or lesion; then it becomes clear that if you change it to another disposition where there is no pain; and keep an eye on it so that the position of the limb is direct and equal, so that the limb does not become twisted when restored.
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	And the quality of the structure of the tranquil member is that which I recommend; for you should know that the members are diversified in their smallness and greatness, and in the form of those.
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	And among those that are small, such as the arm and finger and toe, and similar to those, then it becomes clear that the enveloping should be of very subtle wrapping.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	But among those that are large, such as the thigh or leg, it becomes clear that in those there should be a strong and hard enveloping, because the strong connection connects the big member and strengthens it entirely in an equal structure, so that nothing enters inside.
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	And then begin, and evacuate with equilibrium, pause the convenient liaison according to that, on the place of that fracture in three or four envelopings, depending on how much the member merits; and strengthen your hand a little on the liaison.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	And then see to it that you part from the superior region of the place of the fracture, and strengthen yourself so that you do not force your structure on the place where you have strengthened the fracture.
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	And then elongate yourself in the enveloping of the place of the fracture a little, and soften the structure little by little, until you take hold of the place with a great part.
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	And then take another bandage and envelop that other part over the place where you have enveloped, and then see to it that the envelopings are parted below the fracture; and be your operation in the structure of the enveloping and in softening of that according to what we have said in the primary enveloping above.
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	And then pause between the layers of stopping the wrapping or cloth in which the twisting of the fracture is equalized, if there is twisting; and if not, do not pause in it for any reason.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	And then pause on the other bandage, and then equalize over these envelopings which are decently made, just so, if in the place there is no inflammation or cautious postulate, and then pause on that which settles the postulate and removes the inflammation; and thus it remains for several days; and then you strengthen over the same layers.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	And thus the layers of the bandage are of a certain thickness, and are formed skillfully; or they are made of rushes of cane; or of palm fronds; and let each layer be ample according to this form and figure.
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	However, it becomes clear that the bandage which is paused over that fracture should be thicker and slightly larger than the other bandages, and the length of the bandage according to how it is laid on the member in magnitude and smallness; and then strengthen over the bandages with another bandage according to your primary structure; and then bind below decently according to what we have said about structure, and it is that your structure should be according to the place of the fracture itself, and when it is more elongated from the fracture, it lessens the structure.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	And it becomes clear that the threads are middling in thickness and subtlety, and are of a soft material; and if the threads are thick, thus as you have seen through the operation of several foolish doctors pausing the threads of twisted cords of the tort, and it is a great error, when the structure is not equalized.
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	And very subtle threads are not so convenient, because you do not constrict for structure in those things that you want, and it becomes clear that between bandage and bandage there is less than a digit.
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	And if the patient is led by the extremities of the bandages to the structure in those places, then pause below those of stopping the wrapping or laminated skin until it does not make a lesion.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	Some vainly broken fractures are a plague, and cause disruption in the cord, and you will find remembrance in that chapter according to singularity.
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	And you should know that all broken members are not straightened with bandages on the first day; the reason is that the member, when it is large, does not settle over the bandages until about 5 or 7 days, according to your securement of the advent of cautious postulate.
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	And this is the manner of the plasterers among those whom the Ancients restored, who were experts in fracture and dislocation and twisting.
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	Method of plastering as a remedy for restoring fractures, suitable for complex and major injuries to women and children, because it is about that which neither heat nor cold reaches: and it is that they take powder of millet, and it is the marrow of the flour that penetrates the movement of the mill in the walls of the millet.
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	And they confide in that thus, but not that they filter it with the white of egg, and pause the completion of it not sparse nor subtle; and then use that.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	Another manner of implanting is for restoring fracture and dislocation: recipe of assafetida, of lapdanum, of acacia, of enula, and of migrach, which is made from a thousand granules salvaged, of all one drachm; of mirra and aloen one drachm; alochil one drachm; all are triturated and ground and mixed with water or album in order to complete the complex of the patient's scalp; and then use this implant, because it is of good composition and restores the broken bones quite strongly, and confers a great deal of comfort.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	Another manner of implanting which confers a fracture and dislocation: recipe of migrach and metal of white alta one drachm; of mirra and of aloen one drachm five; of acacia one drachm six; of Armenian bol one drachm twenty.
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	All three mixtures in a mortar with a mixing spoon, and filter them, and then administer them in water or egg white and they are administered.
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	Method of plastering for joints and separated bones in those places, and then pain occurs accidentally in those and in fissures and fractures: take the woolen cloth and submerge it in warm oil and wax, and place it over the area.
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	More in this plaster there is no virtue of restoration, of postrema heat and expelling pains properly.
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	Another method of plaster that restores broken bones: take leaves of fig tree sort and leaves of salvaged poppy; crush all together and make a plaster of it.
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida .i.; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	Method of plaster abbreviated administered for the restoration of fracture of bones and when you want resolution of the remaining heat of postrema: recipe mixture of elder, of chamomile and flowers of violets, of flour of peas, of all in a part. all three mixtures and mixed together in wine, if the member is not wounded.
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	More if it is wounded, then confide in that with water of sweet colander humid or with water and use it.
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	Another method of plastering strongly in resolution that this first, when it happens postrema hard during the restoration of the member: recipe of mixture of elder and of sesame of lime, and of balsam, and melilot, majorana, flowers of violet, of chamomile, of all in a part; all three mixtures and mixed together in water of sage or in water of two waters or in wine, all that follows according to the quality of the member and the repose of its color.
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	More Hippocrates did not dissemble in the free will that it is placed over the wounded member during its restoration, but rather made a mixture of wax and oil and no other cause; and recommended that it be moderate between roughness and subtlety.
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	More in Galen's opinion it is seen that they are placed over the broken member during its restoration and the causes in which it is exsiccated with little heat so thus as myrrh, incense and similar to those causes that we have recommended.
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	Method of plastering that confides in lesion and pain: recipe of migat, of cezès, of skins of wild goose or pennyroyal of auzel, and of elder, and salt, partings equally; all three mixtures and filtered and mixed together, and then make a plaster.
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	More the quantity according to which it is necessary that remains in the league and then it is dislocated, is that you consider if there is no pain or swelling nor the bone is broken nor is it moved from its place, then you do not delay for many days.
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	And if it happens at the place of vehement pain or swelling or inflammation, then you touch or delay that at the hour, and remove the plaster from it.
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	And take a drap of lime and marine sponge, humid and warm, and submerge it in tepid water, and with that wash the place until the swelling and pain cease; and then lay it to rest for an hour; and then place on it the woolen cloth submerged in warm oil or wax, and leave it on for a night until you are secure of postrema heat, and that the inflammation of the member is rested, and the pain of it is mitigated.
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then you apply that subtle structure and small implant underneath, which does not constrain your primary contraction, and subtly enter into that entrance so it may be healthy.
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	And if sometimes the abscess and the redness and the pain and the inflammation are all removed from everything, and you have diagnosed the need for implantation and structure, then you apply that way as you have done from the beginning of the treatment.
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o .vii.; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	And if none of those causes affect that member which we have mentioned, then do not touch it for three days or four or five. And some treatments are all that is necessary for 20 days according to how it appears regarding the dislocation of the member, as we have said, until the fracture adheres, and it approaches the coagulation of the flesh over that.
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	And then adjust in the structure more than in your primary structure altogether, and settle in the engagement of the food of the patient, according to what is preceded by the remembrance of it.
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	More often the place of the fracture is disarticulated and extended more than it does not cover, then you know that the nutrient is prohibited from penetrating to that; and therefore embrocate with warm water treatment for 3 days; and loosen the structure a little, and through this operation correct the member by nourishing it, and it will be healthier.
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	More often that which makes the restorative forces of the fracture of the member another way when it is not restored from the beginning, according to how it covers, and it is restored according to tortuousness, it is an error according to their operation, and great fear, and if it were a turner that which aggravates the Ancients in their free books and they would have worked on that.
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	And I have not seen any of them who have done that, because it is more reasonable that they do not do it.
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	Chapter according to: On the fracture that affects the head.
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	The species of fractures are many, and their figures are diverse, and the causes are distinct, because some fractures are made by percussion of a spine, and the percussion breaks all the bone into the ciphac, which is beneath the bone, just as it would in the fist, and therefore this species is named ascial; or the spine inserts into some part of the bone, and inserts into its flesh and does not pass into the back of it; and this species of fracture is named absolute levation.
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	And the complaint of these two fractures is great or small, and of fracture that is contraction or attraction; and its cause is percussion with a poise or fall onto stone, and to their similarity.
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	And this fracture is penetrating which approaches the peritoneum that is beneath the bone; or it is in the face of the bone, and the complaint of these two fractures is great or small.
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	And the fracture is that which is diminished in the bone, in the subtlety of the small hair-like petiteness, and therefore this species of fracture is named capillary.
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	And it is a fracture that is made either by fall or by percussion of stone and to its similarity, which makes some layer of the bone enter into the divided parts, and it is made in the concave location just as it affects the pores of the skin when it affects their percussion and it is a part of their entrance into the divided parts.
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	And mainly it is done in the bodies of human bones, just as it is in the heads of elephants.
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	And thus all these species of fractures are categorized, they are weighed just as they are separate stars.
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	And I will find a remembrance of all that in its place.
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	And I will discuss all these species of fracture for detection above them and for inquiry into their tents and ostentation of corrupt flesh that is above them.
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	And the capillary species is known for that which is discovered above the bone, and it is scraped, and limited to its tents, because the fracture appears black.
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	More often in the cure of fracture consider from the beginning the accidents of the patient, and then if you see for the accidents that signify manifest significance over fear, just as it is vomit of cholera, and extension, and loss of understanding, and abscission of votes, and syncope, and acute fever, and worsening of the veins and redness of those, and similarity to their accidents in the major dispositions, if they do not get healthy.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	And if you see non-concurrent accidents, you hope for health, then you begin the cure of it.
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	The cause is because if it has come to you the complaint at the beginning as it is a complaint and that is in the days of winter, then it covers that you study in the ostentation of the bone on the 14th day according to all dispositions.
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	And if it is in the days of summer, then it covers that you touch or starve the bone on the 7th day, having that which is beneath the bone be corrupted by the peritoneum, and that the accidents we have recounted occur.
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	And if the fracture has already penetrated the skull covering the brain, and it is broken into small pieces and fragmented, then be careful to collect the broken parts together and reassemble them according to how you will recommend it to yourself.
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	It is that you shave the head of the patient plagued, and discover above the bone according to custom and manner as possible according to the figure of the plague, and that it be lighter above the patient.
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	And if you need to make an incision in the bone, with a flux of blood or aposteme careful, then you oppose yourself to that which is necessary, and it is that you fill the place of drained fluids with wine and rose oil, and make the plague rest until the aposteme is sedated, and be sure of the flux of blood; and then begin in the circle of the bone and in its ablation.
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	And that will be according to one of two manners of operation.
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And one manner is that you cut the bone with an incision of straight style, and this is its form: And then administer another incision like this, a little farther later than that; and this is its form.
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	And then administer more incisions farther later according to the need.
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	And it is necessary to give you the number of diverse incisions, some of which are farther later than others; and some of them are shorter than others and are in the rear of the affected extremities, and are of iron or felt.
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	And use them to facilitate percussion on the incision so that it does not touch the head and lead to that.
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	And if the bone is strong, hard, then it is necessary to perforate in its circumference before you administer the incisions with the trowels, which are called non-deep trowels.
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	And they are not so named thus except that those do not touch the term of the bone of the test to what is approaching it, so that the trowel is round extremity or margin above that which is beneath the head of the agute seeming like a margin or small circle, which prohibits being submerged and passes the thickness of the bone.
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	And it is convenient that you take many of these trowels, a large number of which will conveniently fit the thickness of each bone, until it is present in all tests of the brain, the extremity of which is agute, the quantity in length and brevity being according to the quantity of thickness of this test.
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	And this is the form of three species of trowels: The quality of perforating in the circumference of the broken bone is that it pauses the trowel on the bone and revolves it with the fingers until you know that the bone has been penetrated; and then permits the trowel to another place, and pauses what is between all the tracts the quantity of the grossness of the radius or environs it.
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	And then you incise with incisions what is between each tract of the bone, and make it more subtle that you can operate on it in the end of levity, thus as we have said, until you eradicate the bone, or at your hand, or for some other cause among those instruments which are prepared for that, thus as you have talons and forceps subtle.
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	And it is necessary that you keep with all caution so that the incision does not touch any cause of the ciphering.
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	And thus you will have circumvented the bone perforating, and it will be separated from the ciphering if it is continued in it, and you will have extracted that, it is necessary to shave and equalize it in the asperity of the bone of what is in the other instrument similar to an incision, more imperial because it is more tender and more subtle than the other incisions.
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	And if you find some small bone fragments and splinters, then take them in a way that is facilitated by what is necessary for your instruments; and then cure the plague with liniments and unguents which we have said.
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the other manner of operation is ligature, far from pain, which Galen and the lantern demonstrate for great illumination; and this is its sermon: necessary is it to you at the commencement that you begin to discover the part of the bone in the place where the fracture is most vehement and most manifest, until when you have discovered that part and have placed beneath it the extremity of this trowel slow and gentle, of which this is the form.
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	And it is that the lentiform part is lazy and does not incise any cause, and the acute part is of it in two lengths beforehand in length, thus as times; that the lentiform part be adjusted to the ciphering on the face of the incident acute in the bone.
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	And then you percute on the incision of a part with a small hammer until you incise all the bone facilitated thus as it is revolved, and you are sure of the scalp that does not happen in the accident that you fear in no manner, and if the medicant was the most foolish of all men and the most ignorant of them; certainly, and if he was asleep.
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	When there is a cause annexed to the bone of the little finger in certain places of the bone, it will incite that of the hand at the extremity of the index finger, and it will be facilitated by the removal of its noisy and painful joints.
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the little finger, and that which is absorbed or removed from the bone is its surface, and you remain in its roughness and subtle stagnations, then it is necessary to remove that roughness and eradicate those stagnations with subtle roots, for which you have prepared the number, of various quantities so that it is possible to administer them in all places most conveniently and directly according to what you perceive in your operation on the broken bone and its figure.
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	And it is necessary to administer in your reason the quality that makes the bone start with the most latent of those roots, and then use the most subtle part of it, and do not cease to do so according to continuity until you reach administering the entire tone and the entire subtle part of all those.
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	Perhaps in one of the other small, hair-like fractures, it is necessary to administer a cure according to what you perceive in order to achieve rectification of it.
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	And it is because it is not diminished regarding all those that have studied in this art.
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	And we have written about what we have shown in great fractures.
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	And if the little finger is restrained when you eradicate the bone, then it is necessary to take a drap of oil according to the quantity of the wound, and submerge it in rose oil, and place it over the orifice of the wound; and then take another doubled or tripled drap and submerge it in wine and rose oil and place it over the primary drap, making it as lightweight as possible so that it does not cause discomfort; and then administer the liniment gently, and do not strain it except for the quantity that the wound has, solely.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	And leave it like that for a day or two until you are sure of the apostema's caution; and then dissolve it and administer medicines as those which are superfluous dryness, such as resin of flax and flour of barley, and powder of gum and aristology, and similar to those.
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	And it is that you make of these powdered medicines a powder that is powdered over the wound, just as they are dry; and universally, administer in all medicine of property, which is that it cleanses and does not bite.
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	And beware according to your virtue that the wound in your cure is clean; and it should not be in the filthy mud of poison or another; nor should you allow virulence to accumulate in it; for when it is adjusted over the little finger of the brain, it corrupts it and poisons it, and falls upon the patient with a malicious malignity.
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	And it falls upon the patient's head, as if it is Mondificated (affected) by the bone and worsened when the cure of it is misdirected, and it turns black on its surface; and therefore consider then that it falls to the patient with accidents that we have mentioned, knowing that it is perilous in all aspects.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas .iii., e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if it does not turn black unless by the medicine that is placed beneath, and it is in virtue of that medicine that makes it turn black, then it is necessary to take a melon's share and three parts of rose oil. and mix those liniments into a drap, and then place it over the patient's head; and then cure it with the species of cures that converge until it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter 3.
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	On the restoration of the nose when it is fractured.
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	Know that it is not fractured nose unless two parties are simultaneously broken, or one of those hollow veins, because in it there are two bones, since the party below is cartilaginous, and it is not fractured and does not fall to it except with twisting and tortuosity and sinewy connection.
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	Perhaps if one of the two parties of it is fractured, then it is necessary to introduce the small finger into the nasal passage, and that you grasp that fracture deep within the entire indicated finger, and with the entire finger beforehand, until the nose returns according to its natural figure.
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	And it is done for you to facilitate, and beware that you do not fall into that pitfall of your operation on the patient's limb.
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	And if the fracture is in the upper party of the nose, and the finger does not reach it, then it is necessary to equalize with the extremity of the radius on which the little finger is thickened.
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	And if the fracture is in two parties, then you make the similar thing to that.
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	And try to restore it on the first day of the fracture, if possible; and if not, then wait seven or ten days for the rest of the apostema's caution.
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	And then introduce into the extremity of the nose a drap of oil, if the fracture is in one party, or half of two calves, if the fracture is in two parties, and it should be in the thickened calyx of such quantity that it fills the hole of the nose.
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	And here is the translation:
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	Some veins are inserted into the nose, in place of a vein, pain from a ulcer that is enveloped by a lion's cloth; and it happens that you have a fracture of the nose very violently and that the patient is not prohibited from inspiration.
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	And this cause is not necessary for you; and if you want, do it, and if you want, do veins.
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	And if an abscess forms on the nose, apply a candle made of wax or tallow to the nostrils, or an ointment made from violet oil or rose oil.
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	But if an abscess does not form, then I think that you should apply a poultice made of flour of sizami and powder of cofitz in a poultice of honey; and then pause on the lion's paw, and do not lift the nose for any cause.
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	But if the bones of the nose are broken with a small fracture or are comminuted, then I think that you should bind above them, and extract them with instruments that are convenient for them; and then sew up the wound, and cure it in such a way that it becomes incarnated and consolidated, and apply a poultice that is convenient for it.
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	And if a wound develops within the nose, then I think that you should treat it with veins and administer lead pipes until it is completely healthy.
Capitol .iiii.	Chapter 4.
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	On the restoration of the jaw when it is fractured.
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	When the jaw is broken and the fracture of it is not infected, observe then if the fracture is only superficial, and not broken in two and curved to the inner parts, then its knowledge is easier.
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	And therefore, if the fracture is on the right side, you should insert the right index finger into the patient's mouth; and similarly, if the fracture is on the left jaw, then insert the left index finger of the right hand; and thus you will facilitate the reduction of the inner fracture by pushing it back into its proper place, with your other hand on the outer side of the bone; and in this way, you will make a decent alignment.
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	And if the fracture of the jaw is separated into two parts, then I think that you should administer extension of the two parts according to a straight direction until it is possible to align them.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	And if the teeth are dislocated due to concussion, then strengthen those that you expect will remain in a thread of gold or silver or cedar; and then pause on the broken jaw with wax tallow, and pause on the double-layered cloth, and pause on the great star-shaped decent bandage, or a piece of solo gum at the length of the jaw; and then tie it below according to how you have prepared the ligature of it and how it is convenient for application, so that it is not destroyed.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	And command the patient to rest and be tranquil, and pause from eating the nourishing food of the lion's broth.
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	And if you think that the figure has been altered in some manner, then count to three days; and then rectify what has been altered of it and apply a poultice made of honey, or album of honey, or flour of cizami, because you will have obtained the tallow of it, and pause on the lion's paw.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	And then, as it stands annexed and adjusted the poultice on it, and the disposition of the bone is not altered, leave it like that, so that it does not become dislocated until it is healthy and strengthens the fracture; because many veins are stretched by this fracture for three weeks.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	And if another vein forms an abscess, then administer what we have said about many veins in the treatment of it until it is healthy, and remove that abscess.
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	And if the fracture is infected, then consider whether it is a piece of bone separated or shattered, then you should subtly remove those shatters with instruments that are convenient for them in the removal of those from the instruments.
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And if the orifice of the wound is narrow, then you should amplify it with a fleobotomy according to the quantity of your need.
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	And then when you have removed those shatters, and of those nothing will remain, then you should sew up the orifice of the wound if it is wide; and otherwise, pause on one of the poultices that are convenient for it and incarnate it, until it is healed.
Capitol .v.	Chapter 5.
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	On the restoration of the ankle when it is sprained.
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	Many veins are broken in the ankle joint beneath the foot, and that fracture is made in one of three ways.
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	Because it is broken, or separated, or separated into two parts that do not touch each other; and it is easier to restore it; or it happens that they come together in the shatters, and it is difficult to restore it; or it happens that the fracture is infected.
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	And the operation in that case, when the fracture is a serious wound, it is necessary to have two ministers present, so that one holds the injured limb and the other extends the broken neck on that side.
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	And then adjust the fracture in its proper position within, so that it takes the shape of the bone according to its curve, and is not in a slight prominence or concavity.
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	And if you need extensions, then take care to place a layer of cloth or wool underneath the patient's thigh, and let its size be according to the quantity of your necessity; and stretch and elevate the broken limb and wrap the cloth around your hand within, so that it adjusts the fracture accordingly.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	And if you cannot reduce the extremity of the broken limb to its previous parts, so that it is pervaded by the preon, then take care that the patient is resupinated on their back, and place it on the larger muscle of one thigh, in greatness.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	And the minister presses on the muscle of the patient at the parts below so that the bone of the broken limb is elevated as it is in its socket, and then you straighten the fracture and adjust it within its proper position.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	Maybe you feel numbness of the broken limb and its joints, then take care to bend over that and extract those numbness to facilitate.
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if it is retained in the bone, then you make a precise incision on one of the incisors that have been prepared for that, since you had placed below the broken limb the instrument that serves the purpose; and it is an instrument of wood or iron of which this is the shape.
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	And it is similar to a scoop of which this is the concavity; and let its width be according to what you have needed of it, according to the size of the bone or the smallness of it.
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	Maybe the length of it is according to what is possible for you in the operation; that you have two extremities thus at times, and one extremity is wide and the other is narrow.
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	And if the disruption of the wound which you have incised when you have extracted the numbness from the bone is wide, and yet secure from aposteme caution, then you adjust the two lips of the wound in suture.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	And if the disruption is small, or you fear aposteme caution, then you fill the wound with drainage and poultices according to the quantity of the separation of the wound.
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	And if you fear aposteme caution, then put a warm compress in wine and oil and rose water, and place it over that.
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	Maybe the structure of the bone when it is a wound and a section, is that you place an emplaster made of flour of millet in album of wolf's milk, and place it over the stoppage of the limb, and then place a cushion underneath the thigh, if you need it; and then take a humectant, so that the torque which holds the Sarrazis is not too long, and its width is about one palm or around that; and then place duplicated poultices over the stoppage and emplaster; and then take a subtle table stake of which the width is three fingers and similar length; and then wrap it in a compress, and then wrap that compress with the stake on the site above the fracture site; and then place humectant thus as you revolve, and revolve it over the neck of the limb and underneath the thigh, and underneath the thigh of the patient, and reduce it over all parts, and when the structure of the fracture is in structured descent, and that which is not hidden from you.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	And thus, that the stake does not remain on top of the broken bone; and for this reason take care that you see the patient every day, so that when the ligament is mollified or the stake is already removed, then you straighten it and strengthen the ligature.
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	And then place the patient to sleep on their chest, and place underneath their thigh, removing from them in the night a small cushion; so that in this way the injured limb is elevated above the mattress of that, and thus the fracture of the broken limb is elevated above the muscle; or it is the arm tied to the neck.
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	And do not loosen the ligature unless you fear an impending crisis or aposteme, until twelve days.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	And then renew the emplaster if you have seen the face of it up to that, and adjust in the structure and restore it and let it be until it is restored and the fracture of the broken limb is coagulated.
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	And it is strengthened and comforted according to the months in twenty-eight days, and some gentle exercises are done at home, which are made in less time than that.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter 6.
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	On the restoration of fractures of the shoulder.
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	The shoulder blade is broken in the broad place of it and does not break unless at its edges.
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	And then when the place of it is broken — and it is broken in the middle place of it — and it is not known unless by touch, then according to the figure of the fracture beforehand you prepare it and reduce it according to its natural figure in all manner of engineering which is possible for you.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	And then place the poultice over the painful area, mixing wool with album of egg and stopping the flow; and place a pillow of double-layered cloth; and place a poultice on the flat surface of the table, according to the quantity of the whole spatula or maybe just a little.
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	Perhaps the surface is concave in some areas of the spatula, then you should bend that concavity with a stopper, and adjust the surface according to equality.
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	And then stretch downwards with a long humiliator against decent constriction and firmness of the surface, so that it does not move away from its own place.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	And consider the ligament each day; and all softened that it should be mollified, another day and stretch and equalize the surface if it has moved away from its own place.
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	And elevate the patient over their own bed thus.
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	And the spatula is restored in 20 days or in 25.
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	And then when this number is completed, then you dissolve the ligament, and you will know for certain that those are of the bones which initially were not tempered nor their dissolution.
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	And if you proceed to the place of the bone's wound and remove the crust, then you will separate above it, and lift it, and do according to what we have said about the fracture of the forked aposteme, carefully cut so that it does not stick here.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter 7.
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	On the restoration of a foot fracture.
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	The foot sometimes breaks in its middle place and that end is twisted; perhaps the extremities of it are moved so as to be crooked and comminuted.
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	And of the accidents of it when its middle is broken, it declines to the internal parties and sticks to the great pain, and difficulty in walking, and toes, and strong weakness, and vomiting blood; and it is declared in the cavity of the broken bone and does not hide from the feeling.
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	And the restoration of it is that the patient should be resupinated over their own back, and a cushion between the pillows of one thigh; and then press on its muscles, and adjust its ribs with the hands of two ribs, and subtly you operate on it and in the equation according to all manner that is possible and that converges to it, until the figure of the bone returns as it was.
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	And then place a poultice on it with emplastre and stop, and place another one above the table's subtle surface of sawdust or of chalk and of their similar levitation, since you envelop that in cloth; and then subtly operate on that over the broken bone so that it does not move away; and go with a binding according to retonditat on some days, and strengthen that with decent constriction; and then consider the binding at all hours, and when it is mollified, strengthen that.
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	And if necessary, provoke a deslimentation of that which corrodes or prurites, or pain, or aposteme that sticks in the place, then you touch and detach it and eradicate the emplastre and rectify what sticks per its manner of cure; and then reduce the emplastre, if sometimes it faces that; and adjust to its constriction until it is sanctified.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter 8.
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	On the restoration of ribs when they are fractured.
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	You know that fracture of the ribs does not occur except in thick places that follow the back; and of the extremities of their party within do not stick to those contritions unless for what is cartilaginous.
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	And knowledge of it is not hidden from the feeling, because of the inquiry into its measurements.
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	And the restoration is thus that it equalizes the fracture with its measurements according to the possible manner, until it is equalized as it was, and then applies an emplastre and strengthens the broken bone with a surface, if it needs that.
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	And if the fracture of the ribs declines to the internal parties, then it sticks to the patient with vehement pain and puncture, thus as puncture that sticks to one who has suffered a fall, and because of which the bone puts forth a veil; and it sticks to the difficulty of walking, and toes, and vomiting of much blood; and this is of difficult cure.
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	And now the Antixes are ingenious in that with many clever contrivances.
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	And of them, it is said: it is necessary that you pause the windings of the patient that engender inflammation and flatulence, so that the belly is inflated and extended, and the fracture is pushed to the parties before.
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	Perhaps we have avoided that so it does not cause the lightness to generate an aposteme, if it does not stick; and if it does stick, then it helps with that.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	And they said some of them that it should be paused underneath the window and then sucked with a strong fortitude; and it is similar to reasoning, perhaps because the emperor was afraid that the window would attract the superfluities to the place due to debilitation.
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	And some of the affected areas are covered: it is necessary that the area be protected with a woolen cloth in which they have already been submerged, and small poultices are placed between the ribs so that it may be filled, which is the ligature that envelops according to the technique; and then the patient is treated with careful attention of food and medicine.
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	And if the cause is a strong constraint of the patient who does not suffer, and the bones are punctured by a pointed instrument, be careful over the patient, then it is necessary to make an incision on the affected area, uncovering the broken rib, and then pause regarding that instrument which preserves the vital spirit, the memory of which precedes, and which facilitates the bones, and extract that.
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	And then adjust the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with a bandage, and heal that with implants so that it may be healthy.
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	And if an abscess forms, then you touch and inject poultices into the rosated oil and pause over the area, and the patient is treated with what is suitable for the internal abscess.
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	And let it rise above the quilt on which they sleep, so that it may be healthy.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter 9.
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	On the restoration of fractures of the spine and neck.
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	Some weakened vertebrae of the neck fracture, and then they have a similar attraction, and similarly to the spine of the back.
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	And when it happens to some and you want to know if they will be healthy or not, then consider, because if the veins are more weakened and stupefied and deadened and cannot be nourished nor extended nor strengthened, and when they constrict them with the tight bands or pierce them with the needle, and do not feel pain in them, then you know that they are not healthy, and among the same dispositions it is mortal.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	And if you touch them and feel constriction in the bands and piercing, then you know that the nut of the bone is saved and that the patient's wounds are healing.
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	And if you see the vertebrae of the neck similar to this and you want to know if they will be healthy or not, then consider their feet.
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	Then if you see that they are already weakened, it happens to those who have been affected in the same way, and then when you sit on the back of the patient, and there is ventosity and egestion according to their will, and some weakened vertebrae rise above the back and want to urinate but cannot, then you know that they are mortal, and therefore do not trouble yourself with their cure.
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	Maybe if none of these causes happen to them, the cause is better and less serious.
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	And the treatment for them is that you perform a sedation of the abscess with caution, because it pauses over the affected spine with rosated oil sol, or with mugwort of housing; pause on that day until the abscess is sedated with caution.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	And then pause with one of the comforting and soothing implants, and strengthen over that with a bandage; and command the patient to use rest and tranquility and not to sleep on the affected side where they feel pain until they are healthy.
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	And if it happens that the attraction of the bone is separated from them, or some cause that has already been separated from them, then it is necessary to dissect over the codena and to remove that bone; and then adjust the two lips of the wound, with a suture if it is large; and then treat that with an encarnation of the enguiments, so that it may be healthy.
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	Maybe if the back of the bone is broken, and it is the end of the coccyx, then it is necessary that you insert the finger into the left hand under the buttock, and that you straighten the broken bone as much as possible for secondary alignment; and then pause on the implant and the asterion, if you are not skilled in those, and then strengthen that.
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	And if you feel broken vertebrae in them, then you feel over that, and remove that, and heal the wound with the treatment that precedes so that it may be healthy.
Capitol .x.	Chapter 10.
De restauracio de la ancha.	On the restoration of the narrowness (or constriction).
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	The bones of the narrownesses are easily broken, and if they break, then the fracture of them is not only a communication in the extremities of those and are inserted in the length and decline to the internal parts; and it happens that the patient has pain in the area and piercing, and the leg is stupefied when it is fractured.
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	And the restoration of them is that you extend your hand over that until it is above the fracture, which is the shape of them.
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	And if the fracture is at the extremity of them so alone, then you straighten that according to your apparel for secondary alignment until it is assembled into its natural shape.
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	Maybe if the fracture is in the long or that which has already declined to the lower parts, then you make the patient sit on their back belly up so that it may be prepared for your restoration of that fracture.
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	And then when you have bandaged that, place it over the plaster, and then place it over that straight stick or splint, and strengthen it with a structure so that there is no threat of fracture or movement of the stick.
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	You bandage the cavity so that it fills in there and takes on the structure according to equality, and command the patient to sleep on their back or side, either way.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	Perhaps you hasten the abscess with caution, then you cease the extension of it and its restoration until the abscess is settled, and place over it what settles according to what precedes; and then return to its restoration, and strengthen that thus covers.
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	And if you hasten them in the affected bones or they are communicated, then you treat them.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter 11.
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	On the restoration of the fracture of the adjacent.
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	Adjutori is that which is between the elbow and the head of the shoulder.
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	And if it is torn, then the restoration of it is in one of two ways, one of which is that you take a wooden splint placed according to this form:
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	And tie them with two extreme ligaments, and then they are suspended from the elevated place.
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	And follow the patient on a stool; and then place the broken arm on the stick until it reaches the small spot of it in the middle place where the curvature of the stick is attached.
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	And then suspend it on that heavy cushion, or the master extends it to the divided parts below; and then the doctor says that the fracture is in the most affected places, until the fracture returns according to its cover.
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	And the other way is that the patient is resupinated on their cervical vertebrae and suspends the hand of the neck with a ligament; and then command two ministers that one of them holds what is above the fracture in its most affected places; and the other holds it below; and almost both of them extend to their part.
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	And if you want the extension to be stronger, then you strengthen over the fracture with a ligament and over that with another ligament, and almost both of the two ministers extend to their two parts.
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	And then if the fracture is near the extremity of the muscle, then it covers that half of the ligament over the knot and the other below the fracture towards the elbow.
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	And similarly if the fracture is near the elbow, then it covers that the ligament is placed over that place and over that elbow.
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	You bandage it with facilitated and easy handling, and then when it is bandaged according to what covers and is applied for good application, then strengthen it if you do not hasten the abscess with caution.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	Perhaps you hasten the abscess with caution, then leave the structure until the seventh day, and place over it a soft, folded cloth anointed with good oil and rose oil until the abscess is settled, and then you strengthen it.
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	And the way of strengthening it is that you place a plaster over the fracture, and then place an enveloping of new cloth over the plaster; and then adjust the arm over that adjacent part, and place its hand bent over the shoulder muscle.
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	And place the cloth and strengthen over the adjacent part the arm so that the arm is in its natural position, if it does not prohibit anything from the broken bone.
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	And then use the natural positions.
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	And it is that you place over the fracture that position which is more stable and stronger than the other positions; and place between each position the width of the finger, and let the length of the positions be according to the break with an addition of three fingers from the entire part.
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	And then strengthen over the positions with the structure which was mentioned at the beginning of the chapter.
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	And it is that your structure over the place of the fracture be more straight.
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	And when the fracture is well-aligned, the structure is less.
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	And so if you follow the situation of the positions and the structure as we have said in the hour when you restore the member to its natural situation, then you do it.
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you fear an abscess with caution, then leave the structure and positions until the seventh day as we have said.
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	And then consider the ligament in all parts for three days so that it does not accelerate in the place of pruritus or inflammation; or it is prohibited to bring food to the member by disposition of superfluous structure; and thus rectify all according to what we have said.
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	Perhaps you are confident that it does not accelerate any cause of this, then do not remove the ligature until three days or more.
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	And let the patient's sleep be on their back, and the most affected places be above the stomach.
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	And place over the adjacent part a full covering of soft cloth bandage, and consider at all hours of the night or day that the figure of the broken member is not dislocated or dissolved, or that the ligament is mollified, thus rectify all according to your virtue.
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	Stop the hand of the patient according to the order in which we have given it, so that the hand is subtle in the beginning of the treatment until it becomes stronger; and then cover the hand of the patient.
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	Because the custom of the assistant and the leg of the patient is to be strengthened in 40 days; and then cover that they are dislocated and administered a bath and medicated with those who correct it.
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	And if the fracture is badly treated, then do not dislocate from that limb and the stitches until a day or until two months.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter 12.
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	On the restoration of fracture of the arm.
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	The arm is composed of two bones which are called two forearm bones; of which one is small, and it is the one that supports the little finger, and the other is large and it is the one that is placed below the small finger, from the part below.
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	And often the major forearm bone is broken alone, or the small one, and often they are broken together.
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	And when the small forearm bone is broken above, then the restoration of it is easier, and its healing is even easier.
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	And when the forearm bone is broken below, the fracture of it is bad, and its healing is difficult.
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	And worse than that is when both bones are broken together.
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	Therefore if the bone that is broken is the small forearm bone above, then it is convenient for the doctor to make a little extension to facilitate the restoration of it, so that it can be easily straightened.
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	But if the large forearm bone is the one that is broken, then it is necessary to make a more forceful extension.
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	And if both forearm bones are broken together, then it is necessary that you make the extraction even stronger.
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	And it is necessary that you make the shape of the hand, with the restoration of it and the extension stretched out on a cushion, and the palm of the hand is above, more than all the other fingers, and the auricular finger is lower than the other fingers, and the patient is seated on a curved chair.
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	And there should be a cushion beneath it in its altitude or inclination, so that the patient does not incur trouble.
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	And then extend the minister's arm from below upwards to the sixth hand or limb, and another minister extends similarly from above.
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	And then the doctor straightens the bone so that it returns to its better shape as much as possible.
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	And if in the fracture of the bone there are splinters, then you should thoroughly remove all the pieces from their place with your skill.
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	And if it appears that the splinter is separated and holds the codeine and does not belong to your hope in the restoration of it, then you finish over it and leave that according to the manner which we have mentioned above.
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	But if the fracture is a plague, you have already made a special chapter for that, and so take the care of it.
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	And if you suspect an abscess at the beginning of your restoration, then line up a cloth with cerate made from rose oil and white wax, and be more subtle between speculation and subtlety, and stretch the cloth over it in a subtle structure until the abscess is calmed; and then remove the cerate and place an emplaster prepared from powder of moly clay, and afterwards place stitches; and let the stitch that is placed over that fracture be more laded and stronger.
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	And you know that the number of stitches on the arm is seen in the major dispositions, or whether the fracture is in one forearm bone or in both bones together.
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	And then place your structure over the site of the fracture more strongly and more vehemently, and when it is more certain that the extraction is above the fracture or below it, place the structure a little more soft according to what precedes the remembrance of it at the beginning of the chapter.
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And the cloths that are wrapped around the fracture should be moist humectants, and not dry or harsh, and the thread with which it is strengthened should be of a medium thickness, more subtle between fine and coarse, as we have recommended.
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	And consider the limb and the ligament to be adjusted for several days.
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	And if you suspect any cause for which correction is necessary, as we previously mentioned the one that affects the limb, and then it is necessary that you immerse the limb in warm water until the correction ceases.
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	And let the limb not be constrained until it rests, and then return the structure.
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	And if the extraction is already softened and the bone is already restored and similar to those, then correct all that with your skill.
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	And consider that the nourishment is prohibited from reaching the limb due to excess of structure, because then it is necessary that you soften it a little and let it for several days until it runs towards the nourishment, and then strengthen it.
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	But if the patient does not suspect any cause of those that we have mentioned, then it is not necessary to be dislocated for about 20 days or around that.
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	And then you should suspend the patient's hand for their vertebral movement agitation, and make them sleep on their back.
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	You know that this fracture is restored in 10 days or in 32 days, or perhaps it is restored in 28 days, and all this depends on the disposition of the complications and the disposition of the vertebrae.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter 13.
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	On the restoration of fractures of the finger and of the toes.
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	You know that the fingers of the hand and the toes are prone to fracture, and they do not unite quickly unless treated with well-moisturized bandages.
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	And when the hand fracture or dislocation unites, then it is necessary that the patient follows a straight and equal path, and then you should place their hand on that extended surface.
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	And then the minister extends the broken bones and the doctor extracts those that are not well-conjoined, so they may be in good conjunction.
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	And then it is necessary to apply a plaster and a bandage, if an abscess does not unite quickly; and then you should place a star-shaped dressing underneath according to the quantity of the wound, and you have already enveloped that in a linen cloth.
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	Moreover, if the splint is on the divided parts of the palm of the hand, and then it seems like a spear of cloth, and you command the patient to stretch that with their split palm; then you should strengthen it with a long cloth.
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	And the star-shaped dressing on the body with cloth in which it is elevated, so that the body may be applied to the palm; and strengthen that according to what is necessary.
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	Moreover, if the fracture is on the divided parts of the forearm, then it is necessary to place a star-shaped dressing underneath and another dressing on the divided part below in the palm, so that the hand may be straightened and directed; and then you should place the structure, thus as the hand is revolved to the right angle between the fingers in the ligaments.
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	And if the fracture occurs at the knuckles of the fingers, then it is a small finger, it should be joined according to what is necessary and then strengthened in the palm and if you wish, place a small straight splint per so that the fracture may be elevated and not bent.
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	Moreover, if the fracture is in the other fingers, thus as in that of the middle place, or in the index finger, or in the ring finger, or in the little finger, then it should be joined and tied with the finger itself; or all the joints according to continuity, and it is better; or place on that small star-shaped dressing, thus as we have said about the fingers.
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	And consider, in your restoration, and then place that, the disposition of abscesses and opposing — in the tie-like operation — in what is necessary when any cause of those occurs, according to which the narrative of it is reiterated.
Capitol .xiv.	Chapter 14.
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	On the restoration of fractures of the hip bone.
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	The hip bone, which is well-moisturized, is broken and declared to the patient according to what is converted to the part above and below.
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	And the restoration of it is done in such a way that one ligament is strengthened over the fracture and another ligament below the fracture, and the patient lies prostrate on their back and on their face.
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	And then the minister extends all the ligaments to their part according to quality, when the fracture is in the middle place of the bone.
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	Moreover, if it is near the root of the hip, then the ligament is propelled to the dentate part of the pentagonal place, so that the extension fits into them, and the other ligament below the fracture.
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	And similarly if the break is near the dentate part, then it should be made to propel the ligament to the dentate part, and the extension should be to the parts below.
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	And then the doctor joins the bone with both hands in a natural way so that it reduces to its natural semblance and the bone is joined by good conjunction; then it is necessary to apply a plaster and structure, if an abscess does not unite quickly on the affected limb.
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	Moreover, if an abscess occurs in it, then you should leave that for several days until the abscess is calmed down, and then return to your cure.
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	The structure of it should be done thus: it is necessary to envelop around the fracture a hard bandage, and double that two or three times, and remove the superfluous part; and then envelop the leg until it reaches the ankle and the root of the hip.
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	And insert a long fillet between the hip and the leg near the dentate part below, and you will have the extremities of the fillet from the divided part above the two parts, and then revolve around the leg and the hip that which superfluously flows from the bandage.
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	And then place on the hip in the place of that fracture thus, and place one star-shaped dressing over the bone of the leg.
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	And then fill the empty spaces between the leg and the hip with many towels, so that the extraction can be facilitated.
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	And then begin to apply a strong structure over the site of the fracture with three or four wraps, and when you have already alleviated the swelling at the site of the fracture, your structure should be less tight and easier and more gentle.
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	And then extend the two extremities of the thigh to the parts below until they reach the ankle of the foot, and strengthen both extremities of the steel strips on the other part so that the swelling does not return to its original location.
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	And then place the structure over that, so that it does not touch the corroding member or aposteme of caution nor inflammation and similar to those; and if it touches any of those causes, then cut away from it, and rectify what has touched everything, according to what we have said many times before.
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	But if there is a bone in the bone that puts pressure, then be careful that you do not displace it according to what is possible for you; and if not, place it back over it and cure what was previously mentioned until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	And some times it is strengthened by adjusting this fracture of the hip to the steel strips, just as we have said in the assistant and in the arm.
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	But especially in the restoration of it, in such a way that it does not touch the lame and crippled part; and if it is restored alone, another thing that must be applied to the other leg, then it is necessary that it limp for some time.
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	And you know that the hip is strengthened in 40 days or a few months, and all this is according to the diversity of the complications and other dispositions.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter 15.
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	On the restoration of the fracture of the wheel-shaped bone of the forearm.
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	You know that a fracture of the wheel-shaped bone of the forearm is very difficult to treat, but it touches many times on the aforementioned attrition.
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	But if it touches the fracture, then it is not just a crack or a break in its parts, and that is a plague or several plagues, and about that everything has been said with feeling.
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	And the restoration of it is in such a way that it is grafted with what has been broken off from its parts, and reunited with the digits until it is aggregated and conjoined as much as possible for equilibrium and facilitation and fabrication.
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	And then pause to apply a plaster and place it over that round steel, if you need it; and strengthen below with a structure suitable for that.
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	And then consider all the dispositions that we have recommended in other fractures, just as it is caution and similar to those in which one opposes every accident in what is convenient for it to be healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter 16.
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	On the restoration of the fracture of the leg.
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	You know that in the leg there are two bones, of which one is large, and it is named by the name of the leg; and the other is subtle, and is named fibula.
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	And it touches some species of fracture that touch the two bones of the arm, and for that reason it is made restoration of it just as restoration of the arm by grafting, and the operation of it is one.
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	And if both bones are broken together, the leg is converted into all its parts.
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	And if the subtle bone is broken, the leg is converted into the anterior parts.
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	And if the large bone is broken, it puts that below, and it is one of those causes that are not well joined.
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	And then administer extension and equilibrium and ligature of the bones according to that grafting.
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	But especially be careful, if the fracture of the leg is already having many satanic things, that the extension should be more gentle and easier, and alleviate your virtue.
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	And in the leg there is some cause of operation on the arm, and it is when you graft the steel strips and complete all the entire operation, then you will take measures of wood or pine which are placed below the causes that were placed in solutes, and so make a gentle movement of palm branches; alleviate those with small grocers, and do not be rough with the handles, and let it be the length of those according to the length of the leg, and from the forearm down to the lowest part.
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	And then envelop over each cloth in two wraps according to the length of it, and place one over the part of the leg on one side and the other on the other side, and so from the forearm down to the lowest part of the foot.
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	And then place the two steel strips in three places of two extremities and at the middle location, because with this structure the leg is prohibited from bending to the right and left parts, and it stands for good stability.
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	And then administer a wooden splint according to the length of the leg; and it should be placed on the leg so that it conserves its movement.
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	It is most important that you do this in a fracture, and when it is done thusly it is properly treated.
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	And then consider each day the condition and study it in the last study, and you guard against aposteme and inflammation or other similar causes; and when any of these causes occur, then pause and turn to the one that needs to be healed within.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter 17.
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	About the fracture of the ankle and the bones of the foot and the toes.
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	The ankle does not always suffer a complete fracture; rather the bones of the foot sometimes suffer fragmented fractures; and the toes of the foot rarely suffer fractures, and do not occur unless there is great violence in the means of disposition.
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	And if the bones of the foot receive a fracture and sometimes those bones are elevated above their place, then the patient stops putting their foot on the ground prepared thus like an ant.
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	And then stop putting one foot on what is elevated by those bones, and then press, and bend, and insert it back into its place.
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	And then apply a plaster and stop above, and put below the belly of the foot a small table to which are attached two flat plates.
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	And then strengthen that around the foot in a descending structure, since you have enveloped that with drapes and other causes of which you are aware.
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	And when it passes three or four days, then you remove the bandage, because you will find the bones in place, either well-set or well-dislocated, and the operation on them is thus conformed.
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	But if some toes are out of place, then restore them, and insert them thus as you were and recommend to you in the restoration of the toes of the hand.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	And then stop the out-of-place toe according to the length of the toe, and let it be slightly bent; and then put below the foot this table which I have recommended to you, and strengthen that around in a descending structure.
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	But if what is out of place is two or three or more bones, then you stop above each toe according to its quantity enveloped in a lion's drap, and strengthen the table at the lowest part of the foot, and stand on one of the plates of the table opposite the belly of the foot so that it holds with good retention.
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	And it is convenient for you that you do not forget to consider all the causes which I have told you about in other fractures of accidents that we have discussed; and pause at every accident in what needs to be healed.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter 18.
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	About the fracture of the neck of the thigh and the bone of the perineum and the bruise of the hip.
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	When the neck of the thigh is dislocated, then make it settle in its natural position, and then incline it to the back of the two little ones, and let it be held from behind.
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	And then the midwife places the neck of the hip, and makes it as in the neck of the other thus like a sphere; and then the thigh is concuted, and raises the back of the little one little by little, because all that is forgotten returns until it is denuded to the natural position of the neck thus like a sphere and the dislocated bone returns.
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	And then apply poultices on the back of it, and when you want to urinate, remove the hip thus facilitating and then urinate, and reduce and return according to the manner according to which you began, and then return to the first poultice.
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	And do it thus for seven days or around that, because it is restored.
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	And if you want, take an egg of olive oil and strengthen it over the trajectory of the hip with a tube of cane; and insert the whole vesicle into the neck of the hip, and then sufflate through the tube with vertue until the vesicle is inflated within the neck, because the fracture returns.
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	And then it is fulfilled by the hip and stays for some days according to what we have recommended, until it is healed.
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	And when the bone of the perineum of the hip or of the thigh is dislocated, then administer in the restoration and adjustment of it what we have recommended for the bone of the ankle.
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	And what is direct is not hidden in these proximate fractures, and little is omitted, mainly to that which is some study and use and intend my free book; because that fracture means to you in the major dispositions via directness in the restoration and in the structure of it, and therefore it is.
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	But in the bruise of the hip when it is dislocated, take a poultice of water, and put the bruise in that; and then stop above it with an enveloping drap, and let it be enveloped, and then let it be laid for three days or around that, and it will be healed.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter 19.
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	About the restoration of fractures of bones when they are plagued.
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	It is convenient for that which suffers fracture plagued, and mainly if the bone is large thus like the bone of the thigh or of the adjuster, or similar to that, that you take care and apply remedies as soon as possible if the conditions of fleubotomy are suitable for you or testify thus like we have said before.
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	If the disease flows with blood, then it is necessary that you be careful in retaining it with a bandage, so that you do not scatter it on the wounded place, unless some other cause is present.
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	And then begin to restore the fracture on that same day, and do not delay it, unless an abscess forms.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	But if an abscess forms quickly, then you delay the restoration of it until the sixth day, until the abscess is mature, and do not approach it on the third day or the fourth, lest you cause worse accidents.
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	But if the broken bone is prominent above the uncovered cartilage, then it is necessary that you perforate to reduce it and enclose it with your fingers, which are more facilitating and have little extension.
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	But if the extension is not at your disposal and the equipment of the fingers are more suitable, then reduce it with your fingers; and it is a instrument made of iron, its length is seven or eight inches and its width is according to the quantity of the disease; and for this reason it is necessary for the doctor to take four of these, three or four according to the quantity that he needs for the cure in all types of fracture.
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	And it is rounded, and it is in a small groove so that it does not double back against the compression on it during the hour of operation.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	And it is of acute extremity where the margin is in the six extremities; and it is below it with a large tenderness, and of its magnitude within the divided parts.
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	And this is its shape:
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	And it is named in Greek "labre volentz atelarem", which is a small spatula.
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	Because it is necessary that the extremity of the acute elevation be paused above the extremity of the prominent bone.
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	And press it in a gentle way until the bone returns, and it is enclosed with some equipment.
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	And then it is necessary to enclose the extremities of the fracture among them, and if the broken extremity is subtle, and you do not take that instrument for good acceptance, then it is necessary that you insert the extremity of that bone until the instrument has power over it.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	But if you cannot reduce the bone in all ways that we have recommended, then insert it in one of the ways that the doctors have said; or saw it with one of the saws in which way it is possible for you.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	And then scrape off what remains on the bone of roughness and small scores.
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	And when the bone is reduced, and then the reduction alleviates the vehement pain of the patient, then you know that the bone has not returned to its natural place; and therefore do this because you confer great joy to the patient.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	When you have completed the restoration which you do to the bone, and then submerge it in six stipations of black drap, and properly if it is in summer, and do not pause over the cerous plague or another cause in which there is oil, so that it does not cause putrefaction and corruption.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	And then administer stelas at the time of completing the restoration of the bone, and leave the uncovered plague in that place until you insert the forked instrument and use envelopments according to the quantity of the plague.
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	And be careful with all caution that you do not strengthen the plague in the fracture, because many times it happens that foolish doctors, and they cause death or corroding disease, or putrefaction, so it is sanity.
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	And if the structure of the fracture is loose, soft, different from the structure of other fractures.
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	And if the plague is great or is a bad plague, and you fear those accidents which we have recommended, and it causes pain in that place, then it does not matter that you pause over those stelas, but rather do that envelopment of hard draps in place of stelas and strengthen it with those.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	And when you have begun the plague for one or two days, which in it has generated pus, then you remove from below the drap which you had placed over it six times, and then administer calves, anointing with those of our customary practice, that is to medicate the plagues, thus anointing with tetrafarmacon and similarly to that.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	And it is convenient for you to dissolve the liament and consider the plague on any day morning and evening until it is consolidated and fixed, and it is necessary that the member be prepared in such a way that the putrefaction does not occur from it to the divided parts below, which are more facilitating.
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	If the plague passes many days, and it is not consolidated nor has it abscessed from the pus, then you know that here there are signs of the small wounds because it is necessary to inquire into the plague in the tents.
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	And of those signs, those that are separated remain and extract, those that from them are not separated and touch the member and cause pain, therefore it is necessary to insert them according to what is possible for you.
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	And if you hasten to the plague of ulceration or abscess, which are symptoms, or another kind of corruption and putrefaction, then it is clear that you pause at one of those things that converge on the cure of that which is preceded by narration in the seventh chapter.
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o .xxx.; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	And of that in which it is clear that you make the worst sermon and you present your passion: when the gros (large or serious) is trampled, emines over the member just like the bones of the thigh and of the helper and similarly to those of the large members, and that you do not presume attraction from it, nor the extraction of it, for which motives are hastened per that death; having laid aside that entry that you may be able to fortify your vein for if you are about to xx days or .xxx.; and then the cure of the plague is seen by you, and if it does not set aside that.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter xx.
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	On the cure of numbness that occurs in the vicinity of some fracture.
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	Many hastened steps occur in this numbness in the vicinity of health from fracture, and it is more probable that it is near the joints, and it is obstructed by the figure of the member; and therefore it prohibits the member from its natural operation.
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	Then consider if the numbness is recent and administer in those medicines that have stipulated thus co alsolen, enses, mira, sercacollo, acrassia, and similarly to those; inasmuch as you take some or all of those, and combine them, so they are stipulated with vi stiptic, or album of huou, or vi agree, and pause that over the numbness in estopa, and constrict them over it for good constriction.
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	And leave the extraction that does not dissolve it for many days; and then dissolve it and iterate another, until the numbness is removed; or stretch over that layer of lead decently, because lead has the property of removing all that which is inflamed in the members.
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Moreover if the numbness is already converted into stone and it is necessary to provoke an ostensible contradiction, and then divide it by the superior part of it, and remove the superfluous and eminent, or cut that with some alcus rezoris until it is removed; and cure it until it is healthy.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter xxI.
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	On the restoration of fracture when it is restored and then Roman breaks the subtle member and frees it according to its natural usage.
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	When a fracture of bone is restored, and then Roman breaks the subtle member and frees it, then it is not done except for many causes: among which one is the multitude of solution of the ligament and of the ligature that does not converge according to what is clear; or due to superfluity of structure of the ligaments until the nourishment is prohibited from coursing to the member; or due to multitude of superfluous embrocation; or due to superfluous movement not in its hour; or due to paucity of blood in the body of the patient and for debilitation of it.
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	And the cure of that is to give nourishment to the patient and make their heart tender until the blood is multiplied in them; and administer baths; and apply gypsum and lettuce over them.
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	And then pause poultice over the member, so that the poultice attracts to it much nourishment, or continues embrocation of it with warm water and tepid, until the nourishment courses and returns to its natural figure.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter xxII.
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	On the cure of broken bones when they are restored tortuously and prohibit the operation of their own that is clear.
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	When it happens to the member already restored then health of it from tortuousness and eminence to the broken bone and numbness, and it is for that fededa of form of the member, but meanwhile the member is not prohibited from its natural operation, then it does not happen that you receive the word of him who existed that member was newly broken.
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	Moreover, I have stood many foolish doctors and restorers who have done that in our land; and this operation is very detestable, producing great fear to the old man of which it is mortal.
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	Moreover, if the lameness and numbness are recent, then it is clear that they are embrocated with warm water and tepid in which they take mollifying herbs, thus as they are fuel of altea and razit of them, and mellilot, and similarly to those; and let it be done to them in emplastre with mollificating emplastre thus as dyallaquilon has well done; or that it takes mucilage of razit of altea and is continued with gray of gualina or with oil of cirami, and is emplastered in that; or that they take figuas of grasses and are trissadas in females of colom, and similarly to those of the medicines that are named inermann's consolidation.
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	And some roots are dissolved with steady friction of the ligature that it is in the most humid places, and let it be administered with movement of the member to all parts at all hours.
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	Since the pain has turned into a chronic condition and is strongly rooted and converted into a stone-like hardness, provoking the need for a cure of the limb with iron, then it is necessary to remove the pus that has accumulated above the affected area and dissolve the continuity of the bone, and cut away the superfluous nodules of that member in the bone, and facilitate the administration of the treatment in that sollicitated and studied area.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter 23.
De sermo en dislocacio.	On the speech about dislocation.
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	Dislocation is the displacement of some of the joints in their proper place, which prohibits movement, and alters the shape of the limb, causing great pains and lesions.
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	Therefore, when you encounter a dislocation, then it is necessary to perform reduction as soon as possible, and do not delay, for if delayed, the limb becomes inflamed and strongly fixed, making it difficult to reduce the dislocation.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	And for this reason it is necessary that the patient be massaged and stretched at the time of inflammation, because many gentle movements bring about spasm and alleviate pain.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	Since this happens, then it is necessary that you apply the flaubotomy to the patient's thigh, and place it in such a way that it relaxes the inflammation; and wrap the limb with hot water and oil, and then reduce it with facility.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	And the whole limb will be cured in such a way that the memory of the pain will return to its place.
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	And now I have ordered the chapters on dislocation according to what has been written about fracture; from the higher part of the body down to the lower part.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter 24.
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	On the cure of dislocation of the lower jawbone.
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	Thus the two jawbones are dislocated if they do not close; and the dislocation of both is made in one of two ways: either they are removed from their places with little movement, and then softened a little; or they are completely dislocated and complacent, until they are softened at the joint so that the saliva of the patient flows and cannot hold it nor clear its mouth, and the tongue is enveloped in its speech.
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	Since the dislocation of it is slight, then in major preparations it returns to itself for a slight cause.
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	Since the dislocation is complete and complacent, then it is necessary to administer reduction of the jaw immediately, and not delayed at all.
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And it is that the minister should hold the head of the patient, and meanwhile insert his fingers in the mouth of the patient, if the dislocation is on one side; or he should insert both fingers at the same time, if the dislocation is on both sides, and the other fingers of the hands of the patient are beforehand in those which are engaged; and he commands the patient to relax their jawbones and release them from any part; and the minister engages the jawbone and pushes it back into place until it returns to its proper position.
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	And if the reduction of it is difficult, and especially if both jawbones are simultaneously dislocated, then administer evaporation with hot water and oil, so that the reduction of both can be facilitated and not delayed at all, thus we have said.
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	And thus when they return and are engaged, and the mouth of the patient is closed and not softened, then pause on those pillows of cloth with cerate, and make it firm with wax and oil rosated; and place it in a facilitated position with gentle movements.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	And let the patient sleep on their back, with their head between two aurelhes, so that they do not incline to the right or left side; and do not force them to chew anything, lest they aggravate some cause; having forbidden them to eat any heavy food, until when the pains are removed and the jawbones are numb, then they can eat what they want.
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	And that is administered with facility, and do not trouble themselves over the perception of the mouth, except for eating and drinking and citation, until the jawbone is numb and healed.
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	And if the reduction of both jawbones is difficult when they are dislocated at some hour and not converted to their proper places, then many gentle movements are necessary, and fever and assiduous sweat arise, and strongly it affects the stomach of the patient, and strongly it induces pure cholera.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	And when you see this, then you will know that it is a loss; and many gentle movements are necessary to die from that which happens to him in ten days.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25.
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	On the reduction of the dislocation of the ankle and of the extremity of the muscle.
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	The ankle is not dislocated from its joint behind the foot; and some gentle movements are dislocated beforehand, and that is declared by the sensation.
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	And the restoration of it is that the patient jumps on their back and extends their arms.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	And then grasp the place with your palm in strong grasping, so that it will return.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	And then place a pause on that plaster and powders and strengthen it.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	May the extremity of the one who has fallen be continuous with that, it is not dislocated on any day; then it is necessary that it be reduced and set in place according to what we have said and according to your preparation.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	And then place a pause on that plaster, and powders, and extract, and command the patient to adhere to tranquility and rest inside until they are healed.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	And in this medical treatment, the reduction of the muscle's extremity is achieved when it is separated from its proper place.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter 26.
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	On the Reduction of Dislocation of the Muscle.
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	It is known that the muscle is not dislocated except in three ways, one of which is when it is dislocated from the top to the bottom.
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	And the second is when it is dislocated from above the muscle, and that is done sharply; and it is not dislocated at the back parts through the shoulder; and it is not dislocated at the front parts through the nerves.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	And mostly it is dislocated and beforehand exits at the bottom parts of the muscle, and mostly in those where the flesh is weak, it is easily dislocated; but in those where there are many muscles, it is exited with difficulty.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	And often accidents happen to some men through percussion or fall, and the muscle of it is affected by a hot aposteme, and it is swollen due to what has already been dislocated.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	Then it is necessary that you spread it out so that it is above the affected part of it, and then proceed with its treatment.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	And it is known that the dislocation of it occurs at the bottom parts below the muscle; so that you distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the whole muscle, because you find among them diverse manifest differences; and you find in the head of the concave muscle and below the muscle's ligament, just like a void, and the patient cannot reduce their hand to their proper position, nor does it follow for all movements.
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	If it is dislocated from the foot or above, then you find a clear manifestation, and it is not hidden.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	And from this dislocation, an easy reduction is made when it is fresh and the patient is young.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	And the reduction of it is that the minister raises their hand to the top parts; and then pause with the fingers placed below the muscle's ligament, and raise the joint with strength in its proper place, and the minister raises their hand, and extends it there, and then pause because it returns easily.
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	But if it does not return for what we have said, and so from the beginning of the treatment that caused the dislocation, many days, then it is necessary that the patient be bathed in warm water and receive a soft embrocation that mollifies and liniments, just as if it were a coytz razitz of altaea, and fenugrec, and melillot in water, and be administered.
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	And then the patient should be placed on their back and paused below the muscle's ligament, waiting for a day or two that it is set between levitation and stricture, and then the doctor pauses on the same spot above the spine, and raises the head of the muscle to its proper place, and attracts the hand of the patient so that it is not hidden at the bottom parts, and another minister holds the head of the patient, so that it is not hidden at the bottom parts, because it will then return to its proper place.
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	And if you wish, reduce it in this manner: and it is that you make yourself present as one who has been put longer than the patient, and stand on the side of that bed, and insert the muscle below the ligament of the patient and raise the ligament to the top parts until the patient is suspended in air, and another minister pulls the hand of the patient from the bottom parts of the back.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	But if the patient is light, then it is necessary that another cause be suspended, so that they can hold that, because the dislocation returns soon.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And it is reduced in this way: and it is that it be fixed to the ground on a long stick whose head is rounded in shape, like a pile of mortar, which is not large nor subtle, and then paused below the patient; because when paused above the head of the stick, the patient's limbs are stretched according to the length of the stick, and then extended their hand to the bottom parts of the other side; and it is extended with strength from the other side, because the joint returns to its proper place with velocity.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	And if it is difficult to reduce it for all the causes that we have said, then use this cure: and it is that you take a stick of the quantity whose length is two arms, and its width is four fingers, and its thickness is adjusted at the tip of the ligament according to this form.
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	And then place on the rounded head soft linen drapes so that the stick does not hurt the patient.
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	And you have placed the patient's little finger, and extended your hand or arm over the bust between the divisions of the fingers, and joined the bust to the assistant and the arm and the extremity of the hand.
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	You have placed your arm on a scale of stairs according to the latitude, and the hand is extended to the divisions below, and the other thing is suspended from the other side, so that the internal joint is straightened.
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	And when the instrument is fully prepared according to any possible manner, then cover it with a cloth of wool soaked in a certain quantity; and you have paused to prepare an emplaster made of powder of moly and album of egg white over all the muscle, thus revolving from above, and you have strengthened the little finger in a straight structure; and the ligament is revolved over the emplaster, and the hand of it is attached to its neck, and it is relaxed, and do not move the hand for seven days.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	And you have paused to administer the food of the patient little by little, until the member is comforted, because it is easier to bring health to him.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	And the food has been given in greater quantity for seven or eight days, and then an exercise of movement; and thus if it is strengthened and not softened, then it is already healed.
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	But if the joint is dislocated by many swollen humidities that accumulate on it or for another cause, then cover it with a cautery in three tracts, according to what has been said in the chapter on cauteries.
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	And if all this is done and seven days have passed, the ligament and joint are not strengthened, and the emplaster and structure are reduced over some swollen areas, and it is not strengthened and you cannot lift that arm to the divisions above, then you know that the nerves of it, which are at the head of the muscle, are either injured or extended or softened, and you know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	From the dislocation of that which is done from the foot and thigh or the back parts, the reduction is done with impulse and extension in the hands, until it returns.
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And another structure is administered to it, and care for it until it is healed.
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	And if it happens that the healing is slow in the member and tardy in its movement, then the patient uses many swollen areas until that slowness is alleviated and returns to its original nature.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter 27.
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	On the cure of dislocation of the hip.
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	You know that the joint of the hip is dislocated with difficulty and similarly returns with difficulty; and it is dislocated in all parts, especially from the front to the back, and the dislocation of it is not hidden from you because it falls under the adjustment or under the touch according to some figure that is dislocated, and when you adjust the dislocated hip to its place, it is manifestly declared to you, because the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm, nor touch the underlying muscle.
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	And you see that the hips, and reduce the dislocation as soon as possible before it comes to a chronic apostema, because if it comes to a chronic apostema, difficult is the reduction of it, and far from being entirely healed; and especially when it is in the back parts, because worse is all the other species of dislocation, and of greater pain, and many swollen areas that come with death in that.
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	And the restoration of it, when it is possible to reduce, is that the hand of it is extended in two directions, and the arm of it is expanded, and the hands of the doctor are on the hip and below it, and the fingers of its own hands envelop the joint, or at the root of its palm, until it returns to its place.
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	But if the dislocation is in the front parts, then it returns thus, that you bend the hand with its own hand, until it percusses the hip at the root of its palm.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	And if the dislocation does not obey the reduction, then administer vehement extension and very strong force.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	And it is that two ministers extend the arm, and hold that same thing with two ministers so that it is not removed from the extension.
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	And then you have revolved the arm from all parts, because it is enveloped in a double cloth wrapped long over the hand of it, or ligament.
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, until that oil is poured for so that it facilitates the causes that help in lubricating the joint to facilitate; and then he envelops the joint with a strong impulse until it returns.
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	And then the reduction of it is covered with a plaster on which is stippled and exception made in egg white album, and is strengthened in a straight structure, and the arm is suspended from the neck, and is relaxed for some days.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	And then it is loosened; and thus if the joint is formed in its original place, then you loosen the ligament of it and relax it.
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	If you see the joint is not strengthening, then apply the plaster and bandage, and leave it like that for several days until it is fully extended; and then remove it.
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	Perhaps it falls to the gravity, then reduce the joint, and its disposition is in movement, then administer humidification in bath and subtle friction, and compress, until it is alleviated; or place on the joint alleviated, so it is a motor of great grease; and then bind, and leave that on the bone day and night.
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	And then remove that, and put it in bath; and when it sweats, then you rub the joint with tempered friction, and then place it on the alleviated one, so it is rounded by motion, once a day, and the second, and the third.
am intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	I'm in bath water, until it is relaxed.
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	And if you wish, place on that tender and humid wound of the cow's scalp and bind strongly over it; and do that for several days, because it is humid and reduces its disposition.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter 28.
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	On the cure of dislocation of the shoulder, which is of the joint that is between the arm and the hand.
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	A shoulder dislocation occurs when some veins are displaced, and the reduction of the dislocation is slower, and the opposite is for other joints, but especially it is necessary to have velocity in the reduction of it at the time it is dislocated, so that the place does not become apostematous or falls into an apostema.
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And the reduction of the dislocation is that you place the joint of the patient's arm on a table and the doctor extends the arm of that one, and places his hand or palm over the prominence of the joint, and presses it until it returns to its own place.
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	But especially it is necessary to consider if the palm has been placed on the belly of the arm, then the patient places the back of their arm on a table for extension and reduction; and if the dislocation is previous to the back of the arm, then the position of that arm is inwardly bent over the table, so that the doctor's arm fits over the prominence of the joint.
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	And then it returns soon, good; and if not, then strengthen that with an emplaster, binding tightly the apostema and leave it like that; and do not touch it, because if not, you will not suffer nor be able to put weight on the reduction of it, until the days pass.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	But especially the Roman joint according to its tortuosity; and do not note to the patient any cause, but that the hand is mollified and cannot strengthen any cause; then you will know that the nerves are pinched or compressed, and then it is not engendered in it unless it is strengthened with a pointed cautery for the correction of it and fortifies its confidence.
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	Then when the shoulder is returned, then place on it the emplaster which we have recommended, and leave it like that for five days; and then remove it and leave it and the arm of it should be exercised.
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	But if the movement of it is hindered and falls into some gravity, then bathe it with warm water and rub it with tempered friction for several days, until it is alleviated.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter 29.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	On the cure of dislocation of the toes.
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	Several days are needed to dislocate the toes completely.
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	And when a toe is dislocated to the back of the palm or to the belly of it, then stretch the toe and press the dislocation of it with the tied toes, until it returns.
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	And then support the head of the toe, and suspend it from the part where it is dislocated, and leave it like that for two days.
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	And then suspend it and extend it until it is straightened in its own day.
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	And when it is night, lay it according to that narration, and do not cease to dislodge it in the day and exercise it with movement, and lay it at night; and do that for several days until it is straight.
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	And do similarly to that, if it is dislocated to the belly of the hand, and lay it on that part and do that for the first operation, until it is healed.
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	And similarly do that when it is dislocated to other parts.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter 30.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	On the cure of dislocation of the vertebrae of the back.
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	When it falls to one of the vertebrae of the back or neck a complete dislocation, and so many vertebrae are removed from their places, then in that case there is no cure, because death is likely to seize the patient.
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	And it is sign of that, the effort of the patient is exhausted and beyond their will, and cannot retain it; and many days are mollified some members of it or two legs of it or two arms of it, or one of those; or a vertebra is removed from its place, because many days are removed and many days are made for the removal of that in four parts.
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	Therefore, it has been demonstrated in the back parts and is called gout of the elbow.
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	Maybe the treatment of it is that then you should consider if the gout of the elbow occurs due to weakness, because then there is no cure nor complete healing.
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	Maybe in this case you see by chance or by percussion or by similar things, the Ancients described the methods of treatment as verbose and lengthy; maybe it returns to profit; maybe you have already experienced relief from that which you had little excuse for, due to the proximity of my own exposition, in which I have expounded and formed diverse instruments from that which I will show and explain.
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	And I say that in gout which occurs in the toe joints, there is neither engendering nor healing of it; and similarly in this case, it is made worse by two slips.
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	And of those, none are cured except for that which occurs properly in the back itself, and that is what you recommend.
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	And it is that the patient should be stretched out on their face on a low bench near a wall, and should be stretched out with many pillows under them so that their feet are not lifted.
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	And then a straight stick should be placed, fixed in the ground at the end of the bench around the patient's head, and another stick in the air above their feet on the other side of the bench.
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	And one minister holds the stick, and it should not be fixed in a trench; and another minister holds the other according to that form.
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And then envelop the patient's head and tie it firmly with a linen bandage; and extend the end of the bandage to the stick which is above the patient's head, and tie it there; and then strengthen the other bandage around their hips, and bind their legs; and then adjust all the bandages and tie them to the other stick which is above their feet.
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	And then the minister should carefully extend the bandage to the part of the stick, and do not remove the two sticks and the bandages from their places where they are fixed, maybe even more firmly tied as we have said.
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	And the doctor should place their palms on the spine with great strength until it returns to its place, or should place them on a table, and then adjust the patient's feet on the table until they return to their proper position.
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	Maybe if it does not return to its place through this method, then take a table whose width or length is in the air about three handbreadths, and excavate in the wall where we have said that it is proper for the patient to enter with their limb into the table.
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	And then place the flat surface of the table on the spine, and the doctor should place their feet on the other limb, and stretch strongly until the spine is straightened and returns to its proper position.
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	And if you wish, take hold of the one that is revolving around the hand; and it is that you fix on the ground behind the patient's head at the end of the two sticks, the length of which should be an arm's length, and behind the patient's head again at the end of the two sticks; and let the length between each stick be a palm, and already it is made in each stick a hole in which the cord turns, and each one should be firmly fixed on the ground so that it does not move.
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	And let there be a round stick in which the cord turns, and let it revolve around the two holes of the two sticks.
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	And at the end of it there is a hole in which the stick is formed, the length of which is a palm where it revolves; and on the two other sticks it is similar to that.
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And then strengthen the bandages that you have stretched on the patient's feet at the hole which is above their head, and the bandages that you have stretched on their thighs at the cord which is above their feet.
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	And then there should be a cord and a minister who twists the cord with their hand, and the doctor should adjust the spine according to what we have said.
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	And this is the form of the cord:
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	And then since the spine has returned to its place, and the location is adjusted, then cover it with a plaster made of albumen of egg, and then stop; and then place on the plaster a table whose width is three fingers or around that, and its length is as much as takes up the space of the gout, and above the part of the spine.
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	And then let it be tied with the bandage which we have said, and use subtle nourishment to help the patient until they are healthy.
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	And if there remains any weakness in the location at the end of the healing, then cover it so that medicines are administered which mollify and liniment with administration on the table for a long time, which we have recommended; and already it has been administered in that location a lamina of lead.
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	And some weakened joints occur in the back of the spine of the two, and it is judged for that dislocation; and it is that bone which already has been weakened so that you do not cover it with a prognosis to him at this medicine, because it will make his condition worse and lead to death.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter 21.
De curacio de anca dislocada.	On the treatment of a dislocated ankle.
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	You know that the joint of the ankle and the joint of the muscle do not only have a dislocation, but also a slight movement, and it does not happen to those who have a small movement and cavity.
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	And the ankle joint is dislocated in four ways, either it is dislocated to the inner side, or to the outer side, or to the front side, or to the back side.
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	And mostly it is dislocated to the inner side, and rarely to the front side or to the back side.
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	And the sign of dislocation to the inner side is this, when you adjust the leg of the healthy person with the sick one, it is then longer and the knee is more prominent than the healthy one, and the patient cannot bend their knee, and it is the place where the knee becomes swollen from an apostema, so that the head of the thigh bone has been dislocated here.
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	And the sign of that which suffers from dislocation to the outer side is that the symptoms of it are contrary to this accident.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	And the sign of that which suffers from dislocation to the front side is that it expands the knee joint according to its natural alignment, but nevertheless does not bend because of the pain in the knee, and if it is forced to walk and cannot stand on that leg; and their urine is retained and their knee is swollen, and they have difficulty walking on that foot.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	And the sign of that which suffers from dislocation to the back side is that it does not expand the knee, nor can it bend forward because the knee joint bends, and their leg is shorter than the other, and the knee is weakened, and the head of the thigh bone has fallen to that place.
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	Moreover, the reduction of the species of this dislocation is that you consider, then, if the dislocation is old and ancient, that it has already become chronic with time, you approach its reduction according to its disposition, then it is not in complete cure; and therefore it is not possible that there will be a full recovery.
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	Moreover, in the case where the dislocation is recent, and it is one of the four species of dislocations, then you must take care to return the joint to its place and extend it to the inner and outer sides, and move it to the right and left, so that it returns strongly and does not require another treatment.
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	Moreover, if it does not return in this way, then it is necessary that you prepare a strong minister and extend the leg from the lower part, or with its own muscles, or with a bandage which is tied above the knee; and another minister extends the hand below the knee, so that they grasp the lower parts of the thigh; and you strengthen the bandage over the joint of the thigh bone, and hold another minister who stretches out the extremity of the joint.
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	And its extension is from the ankle to the knee, or from the inner side to the outer side of the hip, or from the back side to the heel.
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	And its extension is all of these in one way, so that the patient is elevated above the ground and remains suspended.
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	And this species of extension is common to all four.
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	And so if the dislocation returns to what we have said, it will be good; and if not, then it is necessary to apply all species of treatment that we have spoken of for its own cure.
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	In the reduction of its own, when it is dislocated, and the dislocation is to the inner side, it is necessary that the patient be resupinated on their back; and then pause the joints at the joint of the thigh bone in the place where the head of the thigh bone meets the knee; and then extend the joint from the part of the knee to the outer side of the hip.
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	And then another strong minister takes hold of its arms, and grasps the large joint of the thigh bone of the patient and extends it to the outer side with violent extension, so that it returns to its original place.
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	And this species is of less gentle treatment, in which this member is reduced more than the other species.
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	Moreover, if it is excused above you and does not obey the entrance to this species of treatment at all, then it is necessary that they be tied with strong bonds, gently, above both feet and both knees.
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	And its length is of each part by the quantity of four fingers, and the patient's leg is extended more than the other by a quantity of two fingers.
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	And then the patient is suspended over the top of the beam, and it is in a pulley; and its length from the ground is a quantity of two arms.
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And then command a strong youth to pull the head of the thigh bone, and it is suspended with another youth, and the other youth pulls the thigh bone with strong and empowering force, so that the joint returns to its original place with velocity.
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	More in the reduction proper, when there is dislocation at the forefront of the patient, it is as if the patient lies on a pug according to what we have recommended in having gelbozitated the vent; and strengthen the ligament over the patient's leg properly and over their chest.
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	And then place two cushions under him, one at his feet and the other at his head; and then place two adjusted cushions under the middle of the puerile ficatum, which wraps around the patient to prevent them from being damaged by the cushion being between their thighs, so that the extension does not reach the affected parts.
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	And then each minister extends to their part, and the doctor places his hand on the reduction according to the art.
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	Then, if you observe a relapse, it will be great; and if not, stop on that diligently and thus as we have said in gelbozitation for that engagement.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	It is fitting that the patient lies on the soft mattresses, which are prepared in this way.
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	And when the dislocation is in the anterior parts, then it is fitting that the leg be extended lightly, and it is according to this narrative method on puerile; and the doctor places the palm of his right hand on the loin of the patient, and then he takes the other hand, and with this contraction he stops the extension to the affected parts below the dentil of the forehead.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	And if the dislocation is in the posterior parts, then it is not fitting that the patient be extended to the affected parts below, and he is elevated above the ground; having said that he should be placed on a hard cause, just as it is said that the anchoring of his feet is dislocated at the forefront, according to what we have said about the positioning of him on two anchors; and it is on his face and the ligaments are extended, according to what we have said, there is no trouble.
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	And it is fitting that compression be administered with a table on the area where the joint is affected.
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	Then, since the reduction is completed as it should be — and the sign of the reduction of him is not hidden from you, and it is that you extend both legs of the patient, and when you see those joints and the patient stretches out his leg and expands those six excuses, then you know that the member is returned as it should be — and then you adjust both thighs and place them in a bandage and stretch thus that the anchor is not bent in any of the parts; and adhere the patient to rest for three days or four.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	And then release the ligament and the bandage, and compare one leg with the other.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	Then, if you see those joints in their proper place, then you know that the dislocation is already fixed, and therefore the patient can walk again.
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	And if you see any cause of softening, then you return and replaster it, and stretch it according to your primary structure, and let it be for three days.
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	And then release it, and make him walk about on crutches for some days, until he is comforted.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter 32.
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	On the treatment of dislocation of the forehead.
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	The forehead is dislocated in three ways, because it is dislocated at the forefront, and at the back parts, and more at the lower parts than at the upper parts; and at the front parts it is not dislocated.
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	And the sign of dislocation of it is that you order the patient to apply his leg to the thigh; then you know that the forehead is dislocated.
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	And the restoration of all its ways is that you make the patient sit upright, so that he stretches out his leg, if possible; tie both his feet to his chest, and place his foot between them; and then make him hold his forehead with both his palms, and return those between the teeth on the forehead in strength, and another minister extends his foot until the forehead returns to its place.
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	And the sign of reduction of it is that his leg adheres to the thigh without effort.
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And then replaster it and make the leg adhere to the thigh, and then tie those together with a bandage for three days or four, and then release them.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	And do not allow the patient to walk about for some days, until he is healed and comforted.
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	It is fitting that if the reduction of it to you is explained, then administer strong extension to the ligaments which are in the treatment of the preceding narration about the ankle.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter 33.
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	On the treatment of dislocation of the ankle.
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	Some ankles are reduced by small movement, and some ankles are dislocated according to completeness, and the dislocation of it is made either at the back parts or at the front parts.
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	And the sign of the dislocation of it is that you see the ankle inflating proceeding to the part where it is dislocated.
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	The treatment of the patient's leg is a lengthy process, and it is necessary to extend it with facilities and ease the hands so that it returns inward.
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	When treating a patient whose limb is displaced according to its natural alignment, make sure to straighten the affected limb, and hold one minister firmly and steadily behind the back of that patient in the middle location.
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	And then you place your right hand on the upper part of the foot above the ankle, and your left hand below the foot at the heel.
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	And then you pull the foot with your right hand, and place your left hand for two fingers, and stretch out your left hand; and you will feel the pulse of the foot on the inside of the leg.
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	And make two finger marks according to what we have counted.
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	And then you feel the pulse of the foot at the third finger mark, and that is at the heel.
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	So if it returns to one finger mark or two according to this method, and if the foot is bent inward, it's good; and if not, then you iterate the operation, because that returns.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	But if you are prohibited from reducing it with what we have recommended, then place the affected limb on a soft surface on the ground, and stretch out a cloth tightly fixed to the earth, and enclose it between the patient's thighs, and you have already wrapped it in a drap so that it does not displace.
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	And then the minister holds their thighs, and another minister extends the foot with their hands or wraps it with a bandage that lies on the ankle; and then extend each minister against the extension of the affected part, and the cloth remains extended between the patient's thighs, retaining it, so that the body does not pull away from the lower parts beyond its extension.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	And then the doctor reduces the dislocation with their hands, and another minister holds the healthy thigh at the lower parts, so that the dislocation returns to its natural alignment.
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	And so when the dislocation returns and it is declared to you the health of the reduction of it, then pause the plaster and stretch out that bandage strongly, and bind the foot with a bandage at the leg.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	And be careful that you protect or guard the nerves which are behind the ankle, so that the bandage on it is not violent and holds it firmly.
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	And then leave it like that for two days or three; and if the bandage becomes soft, stretch it out.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	And then remove it on the third day or on the fourth, and prohibit the affected limb from movement for forty days.
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	But if it is forgotten to attend to that space, it is not done securely so that the dislocation does not become dissolved and corrupted, and then it does not receive a cure.
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	And if you encounter a severe abscess, then be careful that you administer in the sedation of it what we have described beforehand, in another place of cure and of embrocation, until it is relieved.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	Chapter 34.
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	On the treatment of dislocation of the toes of the feet.
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	It is necessary that what is dislocated be bent with little extension of its own effort; and that which is not difficult, because it is easier.
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	But if the dislocation is in one of the toes of the foot, then it is necessary to straighten the affected foot on a flat surface on the ground or on a table, and it should be steady like that.
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	And then you stand on your feet, and pause the affected foot on what you imagine to be the joints, and then calcify that in the affected foot until it returns, and you will see that it is already bent and does not appear in its eminent location.
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	And then pause below the belly of the foot on a table that takes the whole foot, which has two cups, and then strengthen it in a decent structure and firmness for three days; and then remove it and make it rest from walking for many days, until it is strengthened and its return is assured.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter 35.
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	On the species of dislocation that are made with a wound or a fracture or some other signs.
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	When you encounter any of those causes, and you fail in the treatment of it and in its restoration, many finger marks will follow, leading to death.
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	And for that reason it is not fitting to presume on the treatment of it, but only he who is wise in the art, with long usage, merciful and piteous, tardy, not arrogant nor presumptuous; and who uses in the commencement of medicines that calm down so much, and leaves the affected one to divine judgment, but hopes for salvation from destruction, with alleviation of the malady, and in which appears some hope.
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	And therefore it is necessary to strive so much to reduce it in the commencement of the cause, lest an abscess develops cautiously.
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	And therefore if the limb returns according to what we will, then administer a regimen that calms down abscesses and cures the wound with what is convenient for it among the diseased and dried out.
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	And if the dislocation is a fracture and it occurs in separated bones, then you perform the statement of theirs, and do so that we have said in simple maladies beforehand about the preceding places of those.
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	And beware and avoid according to your virtue that which is internal in the ways of fear, as it has preceded my prediction; because it is better for you to give thanks to your Creator, and may you be more permanent in your glory, and may there be more salutations to your body very truly in your time.
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	Thus the phrases of Albucasim perfectly manifest those which God may bless.
Amen.	Amen.
