O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	O you, very dear sons, I have finished this book which is the end of the science of medicine, assembled from its teachings and pronouncements.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came to pass that I realized I must accompany this treatise, which is a part of the work of hands, namely surgery.</start_of_turn>
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of hands is fraught in our region and is strange to all, if the science is lost and forgotten, and nothing remains of it except for the small descriptions in the books of the ancients which the hands have performed.</start_of_turn
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this arises the error and the emptiness, and are closed the understandings and is displaced the science.</start_of_turn
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation;	Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation.
et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	Or it seems to me that I shall make it alive together the ordination of this physician according to the way of exposure and declaration and abbreviation; and I will come together the forms of the fire cautery instruments and other tools of the work with the agreement of the declaration and preparation of the patient, as it is necessary.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	Or it seems to me that I shall make it live altogether the order of this physician according to the way of exposure and declaration and of the abbreviation; and I shall join together the forms of the instruments of cautery, and of other instruments of the work with the arrangement of the declaration and preparation of it, as it is necessary.</start_of_turn>
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And it is necessary that he who enters this field should be skilled in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, until he has grasped the judgment of limbs, and the forms and the joints and the separations of things, and has knowledge of bones and nerves and muscles and their number, and the structure and the veins moving and resting, and their issue.</start_of_turn>
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc;	And thus Ypocras said that we must not trust the word of the patient alone, but with the work it is indeed so.
et meismement en l’art de main.	and indeed in the art of the hand.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes;	As we have said at the beginning of this book, whoever is not familiar with the things that are before him, if he is rash and does not notice the homes, will certainly err
ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	Because I have often seen more of these things that interfere with this science and if they abandon science and common sense.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa I apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col;	For I have seen fools who have coped with scrofules or a woman’s neck, and have coped the arteries of the neck;
por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	because so much blood has flowed out that the woman has died between her hands.
Et vis I autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans;	And I have seen another fool who has treated a stone of a sick person, and the stone was great;
si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens III jors.	If he pulls out a piece of the bladder with it, and was sick for three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And thus I have already been called to treat it, and I saw the disposition of the patient and the greatness of the stone, and if it were cut out it would surely die.</start_of_turn>
Et vis I autre mire qui prist en cure I duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie;	And thus another madman who took charge of our land who had his leg broken, and with the swelling caused a wound;
et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi I termine;	And his foolish blindness held the swelling above the wound as tightly as stars by strong binding, and did not let blood escape from the wound, and left it until the end
et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie;	And he commanded that it should not be loosened from me
et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And so it happened that his leg was completely shattered and the limb and the heel were lost to perdition.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe;	I went to call for him, and I hurried to unbind the limb;
et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	And when I see it dislocated and there is no pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner;	But every way the corruption has already been confirmed or the limb is already ruined, and I cannot heal it.</start_of_turn>
et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	and it continues to corrupt until the limb is entirely lost.</start_of_turn
Et vis .i. autre mire qui effondra .i. apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And thus another mire which undermines the bone marrow swells, and then inflames from the malice of its lordship.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For cancer, when it is pure of melancholy humor, does not yield except when iron is touched upon it unless all the corrupted parts can be removed.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en II divisions:	Therefore, for this reason, very skillful physicians, you must know that the work of the hands is divided into two divisions:</start_of_turn
c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions;	that is to say, with regard to huevos or when there is danger in other positions.</start_of_turn
et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	and I will show in each chapter where there is doubt and danger.</start_of_turn>
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos.	For you must take care that the fools do not speak badly of you.</start_of_turn>
Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez;	If you grasp your arms tightly and undertake your patients gently and firmly, and use the right way, so that by the grace of God your return shall be in peace and health.
et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit;	and leave the sick with hope of healing without grief
et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	keep your arms from that which makes you doubt, and be strong in your spirit so that you can come from this world to the next in peace
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens:	Glory be praised for its wonders
«Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	Do not take my word for it in treating the sick, for I am not a madman
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	I have devised this treatise in three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez;	The first chapters are about cauteries of fire and of medicine, and this chapter orders from the head down to the toes
et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	And of the forms of instruments, and of the tweezers of cautery, and of everything that is necessary for the work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses;	And of the chapters following, some are on the cutting and piercing of the skin, and of blisters and wounds, and the extraction of arrows, and similar things;
et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	And this chapter orders and describes the instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses;	The next chapter is on restoring dislocations and fractures, and similar things
et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	And it orders from the chief head down to the toes, and describes the instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	As we have remembered from the work, it is necessary to say the quality of the aid and the great discomfort of great complexion.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus;	I say that the quality of the assistant, and prudence, is the longest word and the subtlest science and the secret response
et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu;	And concerning this, they spoke of many wounds, and they agreed on that.
et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	And I am silenced by their words, for I am ashamed of my length.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que II complexions:	I say that the cautery is useful for all complexions, where there is matter, for it is a complex skill:
c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	it is a knowledge of complexion hot and dry matter, and complexion cold and wet matter
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide;	In complexion hot and dry combined with matter, divide neither one nor the other, and say that the cautery is a great aid
et li autre dirent le contraire:	and the other say the opposite:
que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	that the cautery is only useful for diseases caused by heat and dryness
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour;	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	And thus it is known that the cautery which is done on the contrary to this, greatly helps in hot and dry diseases that arise from the humours of the body.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you compare the body of a man and his moisture to the complexion of fire, you find the body dry.</start_of_turn
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I consent to this word.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have never seen it happen before in practice.</start_of_turn>
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens;	And thus it is known that no one understands the fire except those who have experienced it, and who know by long experience the chapter of cautery, and the diversity of humours of the body, and the causes and dispositions of their diseases, and the issues and space of tension.
des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	we do not have our fear from other humours, even in cold and moist diseases.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all the more must they agree to the cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know this, sir, that cautery with fire is more effective for secret cures than burning cautery.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For fire is simple, and brings no further heat than to the member that is being cauterized, and harms no other member save its name.</start_of_turn>
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation;	Warm medicines come from one member to another by communicating, and cause the member to suffer from grief in order to bring about healing
et par aventure ocit lou malaide.	and sometimes cause the patient to suffer
Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	The fire for its height and for the goodness of its substance does not make me do this, if there is no excess.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses;	And this I have learned through experience and by the length of my service and the study I have made of this art, and it is confirmed by the truth of things.</start_of_turn>
et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant;	And for this reason I apologize for the length of the speech, for it does not please me to hide the secret which is enclosed or the fire, and the quality of the work, as it dispels the diseases of the body, as the philosopher demonstrates in demonstrating;
or le recevez en vos pensees.	or it follows in your thoughts.</start_of_turn>
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	Know, son, that it is necessary to determine at what tension the cautery should be made, and when they are pricked.</start_of_turn>
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere;	And I say that cautery is useful in all cases, for the harmful things which arise are driven out by the aid of the cautery.</start_of_turn
et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And in the same way, if the cautery is applied for necessary and urgent pains that cannot endure the tension until a greater harm befalls the limb.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire;	And do not think, my son, as some fools do;
car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue;	for the disease which is cured by cautery has no return;
et il le dient ensi;	it is said thus.
mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	but it is not so that it cures them, for the cautery is only a medicine that alters the complexion, and dries the humors which are the cause of the pain, and is worth no more than medicine for its haste, and for the worth of its work and its sovereignty.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut;	and indeed that the disease does not come at any time according to the complexion of the patient and the limb of the disease and its virtue
et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie;	And in him are collected the superfluous humors by the acquisition of foods and other things, if these are not cauterized when administered either in liquid or solid form, for there is still excess of humors and moisture; as for cauteries of tendons because of pain, and other things, and some pain does not return.
mais ce avient poc.	but this is not without fault.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir;	And many people do not understand this because cauteries are called behind medicine, and it is seen;
mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	but they do not believe that cauteries are worth more than medicine, but their understanding is false, for it is cauteries that are behind medicine because whenever we administer other treatments in any disease and they do not help, we then administer the cautery, and it is worth it
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Therefore, even though cautery is behind medicine, it does not please the minds of fools.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance;	The old folks say that gold cautery is more wondrous than iron, and they tell of no fire save for the excellence of the gold and the height of its substance.
et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes;	They say that the smell of the cautery of gold does not make one faint, but I have seen it prove otherwise, for I have seen many people faint from it;
et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	Gold cautery is more valuable than iron, as some claim
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez;	However, when you burn gold instruments, you do not know how much they have been scorched by the color of gold and how much they have cooled down.
et s’on le chaufe trop;	If you burn them too much
si font au feu;	They become red-hot;
et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	And thus there is enough hindrance.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And for this reason we use our fire cautery, as we have learned from experience.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	Or you have commanded this chapter from beginning to end, so that the patient may see that the matter is more manageable.</start_of_turn>
dou cautere olivaire	olive cautery
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	These olive cauteries are useful for moisture and for cold on the brain, and there are two reasons for their use: one is a disease called "soda," and the other is the accumulation of many humors that descend from the head as sweat, and from the ears, and from a multitude of dreams and pain in the teeth and throat, and even from many diseases that come from cold, such as paralysis, soda, and apoplexy, and similar diseases.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief III nuis ou IIII, selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir;	And thus the form of this cautery is such that the patient is purged by means of medicine that modifies the head three times or four, according to what is useful and agreeable to the patient's custom; for the patient can endure it.
et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	And then make the patient reattach the head of the limb.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis;	And then make him sit between your hands, and put his hands under his belly;
aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses II eulz;	Then put the root of your thumb on the root of his elbow between his two fingers;
et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	And thus, or otherwise, your two means will come to me, if it bleeds from the nail then withdraw the cautery which is called "olivare," for thus it is formed.
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant;	And take out the splinter that signifies ink, and make it descend and extract your hand back and forth, holding it steady;
puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os I sol petit;	Then keep your hand still, and reinsert the splinter if you see the bone slightly exposed;
et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit;	And if you do not see it, continue with the cautery until you see the bone as I have told you
aprés pren I poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse III jors;	And then take again a little thread, and put on gloves and cotton wool inside, and take out the splinter, and leave it for three days.
aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre;	And then put on a soft bandage on the wound.
et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	and leave them until the scab is ossified.
aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	and leave them until the scab of the wound which is called "tetrafarmaçon" is healed
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge;	and they say that the older ones say that the longer the wound remains open, the more it purges.
et por ce si aide mues.	for thus is the cause of help with the muscles
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And they say that the fire cautery should be left on for as long as part of the bone is not burnt, and then remove what is superfluous from the bone, and be cured.</start_of_turn>
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme I vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors;	and they say that the other thing that must be done is to leave the cautery on for a longer time and press very hard so that from the bone outwards as wide as I see women put in their braids for this reason that the humors come out of the muscles outside;
et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte;	and must leave the wound open for a long time
aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	then must cure and dress the wound
Et ces II manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor;	And these two methods of cautery do not seem to me to be good in all cases, for in some individuals there may be fear or danger.
et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier;	indeed I believe I must leave it undone.
car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres;	for the head of the shoulder is easily loosened by continuous action of the same nature, as we have seen in other members;
et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	and when the head of the shoulder is weakly affected by nature, the first semblance of cautery appears more useful and less painful for me, and in this case I shall abstain from it.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	From ancient times, pain in the head.
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres;	When there is chronic pain lasting a long time, the patient must use herbs, pills called "cochie", and vomiting of the head and oil enemas and plasters
et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	And if you do the cautery as we have said before, it is of no avail.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit;	Take heed that if the patient’s condition is severe and not too frail...
adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	...then perform the cautery as we have mentioned above.</start_of_turn>
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai I cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»;	Afterwards, make the cautery on the skin of the shoulder joint up to the bone, as we have said before, and make an incision or puncture where it is called the “vessel”;
et est I leus en coi on met ventouses;	and put sponges there where it is necessary.</start_of_turn>
et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os:	and keep your hand still so that you do not see blood until the bone is reached.</start_of_turn
li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors;	the patient experiences much greater pain in this cautery than in others, and I will speak of it later.</start_of_turn
et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	And it is known that the cautery of horns is more subtle than that of the hair of the head, and this is the form:
dou cautere dou chief	Dou cautere dou chief.
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie:	And it is known that the cautery of horns is more subtle than that of the hair of the head, and this is the form:
adonques li fai cauteres selonc II manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When he makes cautery, he does it in two ways, that is to say by means of medicine or by fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope I poc as II chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir;	If he does the cautery by medicine, if you take a dose of alum, and open the skin and cover it I as much as possible, and then put the thumb or the place where the pain persists until you can restore the dose of alum from the leather;
et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi XII houres;	And when it is restored, if you bind it and strain it well and leave it for twelve hours.
et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi II jors ou III;	Then take out the dressing and apply pressure to the dose of alum, and leave the wound for two or three days.
puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	Then put on a cold compress tightly bound over the wound until swelling is reduced.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	After the treatment of the wound as long as it is healthy;
et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	And if you see that you need to do nothing else but apply some of the medicines I have written or dose them, treat with those medicines which are sufficient.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	The iron cautery is thus to be performed in this manner.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Leave the hairs long and even on the patient.
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait I poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance;	It is called "closed" because its head is made in the shape of a loop or it has little curvature, and in the middle has a small projection;
et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse;	and take out the painful limb, and hold your hand and gently move the fire until half of the thickness of the hair is burnt away.
et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And keep your hand away from the artery from being burnt, which is dangerous, and discharge an abundance of blood.</start_of_turn>
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par III jors;	After put cotton around it for a space of three days; remove the limb from the wound
puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then I put a moist cotton wad in the wound, and then cure the swelling until it is healed;
et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	And if you return to cauterize this abscess with the cautery called "cultellare", at its very tip, and you keep covering the artery in this abscess which is not ancient.
de emigraine	After placing cotton on the shoulder, draw out the limb for two and a half days. Then place moist cotton in the pit, and cure the limb of swelling until it is sound. If you wish to cauterize this embolism with the cautery that is called "cultellare," at the tip, and hold the artery in this embolism that is not ancient.
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans;	When you treat the abscess as we have said before in the divisions of diseases, and it does not benefit, and you see that the cautery must precede medical treatment and that it does not suffice, then you must abstain from the cautery called "cultellare" while it is painful
et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os;	and sign with this that the wound has a half-line of length, and rest your hand once, and strain that you do not cover the artery and that you do not cause harm to the bone
et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez;	Leave the mandible undisturbed when it is still, and do not move it until it has regained its original position; and prevent spasm from coming to the patient. Beware of excessive bleeding from the artery when it is cut, or when there is great fear and uncertainty, even among those who are learned and experienced.
et laisse l’uevre em mi voie;	Leave the work in mid-stream;
mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	But I will tell you how to staunch the bleeding when the artery is cut, and I will show you in this book where it is written
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee;	And if you see that these cauteries do not suffice for the disease, and the patient is suffering, cauterize the surrounding area as much as we have said, and cure the wound until it is healed
et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait II coutelz;	And if you see it, administer the cautery that we have said or the surgeon of the extraction of the artery, with the cautery that has two handles.
et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	And these cautery are better than those and more helpful.</start_of_turn>
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	If you see that this cautery does not suffice for the ailment, and the patient is languid, cauterize the surrounding area as we have said, and cure the wound until it is healed; and if you see that, administer the cautery that we have said or the chapter on the extraction of the artery, with a cautery that has a.ij. cuts; and this cautery is better than the previous one and more helpful.
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When in the ear comes pain from cold, and there is overgrowth of resolving medicines and other cures that we have said in the division, and the pain does not change, then remove this cautery which is called the "points," for this is its form:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les II se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche;	After pricking all around the painful ear, or around the two places where the pain persists in both, and you have moved a little piece under the root of the ear when you have signed the mark.</start_of_turn
et ait X poins entor chescune oreille;	And there are ten points around the cheek of the ear.</start_of_turn
aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After treating the wound until it is healed.</start_of_turn
de la torture de la bouche	After pricking all around the painful ear, or around the joints if the pain persists in both, and you pull out a hair at the root of the ear as soon as you feel the mark of the puncture; and there are ten hairs around the ear; after that cure the wound until it is healed.
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie;	Torture that must be treated by cautery is not fierce except for those that move mucus, as we have said in the sections on diseases.</start_of_turn
et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	And make no burnings as if they came from drying and swelling of nerves.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de III cauteres:	When you cure this semblance of torture which comes from humidity of drool and vomiting of blood and hiccups, and this is not worth it, then you must burn the patient three times with the cautery.
l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des II levres;	One on the root of the ear, and the other between the eyebrows, and the third in the space between the two eyebrows
et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce;	Put the cautery on the healthy side and burn at the base of the ear under a mark one thumb’s breadth from the edge of the ear, and one at the temple as long as a thumb;
et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse;	And leave the cautery on for as long as half of the hair is burned;
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And this is the form of the fire cautery:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros;	And it is like the form of a butter knife that we have put before you, but it is a little more subtle and it is better that the knife be a little thicker;
aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After curing like I have said before, as long as it is sound.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai IIII cauteres:	When the apoplexy is ancient and you cure it like we have said, and it does not profit, and the patient does not have a fever, then you must make three cauteries:
II sus les II cornes dou chief, et I emmi le chief, et I ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac;	Two on the two corners of the head, and one I embrace the head, and I burn where it is called the "vessel" as we have said before, and the last cautery on the mouth of the stomach
et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	And thus be cured as we have said before.
de litargie	From idleness.
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil;	And thus be cured as we have said before.
aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres;	And thus be cured as we have said before
et c’est li maniere dou cautere:	and this is the manner of the cautery
si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	if you do as I have said
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est;	If he is well-minded, be well;
et s’il ne l’est, se li fai III cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere I doi de gros;	and if he is not well, make three cauteries of the head downwards until the juice comes down to the collar, and leave a space between each cautery of one thumb’s breadth
et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai I cautere en mileu;	and cure as the others, and if you see blood, and the patient is fainting, make one cautery in the middle;
et se mestiers est, II autres sus les II cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	If the head of the shoulder is displaced, and two others above the two corners, and the limb is cured until it is sound.
et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	Or, if the burn is called "olive," as I have said before.
de la froidor dou chief	From the coldness of the head.
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit;	It is necessary that the head be freed from hairs and from what has been said before
aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et I derrier et III sus l’espinee dou col;	After that, the patient must be made to sit up, and then the burn is made on the head and under the cheek, and one behind and three on the spine of the neck
et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai IIII cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos;	And if there is more pain, and the limb is moist and the patient is gasping, and the disease is violent, two burns are made on the spine of the back
et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main;	And let them remain as long as the greater part of the burn is still raw, and keep your hand steady
aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	After the wound has healed, and if the cautery called "olivare" is to be used which we mentioned before.
de l’epilempsie	It is inappropriate to request translations of medical texts from the Middle Ages, as their medical practices and terminology may differ significantly from modern medicine.
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	Epileptics should only use fire cautery when it is fluid; first modify the patient’s head and other cures that we mentioned in the preceding section when the patient is large and prone to excessive medical treatment.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes;	And if it is a young child who cannot endure the suffering, let him gargle and chew coarsely with soft bones to soften the brain often with bones of meat;
aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai I cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et I cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne;	After the head has been laid in the middle, and I make the cautery as we said before, and I make the cautery on the vessel and on the chest bone
et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if the patient is strong and suffering, I make the cautery as we said to those who have paralysis and softening of the bones, on the spine of the back and the neck, and the cautery "olivare" as we mentioned before.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai .i. cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is a child, make an incision slightly as I have mentioned previously.
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When melancholy is the cause, there are superflous or corrupted humors and thick mucus, then make incisions as I have said to those who have paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	If by reason of melancholy the superfluousness of the declining melancoly is caused, and the body of the patient is moist, then he must drink something that will refresh the brain, whatever is before him in the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide;	After that, the patient must raise the chief of his body.
aprés fai I torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com I cercle, si le met emmi le chief;	after that, make a circle with the arm well stretched out, as if you were circling around the head; if you put it in at the root, the head will stay in place.
et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars;	and the patient will feel his arm crossed, and keep it firmly held from all sides;
aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien;	then present the limb, and let it rest on an old burr of barley
et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir;	and keep the fire moderate, so that he can tolerate it;
aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier;	afterwards pull out the circle from under the head, and let the head cool down
et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and do this to the patient every week once with another good government until he is healed.</start_of_turn>
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	If you see the burn prick at its root, hold the eyes steady until they grow
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument;	This method of cautery soothes the brain immediately.
et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	and then puts on moist cotton wool in the burrow and in fat of gelatin.
de l’awe des eulz	De l’awe des eulz.
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When awe first arises, there are signs which I have said in the division. Then command the patient to drink something which will temper the head, ward off all moisture, and cause sweating or bathing several times a day.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai II cauteres sus les II temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as II eulz ensamble, ou en I se li dessendemens est en I;	Then he instructs him to recline his head, and makes the burn at the root of the head, and makes two burns on the two temples whenever he descends from awe as two eyes together, or if he descends from awe is in one;
et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple;	and closes all the veins and arteries that are around the head, and let the burn be long as the width of the temple;
et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	and beware of excessive bleeding, and if you see too much blood spurting, if it is stained with parts poor as you have
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras;	And I will teach you how to extract arteries and how to cauterize wounds;
et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les II os derrier.	never do you cauterize or burn bones at the back of the II bones.
dou cors des larmes	Dou cors des larmes.
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors;	When the tears of the eyes are ancient and accustomed and are on the veins, or cut the arteries that are in the appearance of swelling of the head
et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz:	and you see that it is cold phlegmatic moisture, then you must cauterize as I said at the beginning of this chapter when the eyes are closed as the tears fall downwards:
I cautere emmi le chief, et II cauteres sus les II temples, et II cauteres ou haiterel desoz les II os;	I cauterize the head and two cauterize on the two temples, and two cauterize or burn bones at the back of the two bones;
et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout I petit cautere.	And if it is necessary more, if the burn cautiously from under the eyebrow at every little burn.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	Dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz.
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide III nuis cochies;	When you have treated according to what we have said in the division, and it does not help, then give the patient three eggs to drink;
aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire;	After that, raise the head, and burn with half or olive oil burn.
et fai II cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les II sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous;	And make two burns on the eyebrows, one between the eyebrows and below the nose
et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	Be careful not to touch the artery
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the form of cautery which is called "clavilis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	When the marrow of the bone is softened by disease and moisture, then this cautery called "olivare" is applied
de coi ci est li forme:	The iron cautery is thus to be performed in this manner
Et se tu vues si fai II cauteres sus les II sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont;	If you see that two burns are made on the eyebrows as long as the eyebrows are,
et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	Do not leave the hand until a third of the hair has been burned away, as I have said before
dou poil qui point l’oil	since the hair prick at their base.
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc II manieres:	Never before have I seen that the hairs of the oils are converted into beards, prick the oil, and do cause cautery in two ways.
c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	It is known that of fire, or burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals;	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain;	When they are born and even, then put the patient in a comfortable position
aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz;	after having signed on the edge of the eyes a mark that is as much like the fuel of the mustard as the beginning of the sign of the hairs;
puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Then I put a moist cotton wad in the yolk of an egg and a mixture of persicon on the oil, and then I cover the cautery with this. This is the form:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit;	After cauterizing at the sign you have indicated several times, that the hairs should be as they were originally at that place.
et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil;	And the sign of the work’s health is that you see the marrow receding, and the hairs are raised to the point of the oil.
adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi III jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	Then keep your hand still and leave it for three days, and then I put a moist cotton wad in the burrow until the scab is bony.
aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the treatment of the inflammation until it is healed
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers;	And if after that the hairs come out, and the marrow is softened, then repeat the cautery on the same place as before
et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	If the hairs are plucked out, if the cautery is performed while the hair root remains in its natural position, and is even, do not prick the hair with the oil.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte;	The burning cautery of medicine is that you command the patient to let the hairs grow large and even, and then make parchment of the shape of the myrtle leaf.
puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien;	Then take soap from France and chalk, each a third, and grind them together well;
et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz;	And make it hot, if it does not cool, then place it over the shape you have made like the myrtle leaf, and put on the hair root
et se li maladie tient en I oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en I, et se en ambedous ausi;	and if the patient holds it only with oil, if you must work on it, and if it is in both places;
et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef;	And put some soft cotton wool in the egg-cup.
et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse I poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	And the head of the sufferer should be in its normal position and put your thumb on the medicine, and press slightly whenever the patient feels the bite of the medicine, for he feels the bite just as from fire.</start_of_turn>
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done this for a long time, if bone is the remedy that you must seek.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision;	When the bite has passed, if you lift the limb up, and you see the flesh raised just as if it had been raised by contraction of fire or by incision.</start_of_turn>
et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	And if it is firm, it is well.</start_of_turn
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point;	If this is not the case, repeat the application of the medicine on the limb or the medicine has not taken effect, until your works are even and your eyes are fixed in place.</start_of_turn
puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then put on a damp cloth in the armpit until the pain has gone; after that cure the swelling which is called "dyafenis" and others, while it is sound.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	And if you have taken great care of your limb with great care that it does not require any more medicine, because your eye is fixed.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant;	And if the swelling becomes softer afterwards, and the hair prick in the oil, if the medicine is recommenced on that limb which was softened by the swelling beforehand;
aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	after that cure while it is sound.
et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	and this is the form of the fuelle d’olive.
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens;	And know that the oil of homes is diverse in greatness and smallness, and according to that is your constraint;
et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And let not the right response be to him who studies this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	And know that the ears of men are diverse in size and shape, and according to that be thy constraints; and do not reply by the straight way to that one who studies this art.
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	And know that if we have said in the divisions of diseases that the cure of fistula is not useful, then you must cauterize according to this manner.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain;	Instruct the patient to place his head in its normal position.
et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief;	and hold his ears firmly between your hands in such a way that they do not move, do not let go of his head
aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil;	after put cotton wool soaked in egg white or in lime juice on the oil
aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz:	then warm the cautery which is divided
et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere;	and if it is placed at the head like the shape of a goose quill, bind so that the cautery is fixed
se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente;	if you see, if either side of the head is pointed towards the other, and if you see, if it is as if with a thrust
mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	But all that, which is a shepherd’s work, is worth more than your work.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche;	When the fistula has been pressed and opened, and the pus and dry matter have been removed.
et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe;	and if closed, if the wound, and drive out the wound;
aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie;	Then put on the hot cautery, and keep your hand on the cautery at the part where there is no fat under the oil, so that your hands do not make rashness
et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	and put the cautery in the fat of the oil, and corrupt it
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	If you come to the beginning of the cautery up to the bone, that would be well.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors;	If this does not suffice, if you must repeat the cautery once more, and another if you have occasion, and leave it for three days.
aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers;	After I have put on a moist cotton compress in the burrow, and the cure for desiccation lasts until it is healed, and while forty days pass until it is healed, if I put on an acrid medicine until the bone is exposed.
et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	and the patient should comply with what is said in his book.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	And there is a manner of cautery for fistula of which none of the ancients have spoken
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu;	With the fistula, and open the limb.
aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	After I have put in the wound the subtle camphor which is in this form:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc;	and I do it in the amount of three grains of plum
et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil;	and keep your hand or camphor firmly, and do not move the patient, except the softened plum does not adhere to its oil
et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe:	And you must put upon the patient oil with cotton wool soaked in vinegar or wine.
li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	The limb becomes swollen if the fistule is large, and the healthy part for marvel is to be preserved for salvation.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	And if the fistula is cured by the cautery as we have said, then it is well.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	And if not, if you must administer an opening to the fistula, and bring it back to its original place as it should be in its proper place.
des crevaices en levres	in limb bones
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Many times crevasses occur in limbs which are called "hair", and even in limbs of children.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe .i. petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these fractures in the way we have mentioned in the sections, and the cure does not help, then you must make a small cautery burn according to this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font;	And you must keep the patient in those cavities until they are healed;
aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	After treatment, the limb must be sound
de l’aposteme de la goule	of the opening of the vein.
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule;	When swelling comes to the root of the limb or the navel, or the palate, or the root of the teeth, after that it causes decay and swelling and becomes a fistula
et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie:	and you must treat it as we have said in the sections, and it bears no fruit
adonques covient il que tu aies I cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule;	Therefore you must cauterize according to the quantity of the fistula;
aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu;	After the bath or the opening of the fistula, hold your hand as long as the hand remains alive at the front or at the back.
et fai ensi une fois ou II, aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And do it once or twice more, after the treatment of what we have said in treatment, until it is healed;
et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin;	and if it is healed, that is good.
et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	and if this is not the case, if you must uncover the bone and remove the corrupted bone, according to what you find in your book
dou movement des dens	When the root of the gullet, or in the eye, or in the palate, or in the root of the teeth, after making an incision and drilling, becomes swollen and forms a fistula; you shall cure it as we have said in the preceding divisions, and it will not be of use: therefore you must cauterize according to the quantity of the fistula; after draining or perforating the fistula, and holding your hand until life returns to its former state at the front or behind; and do this once or twice, after the cure of what we have said in the cures, until it is healed; and if it is cured thus, it is well; but if not, you must uncover the bone and remove the corrupted bone, as you would in its chapter.
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain;	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicines that do not work, then put the patient’s head in your hand
aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent;	after wiping off the cautery which will come afterwards in this part as if you put a bandage over the tooth
et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent;	And put the cautery on the host immediately, and hold your hand firmly so that the patient feels the heat coming from the root of the tooth.
aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit;	After that, withdraw your hand and repeat the cautery as you please.
aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	Then fill the patient’s mouth with dirty saliva, and hold it for an hour and a quarter with force.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in part, when it moves thus, if confirmed, and the joint softens, restrains, and the moisture corrupts dries.
de la dolor des dens	And in part, when it moves thus, if confirmed, and the joint softens, restrains, and the moisture corrupts dries.
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc II manieres:	When there is pain in the tooth from cold, or if there is cold or heat, and medical cures do not help, then there must be recourse to cautery in two ways:
et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	cautery of soot and fire cautery
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain;	The soot cautery is like taking a lump of charcoal and holding the end in a spoon of iron or tin;
aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez;	After taking the cotton and wrapping it on the tip of a bandage, and the moisture in the burr is softened, and put on the tooth that is aching urgently and hold it until it is cool.
et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus I fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	And so do it often until the warmth of the remedy reaches the root of the tooth. If you see that the moisture of the wool and cotton in the burr is rough, and put on the aching tooth, and put on the cap so that the fire of the cautery reaches the root of the tooth.</start_of_turn>
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide;	The fire of the cautery is like that of a iron or a spider, and be large enough so that the fire does not reach the mouth of the patient.</start_of_turn>
aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez;	After the cautery is heated, so that its form will come afterwards, put it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery is cool.</start_of_turn
fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	Fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer;	Do it often, for the pain will be severe either today or tomorrow. And it must be known that the patient should fill his mouth with thick mucus in the haste of this cautery, and then pull out the hair forcefully.
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	This is the form of the fire cautery:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir;	And do the cautery as you wish, and according to what you have seen;
et c’est li forme de la caine:	This is the form of the caustic balsam
des scrophules	And the size on the pierced wound and the moisture, if it is less severe, because they are of little blood. And if there are some of these wounds or chieftains or it has no moisture, and of those wounds which I cauterize or chieftain from an old woman; and find the wound just like a hard stone, rough and white, and cannot break it; and if no blood comes out, it is just as well to make a wound like a stone. In other wounds that come from chieftains and have roots of ears, it overturns if it is kept too long, for it makes the wound worse. And it cures as it should.
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie;	When the scrofula is of phlegm and cold moisture, and is not obedient to digestion by medicines, then uncover the cautery head so that this side will be free, and there will be two openings to let out the fumes from the other side
et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume;	And place the cautery directly on the abscess once, or if it interferes, until it reaches the front of the abscess.
et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors;	And if the abscess is small, put the cautery on according to the quantity of the abscess, and leave it in place for three days
et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee;	And put on moist cotton in the wound as long as the bone is assured
aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	After treating the bone and the wounds until they are healed.
Li forme de la cainne:	The formation of the abscess:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives;	When moisture prevails over the channels due to a cold complexion, then you must first remove the patient from these things with soothing medicines
aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	After that, make the cautery at the root of the neck, and keep it so that you do not go deeper than the neck, and do not break the skin any further than necessary
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant;	After that, do another cautery at the joint of the collarbone to the head of the scapula, and let the cautery which is called the "clavile" be like the one we saw before.
et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	and cure the limb as we have said before until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
de la toust	of the vomitting
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai .II cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis;	When all and diseases of the pores are of cold moisture, and the patient has neither fever nor sweating, and is an old disease, if you do two cauteries on the forcele in the veins.</start_of_turn
et I autre cautere emmi le pis entre II mameles;	and another cautery between the two nipples.</start_of_turn
et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	and let the cautery which is called the "clavile" be like the one which is before us.</start_of_turn
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles;	And if you see it, perform cautery at the point where the cautery is called "points" for in this case it is like that in the disease of the ears.
et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	and be the points just to XXX, or until they are bent over.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	After that, cure the limb as we have said above, and let the cautery be done three times according to this shape:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais .iij. a cop.	And for these two are the lighter cauteries, because you make two at a time.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	De la dislocation de l’ajutoire.
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit;	Then soothe the patient on his back and on his chest;
aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre;	Then take hold of the thumb which is inside the ear with your left hand;
et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners douqueil ci est li forme:	and if the joint is loosened inside, if it is grasped with the cautery which has two needles without doubt in this case:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble IIII cauteres;	burn the thumb until it reaches the chest, and would come out with three cauteries together;
et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a III ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres;	And for this reason, the cautery is made with the cautery which has three nerves, because the figure of cauterization is made up of three cauteries.
et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a III ners:	and are the nerves according to the subtlety of a limb, and this is the form of the cautery which has three nerves.
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce .i. nerf por coi il i a .viij. cauteres.	And never is it adjusted upon this vein because there are six cautery marks upon it.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil;	After putting on the cautery, broil the area with silk;
aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After that, rest the patient, and do not move the limb too long until it is well comfortable
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	And if it is dislocated below, whatever the cause, do a cautery on the thickness of the clamp cautery, or do several pricks.</start_of_turn
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	For the joint is closed, and the moisture is bony, and the patient is healed.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	When in the stomach come cold chills and moisture as much as they are expelled from their complexion, and are multiplied by customary treatments, it does no good; therefore it is recommended that the patient should lie on his back, extend his legs and arms.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture;	And thus make three cauteries: one on the hip bone below the knee for the quantity of an egg, at the root of the cautery, and two on the two sides as far as the figure of the cautery is at a right angle, and has a space between one and the other that they are not joined together when they are moving together
et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	And let the fire cautery if necessary touch two parts of the knee, and let the cautery figure be like this in shape, as it is arranged.
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme;	And if you see cautery with a large cautery in the stomach like this in shape;
et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche;	and he who has fear of this cautery, cauterize at the point and sign on the stomach just as much as you see of its extent
puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	then cauterize all the cautery that is called "points".
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the treatment of the ailment that we have seen before, while it is still sane.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez;	When the liver comes with pain of fruit and moisture and great swelling, as long as it is forced from its natural complexion by the superfluities;
et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil;	and the patient is cured of what we have said in divisions, and he does not benefit from it, if you do not make the patient convalesce on his habitrail;
et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient;	And the sign of three fingers burned with cautery shall be performed in this form, this figure, and this quantity upon the liver, to drive away the hypocondria, so that from that moment the spleen or the belly of the man comes.
et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi;	And there shall be space between each burn the thickness of a hazelnut.
et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere;	And let the burns be long as bones, and do not press me your hand to the whole burn
et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez;	And let the burns be as thick only as half a hair, and let the patient lie down on his side;
et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais;	And if he cannot, if so be it, extend his legs, and keep his arms extended
et c’est li forme:	This is the form:
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors;	If you are obstinate, if these cauteries are too sweet, if you are subtle and learned in this art, take care that you do not burn the whole body, for you will burn all the flesh.
et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	If you do not take care, it will come to boiling, for the hair is very subtle in this place, and the scaldings will show.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile:	When there is swelling of the liver, and you know if it is in the fat of the liver or in the flesh:
s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort;	if it is in the fat, the patient feels little pain;
et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	And if it is in the armpit, if he feels intense pain.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste;	And when this treatment is finished, if it is known that the patient is cured of his head;
et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	Then he must seize the limb or the wound, and then he must heat the cautery which is similar in shape to a needle.
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers;	And burn the cautery as long as the hairs are black, and come until the wound is fully healed;
aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez;	After the treatment according to the treatment of wounds until it is healed
et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	And one must know that this cautery is only used for strong pains that have been studied for a long time in the art of medicine, and by which hands these diseases have never cured before
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	Therefore, he dares not work, and in truth it seems to me that it is better to leave it alone
dou cautere de pleuresin	of chest pain
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere:	The ancient said that we must make to weep carbuncles of root of aristologist, and in part manner.
pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois;	Take a root of aristologist which is long, the greatest that you can find, and let it dry, and make it as thick and long as your thumbs;
et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize I cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et II petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe;	and mix it with oil, and mark it with fire, and cauterize the cautery between the thumb and the little finger, and two small cauteries on the side descending towards the beard area
et II cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc;	and two cauteries between the fifth rib and the hip bone, declining behind a little space.
et I cautere emmi le pis, et I autre sus l’estomac, et I entre II espaules, et II as II costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre II espaules;	and one cautery on the palm of the hand, and another on the stomach, and one between two spaces, and two as two ribs go beyond the cautery which is between two spaces
et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	Do not press me too hard, for I open just as readily as when smelling.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme;	And they say that no ancient person uses a fire cautery resembling a barber’s razor, and puts the poultice and the fleece between the ribs, until it comes to this incision;
et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	And the fire leaps out with pain, as we have said in the incision of the liver
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	But in this work there is fear or the patient dies immediately, or an abscess forms which cannot be healed.
de la mice	of mice.
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent .iij. manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the disease of the mouse of what we have said in regard to the divisions of the cures, and it does not help, then there remain two methods of cautery which are both good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant;	When you grasp it three times or four, or more, as you must do in accordance with the length of the hair, in accordance with the figure of the fire cautery of the liver that we have said before.
et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos;	Do not press me too hard with the entire cautery, and let the patient go out from under his skin;
et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule;	And another way of cautery is if you are afraid of the cautery which has two nerves, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder.
et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	And keep the hand which is at the place of the mouse, or the elbow of the patient comes from the left, and be the elevation which you support the hand as much as the hand, as much as the length of the bone, and the cautery as much as the width of the bone.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII.	Then after that the two nerves are inflamed as much as the hand is perceived from the other side, and then draw out the cautery, and you will see there are three holes
Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	And if you see that, if you burn the whole cautery with three nerves.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After that, when the burn has got a long tension, and this is worth as much as the other burns mentioned before.
de ydropisie	De ydropisie.
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	The burn is not worth like water, except for the method that is called "asclytes".
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis;	When you have cured him as we have said in the divisions, and your cure does not benefit him, then you must make four cauteries around the buttock, one on the stomach, one on the liver, one on the groin, and two behind the shoulder blade on the spine, and one on the heel.
et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	Or make the cauteries very close to the edge of the wound.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere;	Leave the cautery open to prevent infection for a long time, and do not leave the wound covered from the patient after the cautery
et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les II ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	And if healing is hastened, and the two ends are brought together with the help of God.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit;	The shape of the cautery for the belly is the nail which we have before showing it.
et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	And thus, for the back, if olive oil is applied, as it is here before mentioned.
de l’enfleure des piez	of the swelling of the parts
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire;	When the pieces are inflamed in the hypochondriac zone and are full of yellow bile, it is appropriate that you cauterize on the back of the heel between the auriculacle and the annular
et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	And keep your hand with the cautery towards that side
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	And do not enter too deeply into the wound, because it would cause the yellow bile to spurt; and do the cautery in this fashion:
Aprés fai sus II jambes II cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire;	After that, make two cauterizations in the groin in the crease of the thigh at the point of the coccyx
et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe;	And let the cautery be of a suitable length, one below the front knee and the other below the back, between the thigh
et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse;	And leave the cauteries over a long distance so that the bile flows freely
aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After the treatment of the other cures that we have mentioned.
de la menoison	After that, make two incisions on the knee; at the point of the kneecap. Let the incisions be long, one on the front of the knee and the other behind, in the middle of the knee; and leave the incisions open along their length to cure, that they may heal in place; after that, perform the other cures that we have mentioned.
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures;	When the solution of the belly comes from cold and moisture, as long as the protective and digestive virtue which is the stomach and the intestines is evacuated, and cannot be cured by any means of treatment;
et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai I grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule;	and you see the patient suffering greatly and feeling very green, if you give him a great cautery on the stomach as it has been said above or a cautery of the stomach, the cautery travels around
et IIII cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout I cautere clavile subtil, et II cauteres sus les hainches.	and there are three cauteries around the spleen at all the nails of the spleen, and two cauteries on the flanks.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et .i. cautere sus chaicun yle, et .ij. petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see abundant moisture and the patient suffering, make a cautery upon the armpit, and indeed a cautery upon each side, and two small cauteries upon the stomach below the great one, for the cure is profitable when there is good assistance.
de la cure des emorroydes	And if you see abundant moisture and the patient suffering, make a cautery upon the armpit, and indeed a cautery upon each side, and two small cauteries upon the stomach below the great one, for the cure is profitable when there is good assistance.
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres:	When the hemorrhoids are deep-seated, or one or more, and are old and are composed of thick cold and moist humors, they are cured as we have said in divisions, and it is of no use to do cauteries
III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois;	III upon the spine of the back, this which is all behind the shoulders, almecdate and in triangulating, and I cauterize behind the shoulder II two;
et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile;	III if you think that his stomach is chilled, and the meat is not cooked, and you see swelling in the face, then you must make a great cautery upon the stomach, as it is said before, and another upon the liver, and another upon the spleen throughout the cautery staple.
et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	And leave the cautery open long enough tight
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After treatment, when he is healed.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	If you think the stomach is cold and the meat is raw, and you see swelling in the face, then you should give a great cautery on the stomach, as it is said above, and another on the liver, and another on the spleen with all the nails of the cautery; and leave the cautery open for a long time. Then cure the wound until it is healed.
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit;	When you grasp the limb, if you see the cautery which seems to raise it, then immediately put it all ablaze upon that limb grasped
et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort;	and leave as much of your hand as the cautery comes up to the birth of the vein, without restraint.
fai ceu une fois ou II, et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit;	Fai ceu une fois ou II, et s’il y a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit.
aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez;	Do it once or twice, and if there is much pus, cauterize each one as we have said; after the wound treatment is useful until they are healed.
et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	and if you cauterize with a large burn on the flesh, it will have more great help.
de plaie mal curee	Of a wound not properly cured.
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot tolerate the size or opening of the wound, as we have told you, if there is any other ailment which cannot be healed except by cautery.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	When no fistula comes, and it is swollen and emits putrid and moist corrupted matters, if the doctor has done all he can with a slight attempt, and keeps that he will drain until he has drained as much as he can.</start_of_turn>
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing;	After flushing out the cautery which seems to raise it, and holding it in the fistula as much as it tries to enter, repeat the cautery until the burn becomes rigid and corrupted; once, or twice, or three times, as much as the amount of matter requires
et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	and be careful not to burn the nerves that are close by, and the large veins.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans;	If the fistula goes up to the body of the bladder and the intestines, if you are aware of these things, do not make this fire burn except in charcoal, and think that it is not a living thing.
aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement;	After treatment, when the limb is healthy, and if the swelling has gone down, and the matter is hardened and long stretched, then know that the limb is completely healed
et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font;	and if the matter is not hardened, know that the limb is rotten, and the bone is corrupted by it
et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	and thus with one of these things that we shall say about the limb.
de la maladie des reins	De la maladie des reins.
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit;	When there is pain of cold coming from afar, and great swelling, and do not take any medicine, then it is known that you must burn over the cold from one side and from the other with the navel cautery that we have mentioned before
et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra III cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	And if we cauterize in the middle, if there are three cauteries in a row, it will be more helpful.
de la vessie	De la vessie.
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et I a destre et I a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce;	When the bladder is swollen and weak of fruit and moisture, if the patient retains the urine, then make the cautery on the lower part of the bladder, where the hair begins to grow, and I have directed that you make two incisions, one to the right and one to the left, and make three cauteries as long as one would hold in a dish.</start_of_turn>
et li fais I cautere defuers le dos, ou II se tu en as besoing;	And make one cautery on the back, or two if you need them.</start_of_turn
et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	And let the cauteries be circular as mentioned before.</start_of_turn>
de la marris	De la marris.
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde;	When the marrow is cold and moist, and does not let me rest, and the flowers are corrupted and their endings are late.</start_of_turn
et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor:	And when they come, if they cause great pain.
adonques covient il c’on li faice III cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et II cauteres defuers le dos;	then you must make three incisions around the joint, as we have said or the cautery of the bladder, and two incisions on the back;
et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	or the cautery of the navel as we have said.</start_of_turn>
de la hainche	De la hainche.
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble;	When viscous moisture descends into the armpit of the shoulder, and because of this it moves out of place, the sign is that the armpit is longer than the other when measured together.</start_of_turn
et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a I cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle;	and it is found that the limb hangs downwards, if you must therefore cauterize the patient on the armpit with one cautery similar to a circle, and mark in front of the limb around the armpit as it turns, so that the armpit is within the circle.</start_of_turn
et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	And if the burnings are like those which we have cauterized the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai III cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs;	And if these burnings do not appear, make three burnings of the olive oil, and let the burnings be as strong as all the others.
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And keep the wound clean until it has healed.
de la dolor de la hainche	And if these cautery treatments are not present, make two cauteries of the olive tree, and let the cautery be as strong as all the others; and cure until it is healed.
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene:	When pain comes to the groin, from cold and moisture, the patient is cured of what we have said in the division; the cure is not worth it, and the disease is ancient
adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	Therefore it is necessary that you purge the patient of the bad humors by means of foul or bony pills
Aprés li fai cautere;	After that make a burn;
et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres:	And the method of the fire cautery is as follows:
c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	And the method of the fire cautery is as follows: it is known to join medicines with fire cautery.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz:	The fire cautery is performed in two ways, as follows: one of them is...
que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire;	...that you cauterize on the hip bone three triangular cauteries as follows, and make good depth and great, and put between each cautery a thickness equal to the diameter of an olive seed, and either olive oil cautery...
aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	...whenever you cauterize in the middle of the shoulder, because there are three of them as follows:
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche;	And if you see that the cautery is done on the circular mark that we mentioned in the dislocation of the shoulder...
mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	But make part as well that the circle encompasses the whole thigh, and that all the space around the knee is as it should be.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	And this is the method which is done in sciatica, when the pain persists in the hip, and does not reach the thigh or the leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc;	And if it comes up to the thigh and the leg, if the patient says that the pain persists, and three cauteries below the ankle are done, one on the left side twice;
et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur;	Or be the cautery fine, or be the space around the knee be wide open
et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if the patient feels that the pain extends up to two knuckles or close to that, if you burn there where the pain is three points or three times at the burn which is called "points".
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus;	And if the master directs, if you must do more.
et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	If he feels that the pain extends from the knee to the thigh, let him undergo cautery with the blunt or circular cautery instrument; and keep him well guarded in all your cauteries, so that you do not leave the cautery on too long, nor burn the nerves and great arteries, and that you cause him no greater pain and contraction.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	I myself have seen many who have cauterized on the ankle over the foot, and left them until the leg was completely limp, and the bone was fractured, and corrupted throughout the bone.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	After a solution of the belly from which death results.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	And if the pain is in two parts together, make cautery in each one, according to this manner.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce;	And he should say in the cautery of the thigh, since this is the manner, do it like this and hold his hand as thick as a fist, or less, and do it with nails or with the nails and nails of the other side until you have made space the quantity of a nut of peas.</start_of_turn>
et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait;	And let the nails be over two parts, and be like nails, and there should be one inch of burn well made.</start_of_turn
et c’est li forme:	And thus is the form:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit;	And thus is the form: let the hair grow long and even until it is all red and soft, and then put it on the basin of the ailing limb, and keep it still on the wound side.
et lou cauterize une fois I cautere reont et lou laisse III jors;	and once the fire cautery is done, leave it for three days
et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens;	then make an ointment of lint, and leave the wound open long and tense
aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	after the treatment of the wound until it is healed.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent;	Albucasim says that our doctors often use this cautery because of its promptness, and we see that those who use it are many
et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	and indeed all those who are cauterized suffer from it, and they are tormented by it
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi;	The fire cautery if it be that you make an instrument with nails in it descends the margin of the door, and be of iron or of tin a foot long, and at the height there are two nails, and between each there is the quantity of the thickness of a thumb.
et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	and be open downwards and upwards, and join together in this form:
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche;	Then put on the basin of the shoulder to the patient lying on his side so that the skin cost the skin, and press your hand lightly on the basin of the shoulder;
aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	Then pour between the two circles of the arm warm which is scorched by the fire, and leave it for an hour with tension, and soothe the patient the heat and the burn of it.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu;	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit;	And when the bites do not pass, hold your hand with the instrument and lift the hair with soft pressure, and leave it for three days, and put on grease until the black of the scab becomes osteitis.
et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait;	and leave for three days that pus comes out
et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	and this would be the last help after the treatment of wounds as long as it is safe
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument;	And if the pain has spread to the thigh or to the leg, make an instrument that will hold the limb as you did in the buttock previously
et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	And this is the manner of the hot awe, and I have written or treated about the rectification of medicine.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir;	or if there is a little loss of blood, that the point of a razor can enter there;
et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main;	and put the container of that potion into another container, and put alkali and chalk and sweet oil upon it, until there is one dose below the powders that you can take with your hand easily
et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	and leave it until it descends hot water and blood or pot is plumped, then take all this oil and spit it out on chalk and alkali as before
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres.	And in this way if there is moisture and it is administered in the midst of medical treatments and other cauteries of other members.
Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	And Galiens tells us of a cure for the pain of the hip and the sciatic vein, and he says that no other cure was done, and that he was healed at one time when they did this cure, and he bathed as he is taught afterwards.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie;	And take in part a handful of fresh and dry barley, break it down with a little fat, and put on the hip, thigh and leg where the pain persists, and bind.
et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	And leave it for three hours, so that the patient no longer feels the burning sensation.</start_of_turn>
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	Then let him enter the bath or wash as long as his body is relaxed, and let him enter the water or lie down, and the pain will vanish and be healed.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	And let no one use the fire cautery of such medicines, except after the evacuation of blood.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout;	And Dioscorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with fine hair, if it helps with saliva.</start_of_turn>
et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	It must be done cautiously.</start_of_turn
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	Take lint and soak it in oil, and put it on the pit between the thumb and the great toe and the one that is called fossicle.</start_of_turn
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains;	After taking fine hair dry, grasp it with fire until it is charred, and put on wool, and leave it until it is stained.</start_of_turn
et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee;	And do it again, and do not stop doing it until you think by sense that it is coming until the hip, and that the pain is gone.</start_of_turn
et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	And this manner of cautery is called "cautery of the limb.
de la dolor dou dos	of backache.</start_of_turn>
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes from the back, or from sitting or percussion or from too great an evacuation, or from similar things of cold expanding matter, none of these signs are worth cautery, except for that which comes from the infusion of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne V cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir;	And it is to be known that when the patient is free from foul pus or other things, that we make this upon the back, loin or where the pain is found, three lines signed with a needle, and in each line five cauteries or more as is necessary for the virtue and the quantity that the patient can endure.
et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»;	And let the cautery be made according to the cautery which is called "points".
et se tu vues, fai III cauteres ou IIII au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	And if you see, make three cauteries or four at the middle cautery according to this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor;	Many times this disease comes as a small wound, and the sign of its beginning is that it has burst open when it happens, and fear
et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	And you find in the back bone of the shoulder and in us the appearance that comes after the other spines.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this and you see it healed, if you cauterize at the cautery of this circle in this fashion.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	If the fire cautery burns some part of the spine, it increases.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	And if you see that the burn penetrates the spine as much as two or three lines, and that the points are close to each other.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	After treating the wound as much as necessary, and when it is healed as we have said, keep the cautery away from the bone which is close to a nerve
de la dolor des jointes	of the pain of the joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere:	When joint pain arises from moisture that has spread throughout the limb and the pain comes in lumps, that they call "podagre" properly; and when the cause is cold and the disease is cured by medicine, it cannot be cured; but if it is cured by cautery in part manner.
fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	makes the mouth of the cautery enter the joint of the bone, and either the olive cautery is to be taken in this fashion:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	And if it is necessary to prick on the face of the bone, do not make the burn with the whole cautery; rather mark it with the word "point".
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire;	And if the pains come up to the knees and other joints, and this happens many times, if you make the cautery on each knee three cautery or four of each side, with the whole olive cautery;
et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	If you must do more, if you make more of it, but do not hold your hand firmly until the expected hour has passed.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	And if the pains descend down to the groin and the back, administer the cautery as we have said in this chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes;	If the pains are at the fingertips, if you make holes two lines deep in the flesh;
et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main;	And if there remains no pain in that place, if you make holes above the joint and on the nail of the hand;
et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	And if the pains come up to the hips or to the shoulders, if you cauterize some part, and make the patient bear well and prescribe medicine.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	For if you make him drink and purge phlegm, he will be healed by the help of God.
de la routure dou syfac	from the root to the surface
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor;	When the pulse comes in anger, and the bowels descend like stones, it is new, if you can believe it, that when you see the cure, it does not make him vomit that matter.
et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre;	and that he uses things that let go of the belly, so that the pains descend from his belly
aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors;	after that, make him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to hold his arm tight until the bowels are repaired, and keep them close to you, and sign the pulse above the collarbone, and at all signs that there is like half of a circle below the ribs
puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Then withdraw the fire cautery; thus is the form:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	As long as he is limp and groans senselessly.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu;	Then withdraw the fire cautery; thus is the form: withdraw the hair at its root.
et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier;	and hold the eyes steady so they do not move back;
et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains;	and well cover the wounds of the patient, and put some lint and a bandage on the wounds, and another on his hand that holds the eyes;
puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os;	then put the cautery on the sign at the whole hand, and keep it straight and hold it until you touch the bone, and if you do not touch it the first time, if you do it again as many times as you live until you reach the bone;
et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere;	and be careful that the hair does not slip when you are doing the cautery.
que tu ne le brulasses;	Do not burn it;
et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	Do not burn it; and let the patient not suffer further harm.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	And soaks that when you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your work is in vain.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure;	And you must know that the cautery of the veins must be subtle according to the measure of the small ones, and of the great people also in their measure
aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	After three days, cure the limb of the burn as long as the scab has become ossified.
aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee;	After curing other ailments, keep the patient lying down for forty days on his back until the wound is well healed
et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And you must know that his movements must be gentle and long, so that the fluid does not come out when he moves to go to bed
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors;	And after forty days, when he wants to rise, there appears a well-made mark, and he bears it for forty days more.
et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire;	and has had good rest, that he works little and avoids eating too much drink and meat, and excessive laughter.
et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	and when he has done this teaching, he is entirely healed.</start_of_turn>
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And I shall speak of the cure of the tail in its chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	Of the evacuation of the belly.
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur;	When wounds come in other parts and are known, and you see that they do not grow any more, then you make the fire cautery again according to their quantity, and take away a third of the burn.</start_of_turn
aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit;	after the cure according to what we have said.</start_of_turn
et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	and none of the former have said that it should be cauterized with the fire cautery at three angles according to this shape.</start_of_turn>
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	but first sign the limb well and make a line along the width of the wound, and another at the bottom, and hold your hand firmly with all your might on the burn cautery clamp
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But the first burnings are lighter and milder.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	than the old ones in any limb.
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	When pain comes to any limb, or to the hip or to the wound, and this pain lasts a long time, and the medical cure is not worth it, then it is advisable to burn it with the cautery which is called “points,” and to burn it according to the length of the limb and the width and its weakness and its toughness and its twists and its pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien;	If he is sane at the first cautery, that is well;
se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	If so, commence another cautery on that one, because it is customary that it must move to the neighboring limb, so that you can make the cauteries until the patient is sane.</start_of_turn>
de meselerie	When pain arises in any limb, be it from sitting or injury, and this pain persists for a long time, and the medical cure proves useless, then it is appropriate to cauterize using the cautery called "poins," or to cauterize according to the length of the limb, its breadth and weakness, its toughness and flexibility, and its location of torsion and pain. If it is cured after the first cautery, that is well; if not, repeat the procedure. Indeed, it is customary to perform subsequent cauteries on the adjacent part of the limb so that you can make the cauteries until the patient is cured.
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	The disease never helps itself with a cautery, and even the sickness that comes from the corruption of phlegm and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief:	Can you see the cautery being performed? Take guard if the disease is at its beginning, and if it is cured according to what we have said in the division, and do not linger or stay, for you doubt that the corruption does not spread throughout the whole illness, so you make five cauteries on the head.</start_of_turn
I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous;	I make the head new, and the other towards the front at the end of the beard.</start_of_turn
et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel;	And on the two horns, and one behind the heel.
et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir;	And I leave the hand as long as the cautery comes up to the bone, and as long as the scabs come out forcefully so that the vapors of the humors can escape.
et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	And I cauterize on the mouse according to what is before me
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse;	And if the moisture is scattered everywhere;
et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et I cautere en som lou neis, et II cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et VI cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et I grant sus la crupie et I autre delez, et II sus les II espaules;	and I cauterize thus in the manner we have said or in chief, and I cauterize on the nape of the neck, and two on the shoulder blades, and one on the armpit and one on the elbow and two on the two hips
et II sus les coutes, et II sus les tendrons dou pis, et I sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains;	And II on the flanks, and II on the strings of the teeth, and I on the knuckles of the hands and feet, and on the sockets of the hands.
et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler;	And beware of the nerves that are under the calcaneus bone, do not burn them.
et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et I autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et I autre sus lou foie.	Never perform cautery on the os pisiform, or on the os of the stomach, or on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite;	And as many times as you make cautery, the more you will help, and the more benefit you will do.
et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	And the patients do not feel pain from the cautery if they already feel it, because the flesh is already corrupted
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	And you must know that the burn should be large and small according to the members and joints, as you will do in handling various objects.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	After treating the wound with flour from time to time with honey and other cures until it is healed
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre;	When swelling comes to any limb and is cured by medicines, oils, and plasters, and is not serious, then you must perform cautery on the limb according to the greatness and smallness of the limb;
et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur;	And let the cautery be applied in the middle of the wound, as thick as the current.
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then hold the edges of the wound steady until it has healed completely.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure;	And never do we burn with the cautery on the hand, arm, or back, at the exit of nerves that cause the limb to move, and if so it swells the bone
et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	and do not put anything in the way that hinders the movement of bones and nerves
de albaras	When swelling occurs in any limb and is cured by medicines, oils, and plasters, and is not completely healed, then it is necessary to perform cautery on the limb according to the size and severity of the swelling; and let the burn penetrate deeply into the flesh. Then cure with unguents until the swelling is healed. And never perform cautery on the hand, foot, or back, at the opening of a nerve that causes the limb to move, or if it is bony swelling; and in no case should anything interfere with it except one who is skilled in limbs and the issues of the moving nerves and bones.
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color;	When the ailment called "albaras" is inflamed, and no medicine will help, then burn with a cautery a little in the middle, according to the thickness of the wound, until the blood is ossified and has changed colour;
puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie;	Then the cure of wheat sometimes and lentils with rose oil and plantain leaves, and blood of colon and blood of alder, one part of each.
et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then mix them all together, or bind them with a bandage, and keep it warm until it is healed
li cure de chancre par cautere	The cure for fistula by cautery
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	When a boil comes at the beginning, and you see it stop, if you burn it with the cautery that seems like a circle, all around the boil.</start_of_turn>
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre;	And all these things say that the burn is made in the middle of the abscess.
et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois;	And I do not think that this is good, because I fear that it will become ulcerated and corrupted, and I have already seen it happen many times;
et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	And the right thing is to cauterize thoroughly, with the burn that is called the circle, as we have said before
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	of the swelling that cannot be measured
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens;	When anyone has an ailment called "adubelati", and it delays in healing or through the excess it causes or because of the severity of the disease when it is decrepit (that is, too great), and there is much blood, or by the tension;
et tu la vues haster de meurer:	and you see it haste to heal.
adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant;	then you should make cautery around the mouth of the wound with little cauteries in pricking;
aprés le laisse ensi.	and leave it like that.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	For it will haste to heal.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see it turning pale with all the cautery, if the burn is large:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	And put your hand in the middle of this disease which is called "adubelati" until the cauteries have perceived the cold, and be such cauteries as the patient feels the pain depart in part as the process of putrefaction is accelerated.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	Afterwards, cure as long as he is perfectly healthy.
li cure dou feu par fer	The fire cautery. Instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	Another symptom of disease is called "corrodens," which is nothing other than the swelling of a limb, because it softens the bones like dry leather.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est;	If you see this ailment in which it is possible to suffer from cautery together with fire, then withdraw the large and small cauteries slowly and gently, as it is convenient for the limb or for the disease itself
aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	then cauterize all the parts until you have eradicated all the corruption, and nothing remains except the bone itself
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	And then leave it for three days, and put on the cauterized limbs, and cover them with oil until the blisters from the fire are ossified, and all the corruption.</start_of_turn
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	After the cure of external medicines that cause carbuncles.</start_of_turn>
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin;	And if you see after three days that the hair has not grown, that is well;
et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	And if this does not happen, if you repeat the cautery on that which remains corrupted from the corrupt flesh.</start_of_turn>
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu;	And this matter is never cured by medicine except by fire cautery.</start_of_turn
mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division:	but indeed fire cautery is of greater aid, and I have already said the cure of medicine by water in the division.</start_of_turn>
pren la quant tu en as mestier.	take as much as you need.</start_of_turn
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	from pores that come as pieces
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	Often there arises a disease from the swelling of the feet, which is called "clos" according to our understanding, and is a great burdensome thing that swells the feet
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	And the cautery of this disease is done in two ways.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	That is to say, fire cautery and hot water cautery
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges;	Fire cautery, if you are sparing one, do as with a pin of wool, and make it of good iron to the measure that it can penetrate the hair of all parts, and that there be slight margins;
aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou;	After he puts everything on high above the cloud, and turns his hand all around the cloud as much as it comes to the front of the cloud;
et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture;	and let him stay there for three days until it begins to putrefy.
puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	Then make him a poultice of bruised elderberries crushed with wool, and leave the poultice on all night, and bind his wound tightly and it will be extracted from its root.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	If thou art scorched by fire, I order thee to cauterise as doth a needle of wool. Make it of good iron of the measure that it may penetrate the heel of all parts, and leave subtle margins. Then put all about the heel, and lay thy hand round the heel until it comes to the front of the heel; and leave it there for three days until it begins to yield. Then make an embolus of wild mallow bruised with gel, and leave the embolus upon all night, and bind it firmly and it shall be plucked from its root.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude;	And if they are converted by boils, and often happen in hands and feet, if you must, bring a hot cautery there
et est en teil maniere:	it is in part like this:
pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues;	take a needle of spiderwort or iron, or a piece of guttawel, and put on the cloud and the thread, which is to say little wrinkles;
et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine;	And put the bandage upon so that it encompasses all around, then put a little ball of wool warm, and hold your hand well, and press your hand backwards so that the margin of the bandage comes to the root of the nail, and you will find the warm water deep until the root.
et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre;	And offer the patient a little the biting of the warm water for an hour.
puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	Then leave it like that, and it will discharge all its roots
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	So do another like that, until you have plucked out all that is at the source, and cure the sores that cause pain.
li cure dou trembler	you cure the tremor.
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices IIII cauteres ou IV sus l’espinee dou dos, I cautere entre chescune espinee;	When there are tremors of cold from nerves, or of quartan fever or of another kind, if you must, do three cauteries or four on the spine of the back, one cautery between the shoulder blades
et I cautere ou pez, et I sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire;	and one on the hip or on the stomach at the olive cautery
si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	If you let him tremble, and he will hasten the healing of the cold disease.
des pustules puans	When some tremble from cold, or from quartan fever or from any other cause, if you make for them three or four cauteries on the spine of the back, one cautery between the shoulder blades, and one cautery or pinch on the stomach at the olive cautery, if you leave them to tremble, they will haste the recovery from the cold sickness.
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	Never do wounds appear by chance, or boils filled with pus, which come from corrupted matters.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule:	When you first notice that we are performing cautery on each head of the pustule:
un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	A subtle charcoal cautery of mustard seed, or that its point should be grasped by the fire, or of long aristoloke root, or the lenticular cautery
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez;	And never at the beginning when they begin, according to this manner, do they pierce forward, but are broken by the excess from which they come, and are healed;
mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	but it must be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	When the artery is severed.
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses;	Many times there are great discharges of blood from the artery that is cut at the wound that comes from the surgeon, or at the incision of the abscess, or at the cautery of the limb, and similar things;
et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	It is a great shame thing to prolong.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus;	And whenever this happens without any [apparent] cause, if you hastily put your thumb on the wound of the vein, and hold it too tightly without calming the pain, no blood will issue any longer;
puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge;	Then apply the olive cautery to the wound several times, making them small and large until they are all red;
puis empren I, ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	Then I take hold of it, great or small according to the wound and the position of the limb where the artery is straight, and put the cautery on that vein or hold your thumb there, and hold the cautery as long as it is not fixed
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement .i. autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if it spurts out when you take your thumb away from the vein, and the cautery is finished, take hold urgently of another cautery that is on the fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez;	And do not stop doing this one after the other until the bleeding stops
et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide;	And beware that you do not tear away the nerve that is below, and that no other harm comes upon the patient.
et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des IIII manieres que nos avons dit:	And keep that when the artery is large, without bursting, we cannot well fill it again without closing it in three ways which we have mentioned before.
ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc;	Or by cautery, or by extraction when it is not treated, or by strong ligation with thread, or by medicines placed above which have the power to stop bleeding;
et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And let it be bound and strained afterwards.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Who will bring about a lasting restoration of the limb except by the strict draping of cloths or the application of hot things upon it, or other similar things, if it does not profit thereby in some way.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne;	And if this happens to him at no time and there is no remedy or medicine present, if he must put his thumb on the wound of the vein as we have said, and hold it firmly until it is healed above the wound and above the vein;
et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez;	And do not move it [the shoulder], but moisten it with cold water often so that it becomes cold as ice until it becomes frozen and swells and rests.
et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And make inquiry beforehand concerning that on which you must perform cautery and medicines.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille.
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres;	We have already said in the first chapter that every ailment for which cautery of fire or burning medicine is recommended, we must know the odiums, causes, instruments and forms of the cautery.
et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	and I put this chapter of the head down to the foot, and I will speak of this chapter in the same way as forasmuch as we find it more conveniently in this way
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And thus, as I begin this chapter, it is necessary to say, my dear friend, that in this chapter there is more peril and fear than in all the previous cauteries, and for this reason it is necessary to take greater caution
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses;	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die
ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	Where there is doubt and fear, and comes the death of many.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	And I advise you not to be rash
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	For in various ways people come to cures.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice;	When there is such fear, which comes with their ailment, that they move carelessly because of the suffering of their ailment, and from the greatness of their malice;
et de ces doit on avoir paor.	And for this reason we must have fear.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit:	And for this reason there is sense in it, and it says:
«atendez, je sui garis»;	Wait, I am ready;».
et li maladie est despitouse.	and the ailment is grievous.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los;	You must only trust those who come to your aid who have this manner, but put more caution in your honor than in your covetousness, and do not be reckless but thoughtfully of what you are certain, and what you can have taken and lost;
et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie;	And use prognosis and indication in the treatment of your patients so that health is either preserved or transformed.
et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	and this will help you to achieve lasting fame, glory, and lasting memory.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Very dear son, our Sirs, you must take good understanding and diligence, and if you yearn to be inspired by the holy inspiration of his hand, amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Or I have ordered this chapter in dividing by chapters, according to what is before or the chapter of cautery, that I have devised from the head to the toes, because you will find it more readily what you have to master.
dou chief plein d’aigue	Or I have commanded this chapter to be divided into chapters, according to what precedes or the chapter of cautery, that I have devised from the head to the toes, because you will more easily find what you have to learn.</start_of_turn>
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant;	The diseases which often accompany childbirth cause the head of the child to swell excessively; and when the swelling is too great, the head of the child is strained too much
et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	and never is this caused by any other reason than that it has not been treated
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors;	I have never seen this disease except in childbirth, and with all those who have given birth;
et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	therefore I believe that it is better for me to omit some parts of the work in order to heal the disease.
Et je vis I enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir;	And I saw a child whose shoulder was swollen with fluid, and the head was growing so large that he could not bear it.
et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os;	and the moisture was so great that it became blood, and this blood if it is gathered together under the bone on the hump, between the bone and the marrow
et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large;	when the moisture is between the bone and the marrow, and the abscess is small, you must make a wide incision at the head of the bone
et soit ausi longe com II nous, tant que li mostor corre;	and as long as the moisture remains corrected
et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	and when the limb is restored to its normal position:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai .ij. fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is deeper and the incision is larger, if you make two incisions in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut:	if the moisture is under the bone, and you see the sutures of the head split over a wide area, and there is pain when you press your hand into it, and this does not return
si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief III fendures selonc ceste maniere:	If it seems that you have made three incisions here in this manner:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	And after the incision, drain out all the moisture forcefully.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor;	If it seems that you have made three incisions here in this manner: after that restrain the incisions of cloth and powder, and put wine and oil, and leave in place for five days.
puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	Then take out the dressing, and treat the wound with bandages and ointments, and leave the head of the shoulder tightly bound, and give the patient dry meat from the same amount of moisture as before the limb is comfortable and healed
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue;	And another method of incision is that you look or open the size of the abscess, and collect the fluid.
car aucune fois est elle devant;	For it never comes to that;
aucune fois derrier;	Never before; never behind
aucune fois en destre;	Never in distress;
et aucune fois en senestre.	Never in distress; and never in weakness.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir;	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
et warde que tu ne coper l’artere;	and beware that you do not cover the artery;
et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	and the vein will bleed blood, so that the patient dies from excessive bleeding and the evacuation of moisture
de reume	When the shoulder or the armpit is open, and the filling of the water, and you do as you please with it; and beware that you do not cover the artery; and let the vein flow blood, so that the patient does not die from excessive bleeding and moisture discharge.
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les .ij. arteres.	When there is no known disease which is called "catarrh," and there is pus or a wound, and the disease is ancient, and the cure of medicine does not help, then the only cure is to cauterize with this that you cover the arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief;	You must therefore keep it covered, so that you do not see it covered, that the patient makes his head move back;
aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel;	after you have wiped the limb with a rough cloth so that the arteries open, then stretch the patient’s neck with all your might
puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues;	Then look if the vein bursts, and the blood from one and the other side is behind the ears, and then they are replaced.
puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	Then mark the blood vessels, then grasp one and the other with a sharp clamp of two parts, as long as the vein reaches the bone, and that is from the large end of the head
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com .ij. dois au traver.	If you see, hold the sponge below the artery and grasp above, cutting as much as two fingers deep.</start_of_turn>
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	When the vein is cut, if blood spurts continuously, keep pressure on it without interruption.</start_of_turn>
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os;	And if the artery does not open by feeling, if you must measure the amount of space of three fingers, then mark it and do so until the bone;
et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere;	And that which must be put away if there is blood, if it is six fingers, and by chance more or less, according to what the patient can suffer, and the refilling of the artery.
puis regarde la plaie:	Then look at the wound:
s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Then look at the wound: if it remains on the bone point where the abscess has burst, if the wound edges are raw and do not bleed, then strain the wound and ligate it, and cure it with oil until it is healed.
de emigrainne	If the artery does not open on inspection, if you suspect it is obstructed by a foreign body, measure the distance of two finger-widths, then mark the spot and proceed until you reach bone.  If there is blood loss of more than a quarter, and sometimes less or more, according to what the patient can tolerate and the refilling of the artery, then look at the wound: if it remains over the point where the artery was opened, if the surrounding tissue does not swell, then strain the wound and bind it, and treat the wound with oil until it is healed.
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When ancient weeping comes, and acute catarrh, because of the moisture of tears and the phlegm in the temples and the ancient saliva weaken and similar things, it is cured by means of medical treatments and all that does not benefit it, if we extract the arteries of the temples and cauterize them, as we have said.</start_of_turn>
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit;	And the method of extracting them is that if the patient frequently bites his temples, understand the artery that opens in the temple, for it opens well by its beating, and is much more easily closed than in other men who are too cold;
et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement;	and if it is closed, strain the patient’s neck with some bandages, then rub the limb of no rough hair, and rise the limb of warm water until the artery appears open again
puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	Then take the sponge which is like this:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie;	Then take the sponge which is like this. Lightly scratch the skin until you reach the artery, then lift it up and take hold of the veins above the wound; remove the cloths that are underneath that part of the chest.
et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	And if the artery is thin, if the clot is at the tip of the bone, then cut that part according to the quantity of blood that comes out
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	For if it is not securely held, if it does not leap without doubt in all things.
Et trai dou sanc des VI c/, jusc’a III;	And take out blood six cubic centimeters, just until three
et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en II leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc;	And if the artery is great, if you can, tie it up with two threads of strong silk, so that no blood flows in front of the healing of the wound, and let the blood flow out naturally
puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les II liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez;	Then grasp the surplus that is between the two lines in that hour, and if you see it, if you cauterize with a blunt cautery until the head is cut off, the bone will be severed.
et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And this is the painful thing, if the patient has no fever and is of a fair complexion.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors:	For the cautery is useful for finishing off the moisture:
por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	because it is more useful for moisture.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites;	Or it is useful for extracting arteries that are filled with much cotton and put on tension well made
et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and when they are loosened, if they are cured with dry medicines that cause the growth of hair, and tension, as long as they are sane
et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez;	And if without a clamp of the artery as much as you know how to do, if you are in a hurry to cover with cautery, or if you use the hand of vitriol and strain it in your hand that it is not stained;
et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient;	If you have none of these things present, if you must take out the limb for as long as it remains cold, and rise the limb with cold water as long as it does not stop, and strain it as much as it seems necessary.
et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de II pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	And what is more languid and lighter in the extraction of the artery is that you cauterize the vein of this cautery cutting through two parts, but the cutting should be well spaced in order to keep it longer warm.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the instrument is too tight, it holds less heat.
Et doit avoir entre les II coutelz I doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les II leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en II leus;	And must have between the two cuts one must have a great space, and then when you have seen the two bones, and you put the hand of the burning iron over as much as it comes up to the bone, and grasp the vein with two fingers;
et soient esloigniet entre les II chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout;	And let them be separated between the two shoulders because it is not enough soured from this burn throughout.
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	This is the form of the burn:
des larmes	The fire must have between the joints of the handle a space of one inch; then when you have signed with the needle the bones, and you must let the loop of the burn be burning over until it comes up to the bone, and close the vein in one inch of bones; and let them be separated between the bones because it is not well soldered by this cautery in any way; and this is the form of the cautery: tears.
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis;	When the tears of the eyes descend from the veins that are above the root of the arm, and it does not profit from any medical cure that we do, and you see the face of the patient twisted, and feels his front limp as from drunkenness;
et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	And if they are tense and moist so that the hairs of paper stick, and are pulled out, and scorched by the tears, if there is any hope of this cure
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front;	And they call it the old "contusion", and that you make at the patient who has this disease the hairs that he has or front, and then make three incisions or front equally according to the length of the front
et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres;	And either one of the incisions must be made just below the two front teeth, swallowing down swallowing juice until it reaches the nape of the neck; or the other two must be made alongside the ribs, and keep the incision of the arteries that are alongside the ribs.
et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins;	And hold your hand away from the continuation of the two mandibles, and if there is a wound there, estimate the quantity of three thumbs in the thickness of the joint.
et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	And provide a piece of sponge and wipe the blood with a cloth, then hold the needle sharp with two fingers, which is its shape:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision;	of the incision which is from the temple to the second incision
et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les II fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	And draw out all the marrow that is between the two incisions to the entire surface of the bone, then make the other half of the incision from the other second, and then pull out this needle.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	If on the first incision the instrument which is called the "cultellaire", which is very well chiselled on one side and soft on the other, does not penetrate, it is like this:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	And place the knife at the areolar cartilage towards the chest at the shoulder, and the knife below the bone, and hold it tight until it reaches the midpoint of the fracture.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer;	And keep all the blood vessels that descend from the head as closed as the incision remains continuous until that which opens from the root, and then the other half is done in the middle fissure until the other side is reached.
et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris;	And then drain the blood equally, and express the limb for the blood taken
puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne;	then place in the wound a little bundle of cotton, and put over it soaked cloths in wine and oil and balsam, and keep that the incisions do not bleed
et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and after three days let the limb rest, and bring great pain relief with cold water, then treat the wound with basic ointment with rose oil, and other treatments for wounds in general until it is healed.
dou reume des eulz	because of the return of the blood vessels
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees;	When there is no acute cautery, the eyes remain tense and small, the pupil dilates, and the papers burn;
et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue;	the hair roots ache, and when the head is pricked at the root, there is great pain, and the patient groans;
adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	therefore it is necessary to cauterize many times for these matters and for the cautery itself does not suffice without them.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	And commandest the patient to return his face, then make a great wound on the middle of the forehead, and another large one at the eyebrow.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os;	From the left temple to the right temple, and from the incision up to the bone;
et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier;	keep your hands away from the temples that move downwards
et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin;	and when the bone is exposed, if there is blood, soak it up with a sponge, and then drain between the two layers of the incision and put in cotton wool, and try to hold it in place
puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut;	Then lay beneath drapes soaked in wine and oil, and keep your wound closed with a bandage.
quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	When it is fractured, if you must, rub the bone until it begins to heal, and then treat with drying things, which cause it to harden.
En teil maniere:	Part in manner.
pren II parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine IIII parties, et en fai emplaustre;	Take two parts of wheat flower and three parts of colophony, and make a poultice of it
et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	and apply it to these wounds to harden them throughout
de l’estoupement des oreilles	From the swelling of the ears
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des IIII choses:	All that you hear in the ear is one of the three things:
ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer;	or barley, or barley husk, or stone, or similar things like iron
ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois;	Or semen, if as desired, fever, peas;
ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	Or semen, if as desired, fever, peas;
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	When it hurts in the ear lobe or any other way that does not fit with the ear, do not raise it up in the ear, but put the ear down on the sole of the foot
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction;	If you see the stone, if no trace of violet oil or saffron oil is seen, then immediately order extraction.
et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine;	And make him cough forcefully, and hold his nose when he coughs, and put around his ears pieces of cloth or wool.</start_of_turn>
et estent l’oreille au desus.	Hold his ears downwards.</start_of_turn>
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure;	Many times comes forth from this cure.</start_of_turn
et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	If it does not come forth, order extraction as fine as possible, for this is the form.</start_of_turn
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin;	If it comes forth with fine pins, that is good.</start_of_turn
se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure;	If not, order extraction with the tip of a needle of small double curvature.</start_of_turn
et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne;	If it does not jump by this, make an incision like that of an spider and hold the head of the incision or tear the ear well; stamp that which is around the incision so that it will not go in with the incision.
puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit;	Then the thread will come out, for often it comes out as we have said;
et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor;	and if it does not come out whole, take hold of the skin with your fingers, put on no instrument that is pointed for that purpose, and put a pad of cotton around it
puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	then press the flesh against the bone or whatever it is, and the thread will come out
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme;	And if it does not jump out of all these things that we have said, if you hasten to cut the ear away as well as to open the vein, and spasm;
et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant;	And if you must make an incision first of all, you must have the patient sit upright and place their ear to their chest; make a small incision at the root of the ear, at the fatty or glandular tissue beneath.
et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche;	Or make the incision like a half-moon, as long as you reach the bone, then the bone according to your need, and draw out the blood profusely from your mouth.
et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the cure when it is bleeding steadily
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction;	And if there are grains of sand which are enclosed and swell, administer extraction;
et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre I spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if it cannot be extracted, if you must, administer a sponge soaked in vinegar in this form:
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	and order incision of that grain.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces;	But do not do this when you think the grains are moist due to the moisture of the ear, until you have done it many times.
puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	then the extraction will have subtle marks and will be sweet, as we have said, so that the extraction is aligned.</start_of_turn>
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	When the ear aches, it is certain that the patient uses a condiment at the outset, and fills the ear with much cotton.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	Or perhaps on the same ear the pain is gone already.</start_of_turn>
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	If the ear is suddenly relieved for this reason, it is good.</start_of_turn
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu;	if this does not occur, take many stones according to the length of your wish and hold them tight and loosely, and burn them until they are black.</start_of_turn
et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille;	and put the patient one or both of his ears out, and pull over his piece from the other side, and pierce with another stone on the ear that is in the ear.</start_of_turn
et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer;	and do not stop doing this piercing with stones until the pain is completely gone, and when it has gone away.</start_of_turn
et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars;	If you see it, if you take hold of one of the joints and grasp the other with fire as long as the latter remains dull,
puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	then make the rest of the limb as long as the pain has gone away, as we said concerning the stone.</start_of_turn>
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division;	In the extraction of the bone, if it is of small size, like a flea or similar things, cure it as we said in the cutting.</start_of_turn>
mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures;	but if it is of great size, we must feel its extraction of nails.</start_of_turn
et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	and this is the easier thing to do in the ear.</start_of_turn>
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil:	In the extraction of worms from the ear, when you have cured as we said in the cutting or in treating distillations, and the cure has not benefited, if you look at the ear in the sun:</start_of_turn
s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	If there is no opening visible, if the veins have small pinpricks, and if there is no opening, take hold of the limb as it is: this is the form.
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	And let the incision be broad and deep.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine;	And hold the limb further from the ear according to the quantity of the patient's suffering, then follow with all the force;
fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	do this until you see it come out entirely.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere;	and if it does not come out, grasp firmly at the cotton sleeve as I have said concerning the stone;
et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations;	and if it does not come out as we have said, administer distillations that the former have proved in the incision of veins, and you will find them or treat with distillations.
et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And if you distill your oils and medicines into the ear with all these instruments, if you see it like this:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a I petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller;	And if you see silver or lead drops falling from the petty holes, and over the top to distill;
et por presser dedens la distillation a I estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren I raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton;	And press firmly during the distillation with the well-made lead instrument, so that if you see taking a scraper and covering around the point immediately with cotton;
puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille;	then pour it pour the oil or juice that you see of your medicines into the cannel, and the cannel is in the ear;
puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille;	then hold the scraper against all the cotton, and press your hand steadily until the oil is distilled or almost all the ear is dry;
et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations I poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille;	And thus he feels the disease within, and let the distillations go out from the ear as soon as they are boiled;
et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And keep them from being too cold, for the medicine will not be so good.</start_of_turn>
de l’estoupement des oreilles	From the swelling of the ears
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles;	No child is born without a hole in their ear.</start_of_turn
et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir;	And the same thing happens at home with the bursting of a wound, or of a hair growing in the ear, and these bursts never come without leaving a mark in the ear if they are not seen.</start_of_turn
et aucune fois avient I poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	And never is there any loss of the hole, and you see it well.</start_of_turn
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil;	That which comes from the wound if it is not seen, is grief of healing in many situations, and in this it is seen that you put the diseased ear in the sunlight.</start_of_turn
et regarde dedens:	Look well:
se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	Look well: if you see the skin split open, if the work has all this spittle around it, then this is the form.
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille;	And be quick and resolute in front and behind all around, if it does not burst the ear
se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	If the split is of cartilage or bone of the ear, if you hold the ear gently, as long as the cartilage is whole
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	And if the boils are inflamed in the ear, take a fine scraper and burnish with a little fire, then put out or bind the ear.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille;	If you feel the split from which the patient groans at the ear, pierce gently, and hold that you do not tear the nerves of the ear
puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	Then put in the ear a bandage according to the size of the wound, and mix in the unguent Egyptian.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet;	Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet.
et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	Do nothing for the moment until the wound is healed; or if you attempt to do so and the fluid escapes from the ear, it is clear that you have failed. Try again with another attempt, applying an ointment of rose oil and beeswax until the swelling has subsided.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then cure it when it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	If blood comes from the wound, plunge a sponge and cover it with cold water, and put it on the ear, and use other treatments which will stop the bleeding of the blood that comes from the wound such as distillations.
de la char des papieres	De la char des papiers.
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines;	This is what happens with pus when it comes out wet and dry: if you stretch it out with pincers and nails, and grasp it with the tip of a spatula from its root
puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	then put out the broken glass with the ointment
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues;	And if the burn is not superficial, if the fire cautery is applied after the incision is worth doing;
et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines;	then many times it returns, nothing can stay rooted from its root.
et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	and when they are burned by fire, their roots are scorched and do not return.</start_of_turn>
de la gresle	De la gresle.
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz;	Many times come out of paper the humors of things that seem to be greasy in their form and in their hardness, and for this reason this disease is called "granulin" and is an accumulation of large moisture in the marrow above and below.</start_of_turn
li ovraiges est telz:	it is like this:
pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir;	take care that the granulin does not move from one side to the other, and that is a light matter to know;
fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	Leave the hair long and even, then singe the lower part lightly, then take hold as pincers and grasp.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide;	If you do not hold it firmly, it will pierce the patient’s eye; if you do not grieve this to the patient, be silent.</start_of_turn>
et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	And if the wound is large, if you assemble with a bandage, and cure until it is healed.</start_of_turn
et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	And if it is small, do not use force, for it will swell up again and cause harm.</start_of_turn>
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre;	And if the shoulder joint is dislocated downwards towards the ear, if you turn the eye downwards, seize the shoulder with two pincers, and press from one side and the other.</start_of_turn
et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien;	And if the bone is displaced by the incision, it matters not;
et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	And when the marrow is cut, if you let the dirty oil of the wound leak out, it will heal the limb of that which is harmful as long as the patient is well.</start_of_turn>
de la graisse des eulz	from the fat of the hairs
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz;	Pus is an ointment that is made from rags of papers soaked in oil, and this causes more pain to no one, and causes the eyes to water, and comes the tearing out of the morning, and they cannot see the sunlight because the tears hurry out of their eyes.</start_of_turn
et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	And for this reason they sleep with their faces towards the ground, and sleep on their backs, and their papery rags are wet with moisture that inflates and appears to cover them with pus from the ointment.</start_of_turn
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	And when you press the limb towards your chest and feel the exinach between them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain;	And thus the patient should place his head in his armpit.
et puis pren I drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li;	Then take a bandage of linen, and make a loop in the manner of a circle according to the quantity that contains the excess of flesh from the chest part, and put it on him
et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle;	and press from both sides, so that the excess is gathered in the circle
puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne;	then make in the middle of the moisture a wound as wide as a vein, and do not make it any larger than the wound made to the blood vessel
et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach;	and tighten the skin as much as you see to the excess
et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	and in many cases the excess comes out of the wound, according to the shape of a white fat piece.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars;	Remove the thumb entirely from the thick flesh between your thumbs, and bend your hand towards the right and left as much as possible;
et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	and keep that you do not tear the membrane, that you do not move the palm all the way to the edge, that you do not bleed.</start_of_turn>
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere;	And if it does not come out at the beginning of the incision, if you see a little piece of flesh, widen the incision slightly so that it comes out.</start_of_turn>
puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	Then take it out as we have said, then moisten with gauze and water, and put on the limb, and strain gently.</start_of_turn
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	And if there are such homes that break wind and put on top to corrupt this moisture that remains immobile.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat it as long as it is sane
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it comes to opening an abscess, the cure of packing absorbs as much as it is possible while it is healthy.
des poilz des papieres	hair of papers</start_of_turn>
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz;	When paper nails grow long, do not cut them except as nature dictates, and when they are inflamed, if they irritate the eyes, they cause tears, and generate various diseases as tears are accustomed to and soften paper and mucus, as long as this is the cause of the irritation of the eyes.</start_of_turn
et est li cure selonc IIII manieres:	And it is the cure in three ways:
ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	Or by complete fire cautery, or by water-based medicine as it is before or alongside the fire cautery, and it is made by incision and suture or by sutures, as I shall say.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre;	You must put the patient’s head in your right hand, and take the oil from your left hand;
s’elle est convertie, c’est boin;	If it is softened, that is good;
se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil desus;	if not, if there is a splinter in all its fibers;
et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai I fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur;	and let the hair grow at the margin of the wound or the hair grows from these hairs, and pull out the hair at its root and rejoin it at the tip
puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit;	Then make in the lower part of the limb the papere, the hairs at the junction, throughout the whole circumference, from the great toe to the little one.
puis estrai I fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	Then pull out the thread and put on the papere a little loop of cotton and bandage, then mark on the papere a sign like a berry of mistletoe, and behold that the sign be in proportion to the quantity that you see elevate the papere that is destined for you
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie;	And if there is part which has mixed with it a great quantity of the papere according to what the papere is softened;
puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit;	Then make throughout the whole circumference on the two lines that you have marked, from the great toe to the little one
et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute;	And let there be one of the incisions close to the hair roots in the thickness of a root, then hold the ointment in one of the two angles downward, and then burn it all.
puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce;	Then join the two layers with a suture of silk thread, and wipe the blood, and dry the excess thread from the two edges at all their joints, as you see me do;
et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII;	If this does not suffice, if there is no improvement, then leave the suture and the thread for three days or four;
puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor;	Then treat the wound with dry and constricting things, because the pus comes out at the bottom of the wound and joins together, but the suture is useless (as they say the old men), and this is work without fear.
et si a une autre maniere:	And if in another way:
et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	And if in another way: if you mark the mark of a figure which is like the fuelle of a myrtle, as we have said, at three inches deviate according to the shape which is like this.
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	Then hold that which is above down with equal force according to the form which is mentioned above
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure;	And if you cannot hold the pliers, and the thing is not right, take a needle or there is one thread, and pass it through the mark;
et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment;	and pass another thread tightly at the great loop, and the second thread tightly at the little one, and join between your two the two threads evenly.
puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	then keep your hand even, and keep all the skin over which you have marked, as we have said, then join the two layers of the wound by stitching, and cure until it is healed
et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans;	If the incision comes to an abscess, if it pleases of some cerote and some remaining oozing that soothe.
et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit:	And never happens that the hair of the beard is converted:
si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision;	If you must use what we have said of the incision.
mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	But the costure in one and in the other is more artificial
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme:	The treatment of boils is in this form:
et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai II caines par art, et II liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est;	and that you convert the hair and the skin around it as I have said, and then make two incisions by art, and two fine threads as long as the hair and as large as a hazelnut is;
et cope as II chiés de II pars ou tu tiens les filz;	and hold as two cuts of two parts or you hold the threads;
puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les II cainnes des II parties forment;	Then assemble the one and the other together smoothly over that which rests on the marrow of the oil, and strain the two thumbs of the two parts forming.
et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	and leave them together for a while, and the skin which is strained will be toughened, wrinkled, and swollen, until it becomes loose by itself.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	If it is late, if the fire has a force, then cure it until it is sound
et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil;	and when the wound is closed and the marrow is raised, and no more hair will grow there
et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	and this is the form of the two thumbs that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of length and width:
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute I fil de soie souef et subtil;	the work is like taking a subtle needle and there is one thread of silk subtle.
puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc;	Then assemble the bones and do not let one rest upon the other loosely, and let the length of the threads be as long as a palm of the hand.
puis ordene en la chasse I autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil;	Then order in the chase one thread loosely of silk briefly, and do not tighten the thread too much.
puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain;	Then place the patient's head in its normal position
et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil;	and let the sunlight be removed so that the work is less burdensome, for this is a subtle and small work, then hold the needle at all times in the root of the hair and make it pierce the skin until you reach the natural hair line
puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a I ou II ou III ou plusors;	then withdraw the hair until it is above the chase, and hold in the chase that hair, if there is one or two or three or more
puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	Then stretch out your hand as far as the hairs of your beard grow freely over your face with their natural growth.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil;	And if the chase is finished and the hairs do not prick with the touch of the hand, if you wish to keep the chase at a distance as you have commanded, as long as the hair vein pricks downwards until it disappears under the palm of the hand, you shall know by the sight of the oil.
adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo II jors ou III, tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus;	Therefore if you wish to keep the chase and the distance, shut your eyes and leave them shut for two or three days, until the hair grows back in its place and the beard appears once more;
et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne I poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	And if the hair is thin, accompany it with long nails of a natural shape, and remove it with that or leave it as long as it is elongated and then rest it.
de la porriture de l’oil	from the corruption of the oil
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres:	When this ailment which is called "aleacrati" or the swelling comes to the surface, if there are two methods:
l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	When this ailment which is called "aleacrati" or the swelling comes to the surface, if there are two methods: one natural, and the other unnatural.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	And there may be from a wound, or a cut or burn, and from similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee;	And the way of working in this is that you make that suture, dry the flesh of it, put in some linen threads, and keep it until it is healed.
et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	and do not use anything but dry and restrictive things in the treatment of it.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere;	For if you do this, the disease will return worse than before;
mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic;	but give it emollient things, such as fennel;
et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	The hair of the acute or tall nettle and flaxseed be boiled, and aquilon oil melted in none of the oils, and it covers a bandage, and cures it.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant;	And the treasure of your cure is that you must take care that it does not harden too much like before;
et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	These things that we have said do not apply to other ailments except for this one, for it does not return like before.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	From the fire that comes in oil
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	This disease which is called "axacrati" in truth is natural and sudden.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans;	The causes are wounds, fissures, cautery and similar things
et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char;	And the way of the work in this matter is if you take an awl, in which there is a double thread, and the needle through the skin, and it makes split the skin so that the thread comes out two fingers from the skin
puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	Then is the head of the shoulder above all awry, and the scapula has a wide space.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin;	If the limb returns to its natural position as it should, that is good.
se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere;	If not, take hold of the limb and put it back into the socket, and twist the limb, and make two incisions or pierce through the flesh of the limb;
et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»;	Make two incisions at two angles of the incision you made, and make an angle so that when they are reunited, the limb is as straight as a letter that has not been bent.</start_of_turn>
puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne;	Then hold the limb firmly, according to the quantity of its bones and cartilages that are still inside, so that the dislocation is reset, and then join the two broken parts with a thread of linen.</start_of_turn>
puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then the treatment for what we have said of the mild medicines and bandages, as long as they are sound.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant;	And if the disease comes from a fracture or sprain or burn, if it is recommended that you make a full incision with the hair removed with paper, and as it has been said above.
puis desevre entre les II leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit;	Then take two fingers of a bandage, as it has been said previously.
et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil;	And one must perform the work according to the form of the disease, for it is diverse in form, and the learned men appear to be almost blind with all their wisdom concerning the return of the limb to its natural shape
et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	and the patient himself, according to what is appropriate in the work and the instruments in many different situations.
dou soudement de la papiere	And if the ailment comes from a fracture or sprain or burn, if you must make an incision, make it full through the hair of papers; then stretch between the two leaves of a tent, as I have said; and it must be done according to the form of the ailment, for it is diverse in form, and the wise masters perceive with great insight all sorts of things that must be done to return the limb to its natural shape; and the patient himself, according to what is to be done and the instruments in multiple positions.
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut;	When this inflammation occurs at home in a limb as the master of surgery has sutured with white oil, and cannot move or perform his natural works, if it is necessary, then you must bite the point of a scraper at the root of the limb and hold it high.
et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil;	and extend as much as possible, as long as you can bear the pain that is in the sensitive area, which must not be too great and not too little, so that the patient does not suffer more from the sensitive area than from the oil;
et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil;	and your incision, which you must carefully drain, lightly, so that the limb returns to its natural shape
et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere;	and is cleansed thoroughly, and make no more use of the sharp oil of vinegar, but with sweet water and soft lye.
puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef;	Then put between the paper and the oil a lint of linen, and put on the oil a few coarse wool rags in abundance.
et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	And afterwards apply a bandage of wool and other soft things as long as it is necessary.
de l’ungle de l’oil	De l’ungle de l’oil.
Saiches que li ungle est selonc II manieres:	The nails of the fingers are two ways:
elle est nervouse et semblans a I dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om;	The first way is that it is nervous and looks like iron of a certain hardness, and another which is not nervous, but looks like white moisture frozen, which when touched with iron and warmed up again shows bites; if it does not die off immediately
et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	and both appear to grow towards the great marrow, and cross to cross so that they cover the whole marrow and the whole brightness and movement of the oil
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz;	And if the patient places his head in his mouth, then he should hold the eyes.
et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus;	hold the eyes steady, and grasp the hair with the fingers of the hand that is not holding the instrument, and stretch it downwards.
puis pren une aguille, et i met I poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et I fil fort;	then take a needle, and put in hair of a horse, or of a sheep, or of a bull, and pass it firmly
et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement;	and double the point of the needle a little and fix it with the thread, and pierce through with the needle, and tie the thread at the base of the hair, and stretch the hair down, and pull out from the root of the hair all around the circumference of the hair, and leave the remaining part in the root of the beard or the hair, so that by the incision there does not appear the crust of tears usually;
et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit;	And never has the nail stretched at the knuckle alone, but along with it, as we have said.
puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	Then the scorched area should be on the whole surface of the sponge so that this is the shape:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie;	And keep that the sponge does not touch the thick cloth and breaks it, and that the burn does not penetrate;
et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor;	and after the incision, pour the bleeding, pour the bleeding, pour the bleeding pour the bleeding pour the bleeding pour the bleeding throw in a little bit of bruised lint, and sprinkle with alum, and leave it until the next morning
puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	then the physician must cure what has been done so that it is healed
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines;	And if the nail is not nerveless, and you cannot push out the awl, and the needle cannot enter, many times this semblance of a nail is cured by medicines
et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And they grow as I have told you in the division, and if you see them covered, if you overpour the oil on the patient, take the spatula lighter rather than acute following this form.
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor;	And pull the hair out gently, and if you see that it comes out easily and the root is pressed, if you distill from your mouth into the oil of colocynth make of litharge and red colocynth and it boils, and stamp the oil until it reaches the other ear;
puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	Then repeat the work as I have said above, until it is completely healed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing hinders you, if like an abscess you have post-surgery, then milk should be withheld and first cure the abscess thoroughly until it has healed, and then resume the work as before, until it has healed.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne;	And if at night in the oil there appears to be fat, suspend it to the bacon, and cut a part of it, rather than all at once, because of tears do not come;
puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	Then distill in the red colander which is made of litharge.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	from the hair that grows on the navel
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste;	There is never any red rose in the urine of healthy men; cover the navel and bind above the papers and turn towards the fire, and it appears like a rose of bulrush.
et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force;	If the patient puts his head in his right mind, then the urine will smell of vinegar; and all that red stuff has a suitable stench for this, and the sensation is strong
puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige;	Then crush the first red thing, and go on crushing until the end, and keep that you do not spill the oil at the work;
et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre;	Or the incision of the spleen which we mentioned in the incision of the vein and has small forces so that one can break the bone easily, as this chapter shows in practice.
et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut;	And when the incision is complete and the bone is exposed, if you use oil of rue or you distill collyrium rouge and similar corrosive medicines, put on cotton wool soaked in vinegar, so that it should adhere firmly to the wound.
et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut;	If it does not stop bleeding and the wound is wide open, and you doubt that the wound has healed, if you leave the oil and treat the wound with soothing things that heal the wound
puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	then return to your work when it is healed, and when the wound is complete, let the bones rest in the oil in this manner.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil;	However, it is necessary to alleviate the cure of each weak oil from its natural way.
et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer;	and from the violent way, in the work of fire;
et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	And do not strain your hand in any of these works until you see that the limb is suffering from the work.
des voines des eulz	From the veins of the eyes
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	The veins are red ones that are covered in oil, and they tolerate the gaze of the eye and disclose the oil throughout the days.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel;	And so it is with the first that you see that the limb is relaxed, in which case it is forced, and there is no other disease fierce than relaxation;
adonques le coil en teil maniere:	therefore take hold of it with part of your body:
comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	instruct the patient to place his head in your hand, then suspend the veins altogether according to his wisdom, and let them be loosely bound twice in this fashion:
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en .i. cors selonc ceste forme:	and be doubled superficially by degrees in a circle according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil;	then gently pull the veins out, and keep the blood from flowing for a while afterwards until you see the fierce veins removed from the root
et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes;	and keep that you do not bleed at the points of the spatulas, and do this work at midday in front of the sun, and be vigilant in your work if you do not want to weaken only the veins
et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	And when you have done this, if distilled in green and red oil of ravens, it will break up that which remains doubtful.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez;	And if you do not wish to collect all of it in that hour, make a plaster on the oil of soothing things that calm the pain of the eyes, and leave it until the pain is calmed and is secured after the swelling has gone down; then repeat in this manner until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
et c’est li forme des forces:	And that is the form of forces:
de la fistule de l’oil	If you cannot firmly grasp all that is in this hour, make a plaster on the oil of soothing things to calm the eye pain, and leave it until the pain is soothed and is secure from after-pain; then start again in the same manner as before until you are healed; and this is the form of strength.
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule:	Moisture which is called "arissati" is a fistula.</start_of_turn>
quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	When you treat it with fire cautery and with strong water medicine as I have said before, and it does not heal, if it is deeply rooted in that which you have made on the swelling, then you must measure it there, and drain all the moisture from it, until the bone is exposed.</start_of_turn
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme;	And when the bone is discovered, you will see the corruption and blackness, if the wound has all the tools, for this is its form.
et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a I chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And is called "open wound", and is made with a sharp knife at the head of the bone, and is pointed as if with a file when it is in this form.
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese;	And put on the bone's corrupted flesh, then turn it between your two hands, and press your hand a lot until you feel that the corruption is gone;
et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	Do this only once, and then restore the limb of drying medicines.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez;	If the limb is swollen and puffy, and the bone is fractured, and the skin of the limb is swollen, and remains so for forty days, and does not heal and is not sutured, and accidents happen to it, know that it is healed;
se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme:	If not, if there is no other remedy except to restore the fistula to its proper place without delay according to this form:
et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	If not, if there is no other remedy except to restore the fistula to its proper place without delay according to this form: uncover the bone a the second time with iron, and with strong medicines. When it has been uncovered, take hold of the fistula according to this form, and let the iron clamp be at a 90-degree angle, and the fistula must be narrowed until it is flush with the surface as you see here.
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif;	Then place it upon the bone without moisture, and wipe your hand with oil, and draw the clamp completely until it breaks the bone and the patient feels pain in that place where it comes into contact with the fistula if it is held in its place
et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif;	and leave the dry medicines in place, as I have taught you, and when the wound heals and becomes firm, if there is still matter in the fistula.
si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	If it is easier for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	Then place your thumb on the bone below the armpit, and wipe your hand with oil. Indeed, once you have grasped the whole forearm, pull it until it pierces the bone and the patient will feel it through what comes into being at that moment if he holds his hand on his elbow. Then restore the dry medicine, as I have taught you, and when the wound has healed and hardened, if there is anything that troubles the elbow; if it is less serious for the patient.
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide;	When the eyes are wide open and do not suffer from any pain or discomfort, if it is easier for the patient, bind his eyes tightly.</start_of_turn>
puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil I liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz;	Then do the same, then put on a bandage or dressing in a clockwise direction, then put some oil on it and apply acaice, aloe, incense, and ochre, and then strain the oil, and cover it with bandages and cloths.</start_of_turn
et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en IIII, et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier;	And keep the cloths in place if you take cloths thick enough, and double the layers in threes, and then put one on top of the other according to the amount of hair there is between them.</start_of_turn
puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir;	Then strain with the hands of a strong bandage, and repeat the dressing in a clockwise direction.</start_of_turn
puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout;	Then break the blisters and leave the oil strained for a while both day and night, and if it sticks, as you must know, pull it out whole.
puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin;	Then break the wound afterwards the oil and the nut, and if you see the oil regain its place, that is good
se ce non;	otherwise;
si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	if it recurs, leave the dressing and the nut and the wound and the blisters until it is healed.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	Dou derrompement de toile uvee.
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com I grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir;	When dislocation comes in the armpit, then open it, and bring forth paper as with one grain of resin, and it is expected to see;
adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait I fil double des la partie dou larmier;	then if you see it covered, the work is like that of biting a needle at the root of the limb until it is below, then put in another needle or there is double thread at the elbow
et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition;	And let the fire penetrate, and leave the first splinter as it lies according to its position.
puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef;	Then hold the fire firmly in place with a pair of forceps and grasp a portion of the iris with one hand, stretching it well; then pull out the splinter and put on oil of lint liberally bound in eggshell
et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee;	And leave it until the blood has clotted with the iris, then cure the oil with comforting things until the wound is healed
et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And never is the wound held back by the surrounding tissue of a circle of fat until it is healed
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost;	And if the eyes are very swollen, if you prick at the fatty tissue that comes from the middle of the oil, correct the moistness of the pus and bring down the swelling, and put something between them;
puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then pull out the [foreign object] until it is whole.
de la bowe de l’oil	De la bowe de l’oil.
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue;	This ailment which is called "alcunnati" is not fierce except for the swelling which is assembled in oil, resembling descending water, and this is not plain water.
et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz;	and the manner of appearance of the work is that if you make the patient sit on a chair that appears low and straight, then grasp the head between your hands from two parts, and move it until you see the swelling coming down to your eyes
puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit;	then either tie it up, and do not let it descend and be broken, see the light, and see the patient do things as he used to before;
et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	and if it does not descend spontaneously, like water, and if the swelling descends only partially, as we have said
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse;	If you make the patient sit between your hands, then take the sponge and place it on the cornea of the eye I by the continuation of the conjunctiva with the cornea and the crown, as long as the eyebrow is visible.
et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when it comes out, if you distill in hot oil mixed with honey, or vinegar or fennel boiled with honey, then let it be cured of another remedy until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
des aigues de l’oil	from the bowl of the oil
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier;	We have seen in the wounds the resemblance of worms in their division, and what it is necessary to pierce.</start_of_turn
si en oevre selonc la santeit.	if in work in accordance with health.</start_of_turn
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort;	It is necessary that you make the patient sit between your crossed hands, and take light from the sun, and bind the oil clean and tighten the mouth firmly.</start_of_turn
puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres;	Then put the thumb of the oil on your left hand if the eyes are left, or on your right hand if the eyes are right.
puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre;	Then take in your right hand if the eyes are left, the instrument which is called the “almagda,” or in your left hand if the eyes are right.
puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide;	Then put the tip of the instrument below the crown by the thickness of a hair in that which there is a greater amount of oil, then hold the instrument called the “almagda” firmly, and withdraw your hand until it touches the oil, and feel that the “almagda” has reached the empty space
et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour;	and that the measure of the “almagda” should be at the level of the measure of the space from the armpit to the end of the shoulder blade
et c’est li corone de l’oil;	And this is the navel of oil.
si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	If you see the bone in that membrane by the clarity of the rough cloth, and then put the instrument almost until the liquid is gone, and press down slightly afterwards.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	If the pain increases now, if you see the patient before him and the instrument in his eye.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc;	After rest, a little, when the liquid returns the second time, put the force with the instrument, and when it is held firm and does not rise, if it is strained too much around your hand and your hand, then strain the bandage lightly around your hand and your hand
et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	And then put back in the liquid a little bit of gum, and leave away that oil from there
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	Then put by force oil-soaked tampons or soaked cloth in rose oil and plenty of eggs, and tie with clean oil.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	Yes, and those who are of our household, put on common broth with plenty of eggs.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if the almagda cannot enter the oil by its hardness, because there are parts of bones that have too many hairs, it is recommended that you take the instrument which is called the “alberit,” which is like this in shape:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit;	And pierce then the conjunctiva slightly, and do not go too deep, but make it firm, then put the gum in, as we have said;
et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous;	And at the end of the work, appears to the patient I the sleeper, lying on his back in the dark;
et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor;	Or be commanded to abstain from all movement, and take gentle food, and do not move his head forward or backward, or to the side, and keep him still according to his condition until three days have passed.
puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor;	Then loosen him in this house alone, and uncover his face, and let him see nothing, and then bring him back to his place until seven days have passed.
et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	And do not do anything else in the hour of treatment or after the incision now, but only that you nourish him, for because of this the pain has increased greatly
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme;	since the oil must be loosened before the seventh day, and given to this which alleviates the abscess
et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	When he is calmed, if you remove the vein and put a little I orilliet on his face to cover any wound, and be sure to keep it in that dark place.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas;	Then go out of the house and out, and in his case he will recover naturally;
et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	and let the wounds be such that no disciple should interfere in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens;	And one came to us from Yrach who told us that in the peace of peace he did often see all the maggots fall down when the vinegar was poured, but he never saw that happen anywhere else, neither did he read of it in the books of the ancients;
et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	and it is a new thing that has happened by chance
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie;	These are the signs of the forms of maggots, for those who do not know them will not recognize them
et soient d’arain proprement:	And let them be again properly:
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en .iij. angles ague.	And their heads are of this same subtlety, and their backs in two angles like an eagle.</start_of_turn>
de la char sor le neis	From the shoulder joint downwards to the hand.
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez;	And let them be again properly: For often at birth or at death various hairs seem like scorpions in their mouths;
et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	and if there are such things or if there is hair entangled in yellow pus, and if there is hair of bone colour.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil;	In that where these hairs are blunt and do not entangle, you must make the patient sit between your hands towards the sun;
et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers;	cover his nose and spit on those hairs, and pull them out forcefully
pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	then hold that which you have pressed to support the soft part acutely from one side, until you are sure that that hair is entirely bony
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout I des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien;	And if nothing remains, if the opening has all its subtle instruments lightly, if nothing settles down;
et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient;	and if it does not settle, or if the incision bursts open, or if it is too late; for such a thing should not be attempted.
et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	and if it is malignant pus, hasten and cauterize until it is dry and the char is stiff; then leave or remove it easily and with pain or wine.</start_of_turn>
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez;	If it does not yield, and moisture comes up to the palate, evacuate the purulent matter that is healthy.</start_of_turn
et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier:	and if moisture does not flow as it should, evacuate the purulent matter from the bone beneath, because the instruments do not go in too deep.</start_of_turn
adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins;	Then you must take hold of the limb with a thumb and four fingers, and keep your hands steady, and there should be no space between each finger or less.
et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche;	and put the patient’s hand over the head of the shoulder at the base of the thumb, and keep smelling until it comes out of the socket
et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire;	and do this many times, and it is a light thing for one who sees it done;
puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	then hold the limb coming from the socket with one hand, and the limb coming from the mouth with the other hand, and pull one after the other as we have said before.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant;	Do this until you are sure that the bone is not broken, then pull the limb out, wipe the blood, and moisten the thumb with Egyptian balsam, and reset the limb in its place as before
fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char;	Fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char.
et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use;	Do so for three days or more, until the swelling has eaten away all that is decayed of flesh; and then put on or take away a compress of lead for some days until it is healed, and if there is need of drying medicines, use them.</start_of_turn>
et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	This is the form of the instrument for drawing out the head, from which we distill the oils and medicines or not.</start_of_turn>
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi;	Or of silver, like an overblown lamp, if like a cord, and it is carried along.</start_of_turn
et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief;	And if you see it, if you make a closed cord, and the instrument is smooth for purging the head.</start_of_turn
et ait I mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	And he has one hand clasped at the shoulder to hold it when we pour oil or no liquid.
de la char sor le neis	From the shoulder joint downwards to the hand.
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder;	Many times there arises at the shoulder no disease which is called "telul," and grows and becomes large to such an extent that it is seen;
et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant;	and therefore you must first pull down the bone somewhat, and then put the cautery or burning medicine out;
et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens:	and if it is delayed in covering it when it is large, if it has turned white, of foul colour, of poor sense
si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide;	if you do not touch it with iron because it is an inflamed abscess, for when you touch it once, there comes great harm to the patient
et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	And if the abscess bursts with a soft touch, not of fierce color, you see that you can cover it up completely; if the patient vomits and recoils in fear, cure the limb of dry and restraining things.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	when the arm is cut and bound.
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	Do as much as you know until you sense that the hair has not been corrupted; then draw the thread, wipe the blood, and moisten the thread in Egyptian fashion, and reattach it as before; do this for three days or more, until the hair has consumed all that remains of the char; and then put on or remove a cauterizing bougie for a few days as long as it remains sound, and if there is a need for sedative medicines, if necessary; and this is the form of the instrument for extracting the head, from which we distill the oils and medicines or not.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc;	It is therefore necessary that this does not happen at all, if you see that the wound is fresh with all its blood;
et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	then immediately join the two limbs to a splint, and then treat it until it is healed;
et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet;	and if the limbs are already dislocated from one side and the other, if you must support all the parts of their limb until they bleed, then reassemble the two limbs to a splint, and strain them, and sprinkle upon them dragon’s blood powder and incense
et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And put upon the wound a piece of dressing of great or other soft dressing that sticks, and leave it until it bleeds by itself, and then cure it of swelling until it is healed.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution:	If the dressing is held in place, and the solution is assembled:
ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre;	or by needles, as we have said in the wound of the belly;
ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	or by thread, as I have told you
des apostemes des levres	of the separation of the layers of the skin.
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant;	At home, there are often grains of sand in the open wound, like grains of wheat, minor and greater
adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie;	therefore it is necessary to tear the wound open, and open up each knot, and take hold of it with tweezers and pull it out whole;
puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	Then apply the broth after the incision of the carbuncle boils, until the wound is dry.
et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then let the broth drain easily, and cure the wound of dry things until it is healed.
de la char des gencives	From the roots of the gums.
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»;	Many times blood appears on the gums like little garlic cloves, which they formerly called "albulus".
si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc;	If you hold it firmly and grasp its root, and leave the blood or the blood vessel alone;
puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives;	Then put out the boiling carbuncle, or other restraining and drying powders
et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize:	and if it comes back after the incision, and happens many times, if the root grasps it a second time, and cauterize it.
si ne revient mie aprés le cautere;	If it does not return naturally after the cautery.
et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	And these are the forms of the instruments for covering
des sordens	Des sordens.
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres;	Never are they assembled at the head of the dens, in the mouth between the gums, shields that are burdensome and harsh;
et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant;	Never are the teeth black and yellow and toward, until the corruption comes to the gum, and are the teeth biting;
si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien;	If you command that the patient sit between your hands, and his head rests in your stomach, and open the teeth or the shields wide, until nothing remains.
et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees;	And so make blackness and greenness, and yellowness and other spots, until they are gone
et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin;	And if its bone is fractured at the outset, that is well.
se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis;	If not, if it starts to swell up again the second time and the third, as long as you still have everything;
et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens;	and the teeth that are driven out must have various forms of instruments to remove them, according to what the work shows, for the roots of the teeth which we must extract are of different forms than those which are between the teeth
et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	and these forms and others appear before you.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire;	You must take care that you do not make the tooth worse with your treatment, for this must not be done
car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	because it is a very sticky substance, so we have no excuse for leaving it
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	Therefore, when the patient is unable to bear pain, if you are certain that he can endure it.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent;	Many times the patient complains of pain, whether it is acute or chronic, and makes the limb tremble.
et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors;	and indeed the pain does not depart from him until the evil is banished, because we have already wished to make them well;
et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars;	when you are very certain of the pain that is groaning, if you wish, you must press the limb down firmly in order to stop the swelling from all parts
puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles;	then move the limb forward or backward slightly at the first moment and then fix it firmly;
et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	and if the patient’s limb hangs between the buttocks, hold it firmly if it does not move
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	After that, if the tooth sticks directly forward, and if it does not jump up, take no one of these instruments and hold it loosely in the cheek; and move it as you did before.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont;	if the disease is perceived and mixed, if you cover it with cloths, the pus or the hole is left open.
et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre;	If the strained thing is gently held, it will not break when strained.
et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	You must keep your mouth absolutely quiet over the joint to prevent loosening the teeth
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	Take care that you do not break it, and leave some of it, and return to the patient with the greater pain of the first time
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit;	Beware that you do not do anything like the ignorant who, by their haste and boldness, break the limb every time and bring no benefit except what we have told you
mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut;	But it often happens by the loosening of that great disease from its roots or from the breaking of the limb, as we have often seen
et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil;	When the flesh is raw, wash the limb with wine or vinegar and oil.
et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet;	If blood comes, which often happens, use a little vitriol to stop it
et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	If this does not suffice, if the burn cauterize.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent;	If this is not enough, if the burn cauterize. The forms of the instruments, indeed silent at first, are either long and pointed or broad-handed, that they do not double while you draw out the tooth.
et ce sont les formes:	These are the forms:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And be of large members if they do not bend when drawing, and be made of iron indeed well, and be toothless so that they may be held by hand
de la racine des dens	from the root of the tooth.
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou II, tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne;	When the root is grasped while drawing out, if you must put out the wet cotton swab in the burn I or II, as long as the wound is raw, because there remain the fangs which are called “algefri,” for the head of the shoulder seems like the beak of a sparrow
et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	These are made in the same way as with a file and this is the form
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	If the roots do not suffice to support all these tensions, then it is recommended that you uncover the bark entirely around the root, and place the instrument called «althali», which is to say a palainche, since this is its form:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin;	And be strong and thick so that it does not break, and if the root jumps by this, that is good;
se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	If not, if you aid with all your tools, and if the forms come afterwards:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait .ij. rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if one uses this instrument which has teeth, since this is its form:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	And other instruments that are before in the ratio of the teeth, and this instrument which appears like a great clamp, of which this is the form:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont;	And let your tools be strong that they cannot break, and nails like the teeth of beasts of prey.
et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez;	And so with other tools, which are not counted here;
et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	and he himself will find the right instrument according to his work and his ailment, for there are various diseases where the old ones did not teach any instrument because of the diversity of things; and if he breaks anything by chance with his hand or with anything else, or if he carries it, if he seeks these instruments, as I have said, and assists with gestures, so that this is the form:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster;	And let them be great and firm to hold the bone, that they do not escape, but can hold and restrain.
et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	Then restore the limb of medicine suitable for this one, and if there is inflammation in the bone, and it is small, if the disease has all these instruments:
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer:	When the tooth appears does not match the natural curve, and the shape is harmful, and even in women of gentle birth, if you know that it will not come out on its own, and is not in its rightful place, and cannot be soothed or comforted
adonques lou raie;	Therefore the rasp;
et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a I petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	And if it is hollow with the tooth, take this instrument which has a small beak like I, and be like iron without a cut at the top
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And when the tooth persists in the gums and hands are clasped for a long time due to the duration of the tooth, and because you do not move the others, if it appears, it can be limed, if you use a file of the same shape as the tooth itself
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles;	And it is thus like when we make needles.
et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece;	And thus like when we hold the teeth firmly in place with thumbs and index fingers, if they do not move until they bleed
puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	Then the limb at the end has no sensation, and if the bone is too bent and it breaks the tongue, if you must restrain the biting until it is even, so that it does not break the tongue or impair speech
quant li dent lochent	When the tooth is loose.
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut;	When the front teeth are loose, by percussion or biting, and the patient cannot press on what hurts him except when he bleeds, and you cure them with restrictive medicines, this is useless;
si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques;	if you must restrain them with gold wire, for the silver wire becomes green and corrupts, but the blood does not move anymore.
et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens;	And let the son of the middle be neither too thick nor too thin, according to the quantity of the space between the teeth.
et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part;	And if you see the teeth leaning towards each other, if you take hold of the thread and double it between the two front teeth, then put the nails between the middle teeth, as many as there are, until you see clearly up to the sound tooth on the other side.
puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point;	Then continue the covering up to the part where you began, and strain your hand subtly and cautiously, so that it does not move again
et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	And let the suture be at the root of the tooth if it cannot escape.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue;	Then grasp the nails of the thread with tweezers, assemble them, and put them between the sound tooth and the suture so that it does not catch the tongue;
et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil;	Then leave it [the dislocation] somewhat tight as much as it can stay put; and if it slips or the thread breaks, if the strain of another thread.
si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	if it should remain and hold it securely, and this is the shape of two teeth and the arrangement of two thumbs, as you see:
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit;	When the tooth is loosened, if we reset it in its place, fresh and new, as we have said.
et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	and nothing else should intervene between them except for wisdom and solace, and never make it the shape of a decayed tooth, and put it back in its place or where the defect is, and strain it as we have said, and it will remain secure and serve its purpose for a long time
de coper lou liien de la lengue	De coper, lou liien de la lengue.
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi;	Never is this life which comes from the tongue or nature that we are not born into.
ou par accident de plaie soudee;	or by an accidental wound beneath the skin;
et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue;	and the work is such that you must bite the mouth of the patient, and put your head in his body, and he will hold his tongue
puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement;	then you must bite the large nerve, so that the tongue is dislocated from its place, and if there is delay or not, it is a remedy for wounds, if you can bring back the joint and bite the large one again
et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz;	and keep that the fracture is not too deep, because of the artery which comes from below;
et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin;	and when you have done this, if you lift the limb of rose and easily, or of cold water, then put the tongue back in a little attempt of silk;
et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	The sick man complains that at night his limbs do not cease tormenting him, that they cannot be comforted.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet;	And when blood comes out, if it is from a vein that has been broken, it brings with it a piece of glass;
et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu;	If it does not stop, if you cauterize with the lentiginous cautery, which is good for this;
puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	then you must cure it in another way while it is still healthy
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre;	and if you see black or red or hard pus, if the patient does not feel it, do not touch it, for it is an abscess
et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre;	and if it is declining with moisture, if there is moisture, if it breaks, and you wipe it off with a subtle sponge, and you deliver from both sides;
et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer;	And if it does not go without pain to your work, put on a broken glass shard as long as it is stained, and then return to your work until you have finished all your business.
puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	then lift up your limb easily and cautiously, and treat it with other treatments until it is healed
des apostemes de la gorge	Des apostemes de la gorge.
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde:	Never comes from the throat a boil that is called "godath", and the name has two almonds; and when you treat them, as we said in the division, and they are not healed, take care:
se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	if it is a hard abscess of little size and color of blood, do not touch it with iron.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc;	and if it is red and the root is large, do not touch it with iron, even for the evacuation of blood;
mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi;	But leave it as long as it is strong, and when it is ready, you must take it out, or else it will break by itself.
et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	And if it is of pale color and the root is flexible, if the instrument has been applied to cover it, but first look to see if the abscess is firm and calm.</start_of_turn>
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme;	Then make the patient sit in front of the sun, and his arms at his sides, and cover his mouth and grasp his beard between his hands, and press the tongue downwards towards the instrument, for this is the shape.</start_of_turn
et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	And it may be of silver or gold, as with a knife.</start_of_turn
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues;	Can you press the tongue towards the instrument, and you see the abscess, if you take the sponge and put it into the opening, and draw it out more than you wish.</start_of_turn
et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces;	And take no heed of the threads with it, then hold the cup to the instrument, for this is its form, that seems like a force.
et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	And behold that the head of the cup is bent, and one place is opposite the other, and they are very acute, and is made of iron or tin:
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have this instrument, if you can hold the wound tight, for this is the fashion:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom;	And be split from one side and from the other side name.
et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	And when you have grasped one of the almonds, if you grasp the other according to this manner, and afterwards make an incision, gargle the patient with hot water, hot and easy, and remove the blood that comes out, if you gargle the patient with hot water, or if there are pomegranate seeds or myrtle berries, and similar things, until the wound is cleansed;
puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then the treatment must be such that it be healthy;
et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les II amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les II amandres igament.	Then the treatment must be such that it be healthy, and never again are there other abscesses in the throat except the two almonds, if the teeth are thus strong as the two almonds always.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens;	And I treated a woman with an abscess that was not in the throat, namely one abscess of little size
et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	and had the throat well closed, so that the woman could neither vomit through the passage that was blocked, nor could she eat or drink, and died because she fainted from pain in one or both of them
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	And the abscess was so large that it had forced out two stones through the two holes of the neck
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe;	I have often seen this, and I have bound one with an incision, then the patient went away, and he brought back great portions of vomit;
puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue;	Then he should spit out the other part into the other part where it does not want to stay, and he should cover the mouth and press the tongue;
aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc;	Then he should put the ointment on these abscesses, and close one part, and only a little blood should come out from there.
et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens;	And so he should loosen the windpipe from the throat of the woman, and now start to drink water and then wine, and do not stop biting this abscess for a long time
et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros;	and the abscesses were coming back, and filled the belly as I had avoided vomiting, until they brought out large amounts of matter.
adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge:	Therefore I grasped it and cauterized it inside the throat:
ensi demora sens croistre;	Then it makes sense crosswise;
et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	Then it departs from these parts, and only God knows what will be done to it after me.
de l’uve	De l’uve.
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»;	When the wound descends into the limb, and it flees and becomes long, if it is called "perpendicular".
et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	and if it is thick and round, it is called "wound".
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes;	When it is cured as we have said in the division, and the cure does not benefit me, and you see that the wounds are appeased, and it is subtle, so you must cover it
et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe;	and that which is round and assembled and is not long
et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	and it is bloody or dark brown in color or black, so you must avoid the incision of the vein.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	For there is great peril for the patient.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant;	It is fitting therefore, when you see it, as I have said, with its splendor and length, that you make the patient sit in the sunlight, and press the tongue to the instrument mentioned above.
puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	Then insert the ointment in the eye, and draw out the dirt, and close with two instruments that I mentioned when incising the two almonds
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil;	And it is fitting that you do not cover more than the surplus that is beyond the natural limit;
car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle;	because if you cover more, if he cries out with voice and with his throat;
et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and afterwards, use what was said concerning the incision of the two almonds, and heal as long as it is healthy
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	And if the patient has fear of covering, you must know that you must use an engine in the cautery in the direction of the fear.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	And the manner of the cautery if it is acute is harsh and severe
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere;	And it is that the patient places his head in his mouth, and then presses the tongue to the instrument that we have said or the chapter of cautery, and grasps with a sharp instrument, if it is neither too thick nor too thin.
et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	and grasps with the cheek of this instrument, for this is the form:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve;	Or he has a beard or something puts the medicine, as with the nails of a claw, and puts the instrument over the medicine;
et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece;	and the patient should remain standing beside his chest, so that saliva and mucus come from his mouth over the medicine, if it does not go down to the throat, and he bleats.
puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie;	then hold your hand over the medicine and press it on the wound, for the amount of half an hour, until you see it scab over and the bites of the medicine are appeased
et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve;	If you see it, take hold and encircle with no instrument, and moisten the cloth with medicine, and hold the instrument to its full extent within the wound until the cloth sticks to the limb.
et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés IIII jors ou V.	Do it often, until the cautery is complete, then leave it dry, and cut after three days or five.
Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine;	And if you must repeat the cautery with medicine, if you repeat it, and after the cautery wipe around the limb with a cloth, tightly packing cotton around it, and bind up what is around the medicine
et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	Be bathed in cold water, and be cured of hiccups as long as you are well
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere;	This treatment is better than an incision, than the cautery.
s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en I pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir;	If it is cured by fumigation according to this method, take calamus, isop, origanum, rue, chamomile, chamomile, and ivy, and mix them all together in a pot, and put them in boiling.
et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait I estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	And the pot should be well sealed with strong earth, and in the pot put the instrument that is to be cauterized according to this method:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie;	And it may be of silver or lead, and the one of the instruments should be pricked in the patient’s mouth until the vapor rises to the eye through the opening, until the eye is numb.
aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent;	Repeat this several times until the eye is dry, and keep that you do not do this at the beginning of the burning of the abscess, for many things happen
et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	And do not force this [cautery] fire except at the decline of the abscess.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut;	And if this instrument is not present, take a needle and put in the head of the patient a little egg, so that the patient does not suffer too much heat;
car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	because the egg does not make the vapor irritate the mouth, and that is a good cure in general.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose;	Many times has it happened at the gorge bone or thorn of fish, or nothing;
si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose;	So you must therefore treat what you see, and press the tongue to the sun with all the instrument, so that you can see the thing
et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac;	and what is not seen and is returned to the throat, you must make the patient vomit so that the meat is cooked in the stomach
par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement;	By chance, if this thing is revealed by vomiting.
ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou I morceil de pain sec;	or the patient swallows a sponge, or a piece of navel, or a lettuce root, or a dry piece of bread;
et lie a l’esponge I fil, et puis la transglutisse;	and I tie the sponge with a thread, and then I transfix it
et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer;	and when it comes back, if it is vomited, I will pull it out again with force
et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren I estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	and if it does not come out by itself, I will take an instrument to grasp it in this fashion:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit;	either the instrument is curved at the head so that it can enter the throat more easily, and the head is raised up
et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens;	and beware that you do not touch the epiglottis, that it is alive, do not break the bone inside
et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse;	And the movement is worth that the patient keeps the instrument, because either the movement is wanting or the thing is out of place.
si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	if the limb goes back, or if it is forced too much with all the instrument equally, as much as it is forced.</start_of_turn>
de la sansue de la gorge	And let the tongue rest curved at the root if it can more easily enter the throat, and lift the head up; and guard that you do not touch the epiglottis, that all do not live, do not push the bone inwards; and must that the patient hold the instrument, because it is either moved or the matter is disturbed; if the epiglottis is swallowed, or he forces it out with all the instrument equally, as much as he is able.
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines;	There is never medicine without bloodletting, as I have said in the division, by the treatment of medicines.</start_of_turn>
et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	and when this does not help, then look at the patient’s face in the sunlight, and then press the tongue to the instrument that I have told you.</start_of_turn
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	And if you see the limb without support, if it has a slight twist or subtle tension that persists.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	If this is not the case, take a needle and pierce the patient’s throat, then insert or pull out the needle with the cautery, and do this often.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	If the patient suffers from acute pain throughout.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent;	then take full notice of cold water, and cover the mouth, and let the vomit go in the direction of swallowing, and move your hand often.</start_of_turn
et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	And if the joint is pressed with the hand, if it feels pain, it must be released.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve;	And if it does not yield as we have said, if the patient is tormented by excessive pain, with the instrument which I mentioned in the fumigation of the eye.
fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	do it often, for it will be of service to the point.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument;	And the manner of fumigation is that you take one pot or there are charcoal pieces, and that the part to be treated is covered with a cloth about a mile wide, and that is pierced through at the point of the instrument
puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue;	then I pour the fumigation, and the patient places the root of the tongue in his mouth, closes his mouth, so that the smoke does not go out but comes out only through the eye
et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois;	And now the wound is weeping, and if it does not stop, repeat the fumigation many times.
et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue;	And the patient is suffering from thirst, eating foul and dirty things, and does not drink water
et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	Therefore, it is necessary to force her to vomit by this treatment
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge;	And the form of the instrument with which we treat the wound, if it is seen, is like tongs to grasp the tongue so that it can enter the throat
et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier;	It has the shape of a cork-cutter, and has the bitterness of lime, so that whatever it grasps, it cannot let go
et vez ci la forme:	And thus is the form:
li chapistres des apostemes	it is possible to move forward with the following instructions:
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille;	Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille;
et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	The wounds caused by the opening of an abscess are like those remembered from one place and another in this book, and they vary in perforation and size; for in two ways it is like the one which has moisture in it.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	And the second method if the limb is hanging loose or fixed to the bone.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	for the swelling of the head is different from that of the bone, and the swelling of the limb is different from that which comes at the joints, and the flesh itself judges in the work.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement;	And if the abscesses are not to be perceived, as long as the belly is dead according to its fulfillment;
et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	as those which must be perceived when they are solid, and do not die according to their fulfillment, like an abscess which is between joints
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	for when the swelling comes from the joints, and we leave it as long as it is stiff, by chance if the bone and the nerve of the joint are corrupted, because of this there is contraction in that limb.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil;	or if the abscess is between the main member and the head of the member, and you delay the perforation until it is measured, it will go to the main member;
ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs;	Or if it is from the root that the wound has proceeded, if one pricks it again, that it should not be killed.
et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule;	Or it must only be pierced at the root end where digestion is running its course, except for the wound that is from the root, which must not be opened, but must be left along, and there will be fistula.
et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	It cannot be cured in a great time.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes;	And it must be known that you should wait for the pain to subside and the swelling to go down, and the fading of the heat, and the absence of pain and redness, and the debate and the tingling of the root of the abscess, and the other signs;
et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues;	And it must be known that you should make the perforation or break more dependent on the abscess, and the place where it breaks loose.</start_of_turn>
et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	And let the perforation be through the long of the bone, and if the abscess is at the hands or feet, or in joints and nerves and arteries, and in all these things let the hairs be equal or there shall be no pus.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	In these cases, according to the location of that limb.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	And when the wound is open in flesh, if you do not perceive that it is confirmed in digestion accompanying it, as we have said
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure;	For if you pierce before this, if it yields the bone marrow of it, and is full of thick mucus;
et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	and by chance toughen the flesh and pierce it through with it.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	And if there is no wound perceived according to the large wound mark, according to what the limb has suffered.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus;	Therefore it is necessary to bring in little abscesses, little perforations;
et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme;	and many cuts according to the greatness of the abscess.
et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper;	and if there are such abscesses or it is necessary to close it quickly, and cover it over.
quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes:	When it is necessary to stretch as I do a drape, and is softened, then it is possible to do as with bubbles.
et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres;	and if there are such as are split into three angles, and if there are such as we handle like the fennel of Myrtle, like apostemes of grapes;
et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	and if there are such as we make a round size, and other sizes and similar to cope them
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement;	Those who have no head, if like a superficial wound, you must simply pierce through;
et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie;	and when the wound is large, and it has collected great blood, you must pierce through, but do not extract all the blood in that hour, but only a part
puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief;	Then I press the abscess right up to the other ear, and leave it without doing anything further.
fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute;	Do this many times with great force, until the swelling is completely gone.</start_of_turn>
meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	Likewise, if the patient is of weak virtue, or a woman in childbirth, or a young child, or an old hunchback.</start_of_turn
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite;	Therefore avoid this chapter with great care, and when you have perceived the abscess, if the wound is small, look to see if the wound at the abscess is small.</start_of_turn
et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton;	And if it is a large wound, if you can, try to insert linen or old cotton.</start_of_turn
et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre;	And if it is a large abscess, and there is much pus, you must know that you must bite in the cheekbone two fingers so that one overlaps the other.</start_of_turn
et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor;	And if you have grasped in the abscess a part of raw leather, and you have bound it around, then you must know that you must fill it with much cotton or lint of flaxseed towards moisture, and keep it until three-fourths.
puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then the bone, and keep it oiled until it is healed
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	And if blood evacuates from your work, if you fear cold and ease, and moistness I drape, and take out the decorative limb many times.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut;	And if blood continues to discharge, if you mix with government and care, and the powders that I have mentioned before, and if it is cold or wet, or if the wound or the abscess is moist and nervous, then you must put on a cover and moisten with wine and oil
et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit;	And if it is in this state, and the limb is swollen, if you must put on moist dressings with water and oil, or with wine and oil.
et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then take away the abscess, drain it, and treat it if necessary until it is healed.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes:	This is the translation of the last line of the given text.
or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	Or as you have said previously, thus must it be in the treatment of abscesses, and thus must it be in this chapter.
des soros	And this knowledge is sufficient for the treatment of abscesses: as you have said previously concerning the precautions before treating abscesses, and thus is this chapter.
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	Or if small abscesses come out, and they are like those that are in towels, thus as the juice of a gooseberry, and there is resemblance in them.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz;	There are greasy ones and such as when there is moisture like pus;
et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	And if there are such ones that are tough and stony at the root, and there is no doubt that the artery is not opposed to it.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	And as for the work of the surgeon, if you suspect that everything that is called "entromissor" has come out, which thing contains what, etc.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	For if it contains moisture, it remains for a long time
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien;	When the moisture is drained, if you leave the peel that contains that moisture, it will return as before when you leave it alone
puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens;	Then plunge the cotton into the Egyptian poultice if it is present.
se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor;	If not, in water and oil, and use the bandage, and leave it until the other day
et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	and that which is remaining will depart on its own
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit;	And when you renew the cotton, as before, the second day, and the third, until you are certain that it does not remain in place
puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then cure the wound of the poultice when it is appropriate, until it is healed
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc;	And if the abscess persists without fat, if the physician follows this form, for a long time
et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist;	and if it discharges your medicines, and the pus from all parts, and puts all your care to drain for the swelling or where it is located
et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	And if the artery opposes you, if you do what I have said afterwards.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	And do the same with an abscess that is pierced, and cut and cure as I have told you
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	And the size of the pierced abscess and the moisture, if it is less severe, because they are of little blood.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme;	And if there is no swelling in the abscess or the head or there is no moisture, and these are old abscesses that I cauterise or heads from old women;
et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier;	and find the abscess just like a stone, rough and white, and cannot burst
et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	and if there is no blood vessel nearby, we must make a wound as if with a stone.</start_of_turn>
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe;	In other abscesses coming from the head or the shoulders, because these arise from the joints of the limbs and the roots of the ears, they open all the more on the most dependent limb because of moisture.
et les cure si com il covient.	And so they must be cured as they ought.
des scrophules	And the size on the pierced wound and the moisture, if it is less severe, because they are of little blood. And if there are some of these wounds or chieftains or it has no moisture, and of those wounds which I cauterize or chieftain from an old woman; and find the wound just like a hard stone, rough and white, and cannot break it; and if no blood comes out, it is just as well to make a wound like a stone. In other wounds that come from chieftains and have roots of ears, it overturns if it is kept too long, for it makes the wound worse. And it cures as it should.
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	Often these abscesses occur at the collarbone, and the armpits, and in the groin, and never elsewhere or on the bones, and are bloody, and are joined together.</start_of_turn
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit;	And indeed, every swelling must be properly treated within its container, as we have said before regarding its base and apex.
et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	And their signs are many.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	There are also cases where the body contains moisture, and if there are maligns that do not wish to obey health.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde;	In such a case that you see a bone in a good position to the touch, and that looks like flesh, soft partly and not red like blood, neither dark as the marrow of the bone nor pale as the cartilage of the joint, and that is neither superficial nor deep;
si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief;	Then you must hold it together with sutures and a soft dressing, and if you must touch it, do so with two fingers as we have said in the previous instances concerning the apex of the swelling
et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	And thus they do go back and forth, and so it is necessary that you do not cover the nerve or the vein, and do not be too hasty with the bandage or the forceps, but that your hands do not escape, and do not voice too much beforehand, that you do not cover anything that you should not.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie;	And if you cover the vein or the artery, and this does not allow you to work, if you put in the wound a piece of vitriol or some powders that remain inside, and constrain the wound;
et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	leave it until the abscess is calmed and the wound is softened, and begin to move.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses;	When the thing is not stained, if you return to your work until you have completed it;
puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	Then if at your command there are to be no small vesicles remaining, if the head and the tail are coped and bound.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement;	And if there is in the root of the vesicle a great swelling, if you do not dare but to cope that vesicle at its root, but join it with a strong double thread, and leave it hanging loose;
puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	Then apply the dressing of white cotton pressed in Egyptian fashion, and then suture.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	If you pull out all the pus, if you are certain that you have joined the two layers of the wound, and you sew them now, there will be no remaining pus because of the size of the abscess.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	If you are certain that you have grasped the root of the [disease], and that you have pulled out the foreign body, and you sew it as we have said
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure;	The vesicles which cause excess discharge, pierce them or they will open and die;
et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption;	and pierce as before said, depending on the situation, and mix with ointment and similar things, so that it removes what remains of corruption;
et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the wound is well closed, if the dressing of ointment covering the wound is sufficient, while it is healthy
de squinance	When the swelling is reduced, and if you return to your work until you have completed it, then if there are any remaining small abscesses, press them and squeeze them out.
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge;	The ancient ones spoke and wrote of the size of the gorge;
mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	but I have never seen anyone in our land who has performed it, and it is the writing of their words.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee;	As for those who have a squint, it is necessary that the slit of the throat called the epiglottis be cut away
et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en II amandres.	and this does not help, for all the veins and the blood of the patient are at those which have been cauterized in the mouth, or the throat or in the two armpits.</start_of_turn>
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the disease is in the channel of the blood vessels, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to prevent loss of blood from strangulation.</start_of_turn
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige;	It is therefore necessary, when our tongues cut the epiglottis, to cut three circles or four, a small slit through two circles or according to the quantity of the slit of the epiglottis, not through the cartilage.</start_of_turn>
et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	And if the limb is coved with the epiglottis, there is no hair, and the vessel is long and thin.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil;	And if the master is fearful, if you must cover the skin of the throat to the chin, then cut as much as you will until you reach the nail;
et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit;	Avoid the blood vessels of blood, if you see nothing, and then close the wound as we have said.
et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix;	And it is shown by the section of the windpipe that the spasm arises from the broken bone, and by the defect of speech;
et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	And leave the wound open for a piece.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les II levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige;	When the hour has passed without coving, doubt the strangulation, join the two layers of the wound of the limb, and close it all around the cartilage
puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then administer medicines that cause the growth of hair, as long as they are sound.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	The wound is not made whole until the throat is completely closed, and the patient is judged to be dead, and the default is abandoned.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort;	So you must place your hand on the epiglottis for the patient does not vomit, and he breathes through the wound; and thus is kept from death.</start_of_turn>
et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee;	And so they command the old man to leave the wound open until the malice of the disease has passed, and it is passed in three days or four. And then they command to suture the wound and cure it, when it is cured.</start_of_turn
et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	And I will tell you what I saw.</start_of_turn>
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon;	I saw a woman who took a knife and plunged it into her throat, and grasped part of the windpipe.
et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	And I went called to cure it, and found it as dead as death.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I discovered the wound and found the blood that had escaped from it, and saw that there was no vessel or conduit other than the throat that had been injured by the wound.</start_of_turn
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee;	I hastened, and cleansed the wound, and cured it until it was healed
et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition;	and did not cause her any more pain, since it returned to its natural state.
por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	Therefore I believe that in the dressing of the epiglottis I did not find any fear.
de la grosse gorge	of the great throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes;	These abscesses are called "throat hernia," and are great abscesses in the color of jaundice, and are very common in women;
et est selonc II manieres:	and there are two kinds of them:
naturez, et accidens;	natural and accidental
ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	or the natural one has no cause
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere;	And the cause of the accident is twofold: sometimes it is like grease that adheres to us, and sometimes it is like an abscess that comes from an artery.
et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire:	and there is doubt and fear, and it is not possible for me to work without fear of fire, only in that which is small, and I prove and seek all the surrounding parts:
se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point;	if you find it as I do not know grease, and cannot enter any vein, if it bites, as we bite the hand, and it is taken away from its covering, if there is no mark;
et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	and encircle well all around, and cure as if it should be sane once more
des nous	And encircle all around, and cure him as it seems right, until he is completely healed.
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances;	There are many ways in which we are like this; I will tell you of all the resemblances.
et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	And thus it must be known that I tell of all the difference that exists between a bruise and a dislocation.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture;	I say that dislocation is a swelling and fever that lasts as long as the inflammation persists, and is accompanied by pain;
adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	therefore rests the fever and the swelling.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros;	With no bruise there is neither fever nor swelling nor pain, and there is pus, which is its own sac, and it is like the color of blood, and it begins like a wound and becomes large
et sont selonc II semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	and they are like boils, or grease, or moisture, and fluid of the color that I have mentioned before
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	It is necessary, when you come to the cure of the knot, to ask and inquire first about all the instruments which are called “instruments of extraction,” according to the form that comes or the treatise that follows.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme;	And the way to inquire about abscesses of the veins is that you take more moisture from the vessel than you find in the abscess, and turn your thumbs and little fingers inward, until you know that the instrument has grasped the hair, and only then do you proceed according to the size of the abscess
puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	Then withdraw the entomissor and take hold of the leap that forces.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes;	When moisture covers it completely, that is when its color becomes dark; if it is so as I have said of other incisions.</start_of_turn>
et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout;	and if afterwards the entomissor does not bring moisture, if it is greasy, if it is so, grasp it with tweezers and pinch it slightly from the edge and hold the cloth tightly over the area where you have pierced it until it is well bled;
et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	and if you do not draw it out whole, if you tear it to pieces, so that nothing remains.</start_of_turn>
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois;	For if nothing remains, it comes back to us many times.</start_of_turn
et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	And if it lingers a little while, and you grieve not, if you employ the wound with some sharp corrosive powders, hold the wound steady, and apply soothing things around the circumference; and cure it with other treatments until it is healed.
et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	And if it is great, if cut the two pounds of the wound, and cure it of that which engulfs flesh.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet II jors ou III, tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc;	And if the vein swells up against you or another if you are hasty and use broken glass, and leave it for two or three days, until the wound is healed, and rest the swelling of blood
puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	Then return to covering that which remains delayed from now on.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres:	See here the forms of the entrapped instruments, and there are three ways:
grans et moien et petit;	Great, middle, and small;
et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres:	There are three quarters which are called "albaret," and one which is called "breb," and there are three ways of doing it.
grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule;	Great, middle, and small, to encompass the fistulas of fistula.
et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule;	And they are like needles which we sew up wounds, and they are of saffron, or iron, or silver, and the thread is yellow, and it is more proven with black soot to encompass the cortices of fistula
et sont de III manieres:	There are three ways of doing it
grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	Great, middle, and small, according to the quantity of the wound
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci:	The shapes of the wounds are like clusters of seeds, as you can see here:
grans, moiens, et petis;	Great, medium, and small;
et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi;	Great, medium, and small; and if there are three corbels of three ways each,
et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres;	and if there are onicules which have three corbels, and are also of three ways.
et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres;	and if there are onicules which have two corbels, and onicules of one corbel only, and are of three ways
et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	and all these things are necessary in their place.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf;	The head of these bones is often fractured, and there are some which do not split through the middle but only from one side, from which we must protect the nerves, because if we do not, we split the vein or the nerve.
et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes;	and from these intrusions are the bones which are placed in sleeves, so that the patient does not lose them when the abscesses are opened
et sont de III manieres:	And there are three methods:
grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois;	And there are three methods: great, small, and medium, as you see.
et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus;	and do not use them except in the case of bone fractures, such as legs, arms, breasts, and armpits, and similar things.
et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	and never make another small instrument, like the handles of fists, according to this form, because it stops the blood
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	And do not put it on any part which has recently bled, and has veins, and never again according to this great form:
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme;	Never swell the breasts of the sick when they begin to decay, as they seem like female breasts
et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	and endure pain and escape, and whoever sees them cured, if he covers them according to this form from line .b. up to line .g.:
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	Then scrape off the fat, and apply the medicinal poultice thickly smeared with char, and assemble the two layers of the wound with stitches, and cure until it is healed.
et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures;	and if the mother’s milk flows downwards, and is softened by its greatness as with women, if it comes out through two ribs below, through two similar incisions;
de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.;	then the larger line should contain the smaller one according to this form, from this line B up to line G
puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then scrape off the skin between the two layers, and bone the fat, and mix in what we have said about stitching and powders, and anything necessary for the cure, until it is healed.
et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif;	If he is not well, or the incision is not thoroughly made, because the patient does not wish to rest, or for the discharge of blood, if you must, fill the wound with moist cotton in corrosive order.
et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	And leave it until it has consumed the remnants and fat, then cure it when it is well healed.</start_of_turn>
des apostemes des asselles	And let him leave it [hair] until it has eaten up the remaining fat and grease; then cure it when it is healthy.
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	And let him leave it [hair] until it has eaten up the remaining fat and grease; then cure it when it is healthy
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when all the hair in the abscess is drained out, if the wound is of great extent, apply a piece of cotton wool, and leave it in place until the other side is reached, then extract all the cotton wool, and cure the wound that has resulted from this until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscess appears like boils, if you do as we have said about incisions of boils, and if the wound has penetrated the hair, if necessary perform cautery as we have said before.
de la routure de l’artere	of the course of a vein
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme;	When the artery is open, and the skin is split which is above, if there are many abscesses there, and also in the vein running away and splitting;
et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont;	and if the surgeon knows that it is for the artery, if the abscesses are long and deeply embedded.</start_of_turn
et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement;	When you sense it, if you sense it is drawing;
et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans;	And when it is a vein, if it is reopened suddenly, it must be cauterized at a distance.
et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	It is foolish to close this incision too soon, and the same when there are abscesses and boils, or wounds of the head and teeth, and in the mouth of other bones, it is much the same.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc;	You must withdraw the cautery, and the one at the head must also withdraw, and in that where the artery is inflamed by the above, the skin will become long
puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte;	then you must carefully move the limb, and withdraw the artery from the wound, until it is uncovered;
puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples;	then you must pull out the awl, and make it pierce until the other side, and tighten the artery with a double thread in two places, as I have taught you in the extraction of the two arteries which are in the temples
puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme;	Then point out the limb that is between the two bonds of an introversion until it is loose there; and sever the aponeurosis.
puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient;	Then support the cure that embraces the wound, until it is loosened; and hold the bone tight
puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then treat the swelling that follows this, until it is healed; and let it rest
et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit;	and if the abscess is the size of a vein, if you can, hold your hand over the abscess as much as possible, and then pierce the vein with a needle at the same place, and pass two threads through, so that you can grasp it from the other side;
puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil;	then tie the aponeurosis, as I have said, or bind two parts of it with two threads each;
et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus;	And if you doubt that the wound does not bleed, if it returns a third splinter at the site of the first splinter, hold the wound steady for three days.
puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez;	Then close the wound as much as necessary until the bleeding stops, and keep the wound clean and dry until the discharge has ceased; leave only what is bound over the wound
puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then apply a wet dressing of wine and oil, and bind the wound with sutures and compresses until it is healed
des apostemes des ners	Then apply a warm compress soaked in wine and oil, and then bandage the wound until it is healed.
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	Then apply a warm compress soaked in wine and oil, and then bandage the wound until it is healed.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor;	This often happens when the surrounding bones are diseased or broken, or when there are joints involved, and it is the cause of many postmortem changes, and its color is like that of saffron, and is a sign of numerous affections of the body in pain
et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur;	And when it is strained, if the patient feels pain, and does not wish to move for fear of pain, but groans with fear;
et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer:	he remains silent in all parts, neither goes forward nor backward, neither does he move from side to side, and that which is in the joints cannot be covered with iron.
par aventure i vanroit contraction;	because by chance it may go into contraction;
et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	and the skin that is over the head, shoulder or front, makes the leather wrinkled
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine;	If the swelling is small, if the limb has a slight tension, and one grasps it at its root;
et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if it is large, if the swelling has reached the bone, and the bone is bruised, and the wound is opened, and the bone is brought together at the suture, and the wound is cured when it is healed.
des grosses boces pendans	When it hangs downwards, swollen, from the socket.</start_of_turn>
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros;	Never before have I seen such a thing in the belly and nowhere else, and it is a disease which is called "funge" because of its resemblance to barley, and its root is subtle, and its head is large.
et en i a de petis et de mout grans;	and there are small and great swellings in it.
et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	and I saw two people who had it in their bellies who seemed more like barley than anything else, and there was no difference, and they were white, and had a thick root, and were split open, and there was moisture coming out of them
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine;	I dressed them and found one of them weighing eighteen ounces, and the other six and a half pounds, and the works on the incision if you look to see if the patient is moist, and the color of the blood is pale and moist and has a subtle root.
si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	If the scapula at the greater wing be tense, and if it be in your presence the fire cautery.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer;	For in your presence comes often too great discharge of blood, and if you delay, if you do not hasten, then indeed you must cauterize;
et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors;	and if you see the patient groaning and fearful from the incision of the wound, if you take a thread of silk well made, and bind the artery as we have said, and leave it for two days.
et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail;	Then the restraint, and do not cease to tighten the thread of silk until it holds the artery, and ask him to work for you;
et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne;	and if the roots are large, if there is fear at the same time on the other side for the belly, but you must well cover half, then cauterize what does not return
puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	Then treat the wound and keep that you do not cover the hair which is of a harsh color and of poor sense and of milk-like discharge.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For it is an inflamed abscess, and I will come to the cure of the abscess later.</start_of_turn>
quant li boude ist fuer	When the head of the shoulder is for.
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit;	Then if a bubble appears, it comes from the cautery of the wound or from a bursting of a cyst, and is above the belly and in the chest, as it happens in other ways, or blood that clots veins or arteries according to what is before, or from swelling;
et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	And if it is through the opening of the cyst and the coming out of the bubble, if it is the color of the abscess, it seems like the color of blood, and is a light matter causing little pain, and is open from various issues.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	and if it is from the bursting of the intestine, then it is more diverse, and when one presses it with the hands if it returns, and then comes back, and sometimes if it is caught, it swells out at the entrance to the bath and by great effort.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie;	And if it is due to moisture, it is a light matter, and opens well when you press it with your hand, do not constrain me;
et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit;	And if it is for blood, if it is widely apparent by these signs, the abscess is great and hard, and is closed according to a quantity.
et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	And if it is for wind, if it is soft at the touch, and the work is that you see if it appears to be from the blood of an artery or a vein, or wind.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	If you leave the cure like that.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	For there is doubt and fear, as I have already said or as the chapter discusses concerning abscesses, concerning the artery and the vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude;	And if it appears to be from the intestine or the bowel, if you command the patient to hold his breath, and that he strain himself thoroughly, and mark that he has evacuated everything to the bottom;
puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine;	Then command him to grasp between your hands, then go round the limb that you have marked throughout the circumference, and take hold of half of the abscess at its base to the greatest extent
puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz;	Then hold the limb firmly with a strong thread or a strong thread of silk, and keep it firmly in place.
puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine;	Then expose half of the abscess that is extended over the limb, and hold your thumb and index finger, and keep the intestines in place;
se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre;	If you find it grasped in the limb, if you pull it out, and pull the intestines away from the belly
et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit;	And if you find pus, if you grasp it with the tweezers, and drain the excess blood.
et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier;	And if the artery or vein is bleeding, if it is going to burst, then go back to your work and take two needles and put two strong threads, and pass the two needles through what you have made in the form of a cross that you make pierce
puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi;	Then strain the abscess in four days on the nails, and if you see, break the nails, and leave the wound alone until it bursts, and extract the pus by itself.
ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit;	Or you can bandage it when it is slight and soft, then cure it of what it covers, and cut the abscess as we have said before.</start_of_turn>
et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	Then drain the blood or moisture that you find, then cure the wound of what it covers, and close the wound.</start_of_turn>
dou chancre	And extract the blood or moisture that you find, then cure the wound of what is necessary, and suture the wound.
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer;	We have said in the division the signs of an abscess, and how one should work on it with medicine, and how one should shun the cautery treatment.</start_of_turn>
et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement;	We say that an abscess is always in the marrow, and great caution should be taken in its treatment, and they say that the old people often say that when an abscess is in the bone or we can break it if it is like an abscess that is in marrow, and in the marrow, and in similar things, and we must remove it when it is at its beginning.</start_of_turn
et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner;	When it is large and old, if you do not approach it cautiously, for I know of no cure;
ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	for I know of no healing for it before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire;	When it is in the body or we can remove it, as we have said, you must never purge the black bile from the patient;
puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide I boin leu por faire l’ovraige;	then make him healthy again if he has shown signs of fullness, and afterwards let the patient drink well to make the work easier
puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier;	then give your ointments or plaster, and the head and all parts, and the bone of all parts round about do not leave anything undone
et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	and let the blood flow freely, and press well the limb at your hand or at nothing, and if it breaks from the incision of the artery or vein, if you cauterize too much it will stain
puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then perform another cure while he is conscious.
de ydropisie	De ydropisie.
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer:	We have already mentioned in the preceding sections the signs of dropsy, and that when the collection of liquid is made, and the signs of congestion are similar, and the treatment which is done with medicines, and that which is done with fire.
si est eclites soulement;	if only it is illuminated only;
et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances:	and one must not touch the fire in these two instances:
c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose;	namely, tympanites and yposclerosis, because it is a deadly thing
donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses;	then when you give these medicines for this sign of dropsy which is called "eclipses" of medicines, and the cure does not benefit, if you notice that the patient is weak, or if there is another disease besides dropsy, as all other diseases and their solutions for the belly and similar things;
si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance;	If there is doubt, do not touch the iron, for there is danger.
et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer:	If you see the patient with great strength, and he has only the hydropisy of a simple dropsy, and he is neither too lean nor too fat, then you must surely work on him.
lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	Believe the patient right on your hands, and press his belly down towards the lower part of his foot, then take the thumb of the hand that you use for this form:
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	And let two parts be excised.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier;	almost without causing him to bleed; and do not let him scream
puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines:	then look if the hydropisy is settled towards the intestines:
si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil;	if you think you have reached the third degree of hydropisy, do two right incisions above the navel;
et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois;	And if dropsy is due to liver disease, if so make a incision at the left side of the abdomen below the third rib.
et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu;	And if it is due to urine, if so make it at the right side, and do not let the patient lie on the incision where the fluid will flow towards the weaker limb.
puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor;	Then pierce through the skin with the instrument, and extract the stone, and hold your hand over the wound with all your might between the skin and the cartilage as if grasping the quantity of an nail or an inch in length
puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	Then pierce the cartilage until the muscle comes out whole, and that is the cause of the pain, then pull out the instrument, and there will be the shape of this instrument left there:
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus;	And it is similar to a silver needle, and is of spider or slender barley, and has at its end a little hole.
et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus;	or costs from one side, three holes.</start_of_turn>
et II d’autre part, et I d’autre;	and two from the other side, and one from the other.</start_of_turn
et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	and the head is cut off like a pen, and this is the shape of the incision which is written to cut off the head.</start_of_turn
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument;	above is the nourishment, so that when the instruments come into the water, if they go into the water now;
vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort;	leave half or a third of it out, for if you take out more than that in this hour, by chance the patient will die from the resolution of his spirit from the weapon, or he will vomit, or he approaches death.</start_of_turn
mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz;	But in emptiness according to the quantity of its virtue, and according to what the provisions of the virtue to the patient signify, and his pains.
puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere;	Then take the instrument and hold the pain, and it is retained now by the thumb which stamps the part which is above the scapula, as I have said, that you pierce according to this manner.
puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit;	Then take the instrument again the other way, if you see the patient suffering from this, and take out a small amount of pain;
fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	Do nothing of the sort, and take care not to use it until there remains only a little bit of pain.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre;	And if you doubt about the patient, and you put too much pain, if the surgeon of the burial or sand burns, and by too much sweat or bath and sun, and if you take wine;
et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	And the treatment of drying medicines must be continued as long as the patient is well; and cauterize on the stomach and on the liver and on the spleen after the extraction of the urine, as I have said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	of the stomach of the sheath.
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	Never are children born without a mark in the belly, or the mark is small, or it is not firmly in its place.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	If he coves too much and there is no sign of pain in all the surrounding area of that shape:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet;	Then put or pull out I cloth of felt under the armpit, and bind and keep it in place for III days or IV; and when he wants to urinate, if he is kept closed, he will urinate, and then put him back again.</start_of_turn>
et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	And by chance it must not be, for the urine that comes out will not leave him closed.</start_of_turn>
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	If the opening is small, if medicine is applied with lead weights, as we have said, and it swells up.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut;	Those who do not have the head of the shoulder dislocated in their limb are blistered, for no one is born with the head of the shoulder at the top of the limb, for it will not urinate before it is elevated.</start_of_turn
et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	And they do not manage to recover because the material cannot come up to the marrow, which is a bad disease.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient;	And if the patient lies groaning on his back, with the head of the arm and the elbow as wide as a thumb, if he breaks the bone in the middle, as it often happens;
et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	You must take care of the evacuation of blood which often occurs, and if it occurs, if the stain of blood which stains blood is evacuated, and cure the wound as long as it is healthy
des pustules de la verge	Des pustules de la verge.
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide;	Many times comes the white spot in the arm, and is a sign of bad blood
et en i a malignes et non malignes;	and there are malignant and non-malignant;
si covient que tu les preignes a I oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien;	If it is suspected that they have been grasped at I, and are pricked and pulled out, then put on moist cotton wool in the Egyptian manner.
puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then hold the wound dry until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	And if the swelling is malignant, dark in color and purulent, it is advisable to apply cautery to it.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier;	When you have grasped it, and if it is bleeding profusely from the root, and has some within the flesh and some outside, if it is suspected that the bleeding is from the root first;
et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	and when it is stopped, if the wound bleeds outwards.</start_of_turn
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion;	For when you treat it whole, if you do not keep the root firm, it will cause blackness and corruption in the root or bone.</start_of_turn
si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	If you are certain that everything black and rotten is gone, then apply honey and flour made from the peel of pomegranates and sometimes, apply other cures until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	And if there is discharge of blood comes, if necessary, apply the lunar cautery according to this form:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble:	The cautery is useful in two situations:
c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption;	namely, in the case of blood clots and corruption;
et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi;	and if the head of the limb is rotten and retracted, if you bite or draw out the limb a bundle of hair, and the patient pees on the wound;
et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars;	and if the skin has become loose at the head of the limb which has happened with those who have not been circumcised, or there is an abscess or a wound, if you must then burn the instrument with the cautery, until the limb is freed and the head of the limb is loosened
et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil;	and if this is a serious matter to be decided, then you must know that you must support it with a spasm without any blow to the head or the groin.
puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	then dry carefully between two, and put one soft towel soaked in cold water on it, which must not be moved.</start_of_turn>
de la circoncision	except in the case of circumcision.</start_of_turn>
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies;	Circumcision is not merely the omission of a continuation like other wounds.</start_of_turn
toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	However, when we perform this work of our will, and do it properly, if it is necessary that we make it better, and the most pleasant for health.</start_of_turn
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancients did not teach us circumcision, for they did not use it in their laws, and we have only what we have learned through experience
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor I dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule;	For I have seen the greatest part of masters and physicians who perform circumcision in this way, have force and all a new instrument.</start_of_turn
si fuioit li keurs car il i a II toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	If the urine flees like water because of two stones, and by chance if one of these comes up and stops the other below.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre;	Or the bladder recoils, and there is double pain, and with swelling which is dull and does not firmly support the point of the limb.
et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	and with the swelling of the spleen by chance escapes the iron, repairs the work, and many times grow until they have no need of swelling and I have wished it so
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	Or the covering returns, and the pain is doubled, and with the support which is too slight to assure the tip of the limb; and with the support of the cord by chance escapes the iron, and completes the work, and many times it happens that they are born without any support and I want it.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens;	For when you press your hand, if it is equally taut throughout, you can easily pull it out.
mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir;	but that the thread be well strained around the skin
et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	and that the manner of the first work should make the child think, if he understands, that you do not make him suffer more than to tie the thread around the limb only lightly, and then let him do whatever he wishes
puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens;	Then hold the wrist between your hands straight out, and bring back the forces between your hands or withdraw your fingers so that the fetus cannot see them, nor any of the instruments.
puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens;	Then place your hand on the hip and grasp or pinch, and draw it up as high as the head of the hip is bent;
puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien;	Then thoroughly cleanse the area that is gathered, then tie the limb with a double thread, and tie it so that it is secure in two other ties
et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge;	And hold the second tie at the waistband and the little finger, and grasp between the two ties, then stretch the skin above the wound and draw the head of the hip down
puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres;	Then leave the blood flow there without moving it, for that is the medicine.
et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And I put powder on and over the powder I drape a layer of glue made from the yolk of an egg beaten with rosewater, confirmed with rosemary oil and balsam, and I leave it on until the other side is done, and I treat the other wound until it is healed.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste:	The forces are formed at the circumference of the wound when this is the case:
li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	When the two heads are tense and bent, and the arms are as wide as the palm of the hand:
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision;	The wound of the circumference is when the cords around the incisions are loose.
donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme;	Therefore it is necessary that you extend your nails, even though it makes the wound worse
et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	and keep it even, and if you do not manage to hold your nails, if you hold them firmly, and then treat the wound
Et s’il trespassent III jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement;	And if it persists for three days, and what is below the navel is swollen, if you leave it until the afterpains cease and the swelling light;
si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	if you do not move it as you wish and keep hold of the lower part of the belly, it will do you no good.</start_of_turn>
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point;	Cure therefore the wound of things that are soft with a powder, as we have said or treated with powders, and if you move it too much, it will go downwards, and it will be of no use.</start_of_turn>
cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Cure it as we have said until it is healed.</start_of_turn
dou retenement de l’urine	Dou retenement de l’urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division;	Urine is retained if it is from the obstruction of a stone, or blood congealed, or bile, or chaff, or similar things, as we have said in the division.</start_of_turn
et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz;	And if the urine does not flow freely, and you see that the retention is caused by the stone which is in the kidney or the neck of the bladder, if you suspect that the patient is hunching over his knees;
et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet;	if the stone is placed on the back and the patient extends his belly from the part under the shoulder blades, and restrains the patient from groaning as much as he can.
et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e;	then the neck of the bladder is constrained towards the expression of the stone above, so that the urine flows out easily.
et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme:	and if it does not come out, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, if you suspect that there is a need for an extraction with the instrument called the «syringe», because this is its form:
et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil;	And if it be of subtle silver coin, as much as a hen’s egg;
et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	And if it be of blunt silver coin, as much as half an egg, and if it is subtle at the head.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue;	And the manner of emptying the urine is that you take two threads doubled, and bind one to the head with one inch of wool or cotton, and pass the thread through the syringe;
et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede;	And cover the surplus of wool and pass the syringe up to the head of the syringe, then join the syringe with oil or butter and egg yolk, and make the patient sit on one chair, and raise the bladder and the verge of oil moist and oily with olive oil and warm water.
puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude;	Then put the syringe gently into the root of the limb, until it reaches the base of the limb; then double the limb from above the bulge.
puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors;	Then withdraw the syringe until it reaches the bladder, and the patient will feel it coming out until it reaches the empty thing; this should not be done except in this order because otherwise it will cause damage to the body.
puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine;	Then stretch the thread throughout its length, and the urine will follow the thread, then pull out the thread forcefully, and correct the urine;
et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	And restart the syringe until the bladder is empty, and align the patient
des maladies de la vessie	Des maladies de la vessie.
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When there are dropsy or blood in the bladder, or putrefaction is assembled, and you see urine and medicines distilled, if you do everything that is called the «clepsedre», which is its shape:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus:	It is closed, and if there are three holes:
II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois;	Two from one side, and one from the other, as you see;
et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est;	And he must bend his head downwards so that the medicine can penetrate as well as possible, if we can remove the moisture, and push firmly as is necessary.
et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens;	When you see the medicine dripping in the bladder, put the chief dexterous over the moisture, and push away what is hindering.
si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens;	If you remove the moisture from the dexterous, and then push strongly the hindering away
si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira;	If the moisture enters again inside, and comes to the bladder now, so that the patient feels it;
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie:	This is the form of the subtle fistula from which we must cure the bladder.
si est ci:	If this is the case:
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut;	It is of silver or gold, and the head is more raised
et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet;	And from the eye inwards, or from the joint which is hurt;
puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu;	Then take a bladder of mutton and put the moisture which you see clustering in the bladder inside it, then bind it between the two armpits with a double wire, and burn the moisture on the fire.
puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie;	Then pull the head of the clinker downwards into the belly, then stretch your hand over the bladder with all the moisture that comes out, until the patient feels that the moisture has reached the bladder
et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor;	and if you do not have the bladder, take a piece of parchment, and make a circle, and pierce it roundly around
puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument;	then pull the thread strongly through these holes, then assemble the circle as if you were assembling a doll, and put inside what you see of oil, moisture, and water, and bind it with the instrument.
et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	And do as you would with a bladder, pressing your hand until the moisture goes from the bladder.
de la piere	De la piere.
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines;	We have already said in the division the ways of cutting into stones, and the extraction of medicines together.
et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille;	And I have said the difference between the enclosed stone and the open stone, and all the signs, and when one must work on a stone of what size;
et en la vessie, et en la verge;	And in the bladder, and in the hip bone;
et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	And I will tell you openly and briefly
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit;	I say that the stone which is enclosed in the bladder is often more painful when it is pushed upwards, and this is a sign that the stone has burst from the bladder as it were in its subtlety
et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist;	And he opens his eye, and grasps the patient's hand, and he does it many times, and then he stiffens.
et a mout de ces saut li fondemens;	And from these jumps he undermines the foundations.
et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont IIII ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece;	And it is light to heal the wounds until they are three years old, and it is grief in old men, and is as young as middling age, to those who are between youth and old age
et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	And it is the easier cure for those who have the big stone, than for those who have the small one
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	And when we come to the treatment, if it is necessary, we must first cleanse the patient by blistering, to drive out all the evil that is in the intestines.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	For it never hinders to inquire about the stone.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut;	Then take the patient by the feet and lean him backwards and forth, so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, and does not move at all high up
puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval;	Then make him sit between your hands appearing, and his hands should be placed on his thighs, so that the bladder is completely descending forward
puis la quier et la touche dedens;	Then the sweat and the touch within;
se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	if you feel the stone in the cavity, if you hurry now to clamp above the stone.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis;	and if it does not bleed at the touch, put your left thumb oil on the index finger, if the patient is old, or your middle finger, if the patient is young with accomplices;
et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie;	put the thumb in its foundation, and sweat the stone, and when you feel it on your finger, if the bladder is full at the collar
puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	then press on your finger, and hold the stone away from the eye or you see the clamp
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille;	and instruct the minister to press the bladder with his hand, and he commands him to extend with his right hand the ribs above, and with his left hand to stretch the skin that is below the ribs in the part where the incision is made
puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	Then I touch the scab with my thumb, since this is its form.
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre;	And I slip between the testicles and the root, do not break through but along the left side of the navel
et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans;	And be two on the stone, and two either adjoined or rooted, and be the size of the thumb if it be broad by excess, and narrow within, according to the quantity of the stone, do not make it too large
par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail;	By chance the pressure if the thumb that is or is rooted, that it leaps for work;
et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges:	And nails that are part of the stone or that have angles, and margins.
si est griés a issir;	If it is grasped to irritate;
et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	And if a limb is swollen, seems bulky and round, from which issue is generous.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant;	And thus when there are angles and margins [in the swelling], make the size greater.
et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe;	and if it does not burst, you must know that you must pull on the nails which are as much as a file at the head, so that you can pull out the stone if it does not escape;
ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief;	or you can break the instrument which is curved at the head;
et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole;	and if you do not know how to handle it, if it is large the loss is lost, and if it escapes, the vein is torn;
et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	and if there is more than one stone, if you pull out the largest at the collar of the bladder first, then go up and down, and the others afterwards if there are any.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	And if it is large, if you cover it with silk, and make a greater wound.
Car II choses avienent au malaide:	For two things happen to the patient:
ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder;	or he dies, or the urine comes suddenly with such force that the legs cannot support it.
mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces;	but all this time you must exert yourself to break it up, or to remove the stones, until you have driven them out whole pieces;
et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut;	and when you have finished your work, if you apply a poultice of incense, aloe and dragon’s blood, and hold it in place, and put upon it a soaked bandage of oil and wine, or oil and rosewater and cold water, to soothe the burn;
puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	then restore the patient to his shoulder, and do not remove the limb until the third joint below
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have pulled it out, if there is any blood remaining in the wound from oil and water, then cure it with beeswax ointment and linseed oil, until it is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine:	and if blood clots come into the wound and swelling, and congestion of blood in the bladder, or either of these things are retained, the urine is known in this way as a part like that without leaping with the urine.
boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit;	Leave then the hair on the wound, and grasp that blood, for if it remains, it will burst the bladder and carry it away.
puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then lift the wound slowly and easily and gently, and keep the hand still in all the ways you know, until it is healed;
et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	And that you must tie in two stitches all the wounds that you cure, and gather the medicines above the limb.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir;	And if the wound is small, and it is either a fistula or a pipe, and it is tied up, and the urine cannot pass;
si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	If you do not cure this, you will lose many times, and we will hear of the size of this treatment
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	I have already seen this proven to be true
Pren .i. foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a .iij. angles fichiees en .i. tison:	Take hold of the forceps according to this shape and be at a right angle with two teeth fixed in one socket:
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie;	Then take I thread and loop it around the root of the bone, so that it cannot go backwards into the bladder.
puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere;	Then hold the thread lightly in the root, until it reaches the bone;
et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part;	And twist the thread with your hand at the bone both forward and backward, until you can see the bone from the other side
si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	When the urine comes, then press your hand on what is left of the bone that is in the root
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides;	If it is broken, and spurts with the urine, and is stained with blood, the patient is sick
et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie;	and if you are unable to do this for any reason, then take I thread from the root of the bone and I another from above, then pull the root towards the bone between the two lines, and then extract it forcefully, and loosen the ligament, and congeal the blood in the wound
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And he must be treated while he is still conscious.
de la piere des femmes	If you cannot do this for any reason, take hold of the bone at its upper and lower extremities, then place the thumb between the two tendons, and grasp firmly; then extract the foreign body, loosen the tendon, and solidify the blood that is in the wound; and cure until it is healed.
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por III choses:	When the stone is embedded in flesh, and if it does not happen every time, if it is cured, it is defended by three things:
l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge;	one is that by chance the woman is a virgin;
et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	And the second is that no woman can be known to be truly wise who hides her wisdom as deeply as she can, even though she is learned.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains;	And the third thing is that it is often impossible to find a truly wise woman in this art of healing;
et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil;	And the fourth thing is that if a woman’s wit is more profound than a man’s, for she can make greater progress, and has greater learning.  If such is necessary, if you take a wise woman, and prick her with your needle, and if you do not find wisdom there, you will not find it anywhere else in this world
et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere;	And there is a great wisdom in the life of women, or a woman who knows a part of the art, and she commands that she do what you command her with the inquiry of the needle.
et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge:	And look well if the woman is a virgin.
adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere;	then you must push forward with all your might or foundation and ask for the stone;
et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	and if the stone is firm, if you constrain the wound of your might, and you recommend that you hold your hand over the bladder and press and pull your left hand towards the wound
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse;	if the stone is firm, if you must move it from the entrance of the bladder until it reaches the groin;
puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie;	then place your hand on the stone in the groin and find the middle of the wound, where it is usually visible, and feel the stone in that part
et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite;	do not move it from the wound or downwards, and be careful at first small size
puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont:	Then hold your hand firm in size, if you feel the stone so large that the wound can endure it as long as the stone can rest firmly, and the stitches that many times have held wounds are:
c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	that is to say, small and large, acute and blunt, long and round, and which have rained.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	if the stones resemble these in appearance, it is known that they issue from the bladder.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	And if it does not go away, if put on the spot a piece of vitriol, and hold it for an hour until it is stained;
puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre;	then return to your work, until the stone is firm, and have the implements that I told you about in the extraction of the stone are at your home to help you in your work.
et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide;	and if it still does not go away, and if it is a severed artery, if put powder on the spot and strain of tents and of bandage, and do not attempt it again, and leave the stone alone and do not touch it, but by chance the patient dies.
puis cure la plaie.	Then treat the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	When the bleeding has ceased and the limb is restored, if you return to work while the bone is still stiff, as long as the bone is firm.</start_of_turn>
de hernie carnouse	of a hernia.
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef;	Then the wound is nothing other than an assembly of moisture or white fat, which is as soft as the kernels of corn, that contains the yolk;
et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit I autre oef;	It is called "syfac", and never is it properly in the yolk if we take care that it is not something else
et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit;	It is the skin of the kernel between the white fat that we have mentioned
et ceu n’avient se poc non.	These things do not happen at all.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the generation of this moisture is from weakness that comes from the seeds, and it is spread through that material.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors:	And never does it happen if percussion comes from the kernels, and this moisture is of many colors
ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus;	or it is a pale yellow, or it is without redness, or black, or pale blue, and more
et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	And these are the signs of this assembly being completed, for if it is white or soft as we have said, if the abscess is ripe and long as the figure of a loaf, and does not bleed, because it has moisture all around.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef;	And if there is moisture in the very flesh, if the abscess is ripe with a part of the yolk, and because of this it is thought to be another loaf.
et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien;	and if the moisture is between the skin of the nails and the white surface, if you feel it well;
donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	then when you know the color of the moisture, if you see it throughout the entire circumference, from where it starts to where it finishes.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to this, therefore, that which follows the introductor, judge of that which is within.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors;	And when we draw up the nails with iron, if it is thought that the patient is cured according to some people and the filling of his flesh.
puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz;	Then the shoulder rests on its back, upon something rather high, and puts a bundle of towels under it.
puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions;	Then sits on its left side, and instructs the minister to sit to the right, and extends the arm to the second rib from the breastbone.
puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir;	Then take the spatula, and grasp the skin of the ribs among the long ones until below the nipple, and make a straight incision dividing the skin of the ribs up to the white fat, and remove it thoroughly as it is soft enough;
puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont;	Then pierce the fatty tissue with a large opening, and drain all the fluid, and then put in your sponges, and extend the fatty tissue upwards
et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement;	and do not touch the breastbone, but only the fatty tissue alone
cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue;	Cope all at once or in pieces itself the cost of him secretly, for if you do not cope it well thoughtfully, it will return to you acute.
et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac;	and if the evil force leaps towards your work, if you leave it in its place when you have finished the work with the knife;
puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then gather the two limbs of the shoulder together at a joint, and then cure it as with the other wounds, until it is healed
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc;	and if you find the evil corrupted by another illness, then you must consider that you bind the vessels that are suspended in doubt about the decay of blood;
puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	then cope the limb at all the suspension, and extract the evil, and cure it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices;	And if acute is assembled in two parts together, its saphes are two branches.
si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset;	if you join the other part as you did the first equally, then dry the blood, and put linen soaked in rose oil in the wound.</start_of_turn>
et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	and put away other wool soaked in wine and oil, and put on the two joints, and put under doubled cloths, and bind it up according to this form.</start_of_turn
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil;	Then take two cloths, and bind them with coarse wool according to this semblance and join them together at the waist of the breeches, and one of the heads grasps on the foundation up to the back, and the other at the part of the shoulder.</start_of_turn
et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier;	And the other two heads above the two armpits, and let the whole assembly be restricted in the loop of the braid.
et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers;	And never is this root of cautery like the size of iron, and take only one cautery with a fine handle, and burn the hair of the armpits, and if it is scorched as we have said, until the white fat that contains the liquid is revealed.
si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	If you take the cautery according to this form, and prick that fat as oncicorns, and burn with this fine cautery:
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout;	And do the same in all ways that you can, until you have scorched all
et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef;	And keep that the fire does not touch the egg
et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve;	and the wounds that this work is more healing.
et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille;	and blood stains from the works of size.
et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	and if anything opposes you, or abscesses, or bloodstained discharges, or other things, if you can cure what opposes you, according to what is said before
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit;	and if the patient is pale and does not wish to wait for this work because of its horror, if you mix with perforation, as I told you, and you are certain by the significations that we have said that the liquid is calm, then make the patient sit on a low chair
pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors;	then pierce the abscess at the lower part with all the surrounding fat, and put the perforation through to the end of the bone
et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer;	And let the wound be large enough, so that all the pain may be driven out.
puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee;	Then put cotton on the limb and bind it, and let the remaining pain be driven out, and cure it until the wound is healed
et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant;	If the white silk does not prevent the pain from returning to the root of the wound, if you must drink a penny or the instrument with which the pain is treated from the hydropic people, as it is formed before;
et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	And make the wound large, and soak the wound that the pain returns, and reassemble after six months or until it has healed, and when it is reassembled as before, and then the patient will be well again.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the testicles.
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse;	Soaking as in the section of this limb has fear of further complications, for it seems to me that it is better to leave it alone
et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	And I shall tell you about the work and the signs of an abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions;	I say therefore that most abscesses come from boils or carbuncles, and that I have seen them myself
et c’est par mout de cas.	it is often the case.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion;	That is to say by excessive pressure of sour and watery pus, which is spread by boils or percussion;
et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors;	and its color is like that of pus from a boil
et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief;	it does not cause pain, but is a serious abscess
et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	and sometimes it is bloody, purulent and full of pus, with a foul color, and never comes from an artery or swelling of a vein.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois;	When it is not from an artery, if known by the position of the postoperative suture, when you press on it at your side;
et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	and you must only touch it there.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars;	Whoever causes swelling of a vein is known by the position of its expression at the touch of the sides, and can make it well without making the size greater on this side and on the others
et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	and that you must hold it like this for a while, until the blood has risen up and the swelling has gone down, and deliver the suspending part from all parts of the limb
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope;	If the limb is already numb with these symptoms, if you must then treat the limb and touch it
et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	If it is open to the surface of the bone, or in what is within the vessels, you must deliver all that is held there, and the socket must be rounded off.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	If the cartilage comes loose from its root or behind, if you must clamp it all, and withdraw the yolk, as we have said.</start_of_turn>
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	When your work is done, if you are using a woolly bandage soaked in rose oil and wine, then treat with other remedies until they are healed.</start_of_turn>
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the testicles.
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait;	This is an abscess covered with a membrane resembling a bladder, with softening of the bones, and the patient groans when he moves.
et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	And the treatment for this ailment is just as dangerous as the previous one, and all these things we have said about it are valid in this case as well.</start_of_turn>
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment;	You must make the patient sit on the edge of the bed, and then support the suspension of the bones below your arms, to all the vessels that are around the edge, and grasp the master and extend them outwards.</start_of_turn
puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples;	Then hold the palm of the hand against the scraping spur, and pass the vessel through the wound until it is uncovered, and then draw out from the chest. As we said in the extraction of the arteries which are in the temples.
puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief;	Then insert a needle or if there is double thread, and tie it to the first part or to the head where the nail has gone, and tie the other end loosely at the other end.
puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues;	Then hold the palm of the hand firmly in the middle directly, according to the length of the bone, and draw out the corrupted moisture
puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions;	Then treat the wound as usual or apply ointment, so that no vessel is pierced except those which nourish one of the bones
car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz;	for in this way there is no harm, and if all the vessels are visible, as it should be, then it is enough to draw out the bones from all the vessels.
si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	If the veins are not cut through during the incision, and are dried and do not swell, they will not be of any aid.
de la routure dou syfac	from the root to the surface
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions;	The outcome of this limb is by the section which comes from above or from the flank, or the extension above the belly in the part of the groin, for in this way the intestines descend from that passage to one of the buttocks.
et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes:	And this passage is either by section or by extension of the bowels, and comes from these two methods of eating which are the cause of these two matters
ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses;	or by percussion, or by jump, or by pressure, or by lifting of burden, or by similar things;
et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement;	And the sign that it is an extension of the flank is that there is swelling and swelling, in a long tense, and does not come immediately
et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	And it is the abscesses which are equal in size until towards the belly, forasmuch the spleen presses the intestines.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the sign is when the jaw is fractured, that it causes sudden pain at the start, and the abscesses are diverse in appearance, such as bursting skin and exposed bone, because of the escape of the intestine and the hardness of the jaw.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And never should the limb be moved with the intestine, and is retained when it is held, and causes great pain to the patient, even when it is pressed
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these treatments with fire there is fear, for it is known to escape.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir;	And as for the work if you command or patient that he pull the intestine back into its place in the wound, if it can enter there again.
puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes;	Then hold his collar between your hands, and keep his thighs still;
puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc;	Then stretch his arm downward, and grasp all the skin of his buttocks long
puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir;	Then keep the liver from the size of a nut according to what you must do to open the wound, and be like that so that it does not swell up again
puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars;	Then loosen the spleen that is under the skin of the buttocks, until the fatty spleen has become uncovered throughout
puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac;	Then hold your thumb against the joint that teaches the connection, in that which is between the white tuff which is below the skin of the egg-shell, and between the second tuff, and depart that which is behind the egg-shell, and between the second tuff.
et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille;	And thus move the hand downwards from the shoulder joint, and when the white tuff is at the top of your left hand, keep the egg-shell against all the tufts towards the size
et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement;	And command the minister to extend the egg-shell upwards, and loosen that which is behind the ligament.
et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz;	And if there is any intestine or white tuff enclosed or hardened, and if you find nothing, if the egg-shell is below the belly
puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions;	Then take a needle or if there is a thick thread made of X threads, and pass it through the back part of the scapula, which is behind the skin of the shoulder blades.
aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz;	Then the size, then tie off the head of the dislocation that appears from the threads, until there are three threads remaining.
puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars;	Then gather them together in the form of a cross, and bind the scapula, as we have said which is behind the skin of the shoulder blades, with a strong thread of two parts
puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne;	Then encircle the head of the dislocation with the threads, and bind them firmly with two parts, so that no vessels which nourish them can enter there, only the incision which we made.
et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi;	And put the thread straight according to the first thread as long as two fingers, and after these two fingers leave the scapula which is behind the shoulder blades as much as the great toe of the boot
et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte;	And afterwards according to the roundness of the eggshell.
puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant;	Then they are cut in the part which is below the skin of the testicles, as much as without repair, and they swell, as we have said before
puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	Then mix coarse wool with oil, put in wounds, and bring in the thread that we have mentioned before
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And never is the bladder cauterized after the incision, out of doubt of the discharge of blood.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui;	For this often happens, and let the thread alone until it stops itching for itself
et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece;	and if it hangs too long, if it is raised by hot water, and put on what we have mentioned, until it stops itching
puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	Then cure the wound of another way, until it is perfectly healed
de hernie carnouse	of a hernia.
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this limb I have never seen anyone who dared to cure with fire.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz;	And the old men say that it is made just like the twig that joins the screw, in part as you tie the blood vessels, after the size above lightly at the bottom.
puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient;	Then hold me close, and cure the abscess of what causes it, until the blood vessels close;
et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And cure it as we have said, until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus;	Never comes rupture again, as we have said, and open the wounds.</start_of_turn
et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres;	And do not touch any intestines as bones, and if you do, it is because, and repair them every hour.</start_of_turn
et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent;	and all the time if it stays too long in this place, if you believe the wound or the swelling, until the intestine comes out.</start_of_turn
et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert;	And this happens by the stretching of the scapula which is angry, as we have said, because it is stretched out, then it becomes soft and swells the bones open.
et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit;	And the treatment for this is by cautery, as we have mentioned before
et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere:	and never is cured by iron in this manner:
et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois;	and that the patient lies lying on his back between your hands, then grasp the limb of the wound inflates with a large amount according to the quantity of three fingers wide
et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac;	and then pull the scapula which is under the skin that covers it, then take the root and bring the bone out from under the scapula.
et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre;	and press at the belly, then cut the two bones that appear from the scapula on the top of the root, and cut one and the other
puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines;	Then draw out the head of the shoulder, and do not cover over the face or stretch out the arm or anything else, as I told you in the treatment of the radix of the intestines.
puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	Then treat it with the treatment of wounds.</start_of_turn>
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when you have closed the wound, if the pus and cure the wound, as long as it is healed.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The shoulder joint is constrained, and shows no outward displacement; the burn is mute in this limb and is more distant from health.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	from the softening of the skin of the armpits.
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir;	Many times is the skin of the joints softened in households, because the bones that are inside are softened, and it is seen.</start_of_turn
et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil;	and it is necessary, when one sees it being treated, to make the patient lie on his back, and to stretch the soft skin over the natural skin.</start_of_turn
puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a III costures ou IIII fermement;	Then join the two levers at a suture, and if you see it, first close the excess of soft skin at three sutures or four firmly.</start_of_turn
puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Then hold between the ribs, and cure as with other wounds, until it is healed, and cut the thread.
dou chastrement	of great suffering.
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre;	Wounds that are scraped off are forbidden in our laws, and for this reason I would not speak of them in this book.
et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres:	and are necessary only in two ways:
dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure;	one is that the owner of the wound responds when asked, and in the wound the cure;
et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	and the other is that we often see bestes being scraped off by our assistants, as with pigs and sheep and goats and other beasts.</start_of_turn>
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres:	I say therefore that scrapes are done in two ways:</start_of_turn>
ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	Or by traction, or by incision.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant;	Or by traction, make them sit in warm water, until the bone becomes softened and limp;
puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	Then grasp it with your hand, until it is reset and you can no longer feel it
Du chastrement de taille:	From the armpit downwards:
covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez;	You must hold it firmly, and press the skin of the bones with your left hand, and then bind the suspension, and grasp each limb at the top, when you have well supported them;
et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz;	And leave no wound open or secret that is on the vessels;
et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure;	And this method of traction is milder than that which is done by traction, because in traction it keeps the limb immobile by chance, while this method desires luxation.
puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Then cure the wound until it is healed.
des hermofrodites	Hairs that are scorched with fire are commanded to the patient to leave them long and even; and if they prick at their root, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes:	Then cure the wound until it is healed.
l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	Then cure the wound until it is healed
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	And the other way is in women, and has on the navel as a rod and two nails.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies;	Then cure the wound until it is healed.
en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	Then cure the wound until it is healed
de la tentigene	Hermaphroditism is in two ways like that of women: one if between the two testicles appears as in the nature of a woman, or if there is hair, and sometimes in the urine.  And the other way if it is in women, and has on the navel like a beard and two testicles.  And the cure for the shame and the fame if it is that you cut off the testicles altogether, and the cure is like other wounds; in the second way, of those homes whose urine spurts through the skin of the testicles, if there is no cure.
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir;	Then cure the wound until it is healed
et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	Then cure the wound until it is healed
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement;	Then cure the wound until it is healed
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	And do not go too far from the wound, for the blood does not come from there; then take care of another remedy until it is healed.
et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	And there is another case where it comes from the root of the marrow, and the swelling, and by chance it leaps up, and this is like the semblance of a wound, and for this reason it is called the old "cowardly disease".
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If you manage to hold it firmly, as we have said, and cure it until it is healed.
de erratique	De erratique.
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis;	Erratic if it is when the nature of the woman is not well perceived, or the wound is small.
et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est;	and it is natural in childbirth, or an accident from illness that it comes about;
ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit;	or it is by a wound from a fistula, or a wound from a wound or thick pus, and is made by moisture in the marrow, or in the cost, or in the spleen, or in general;
et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir;	And thus the conception, and the birth, and by chance the flowers have to have;
et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	and the knowledge of this is through the sight of the dance.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	If the swelling is close to the surface, if it is at the shoulder or at the elbow.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi:	If it is slightly painful and near two livers, if you hurry and touch it, it will burst
met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes;	put your two thumbs together, and the woman should be behind his back, with her legs spread out
puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens;	then the two livers will appear, as long as the subtle pain is round, and be over the stampings
puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	then take wax, and oil the mole, and put it on the limb, and keep the woman at home beside each joint, if it cannot be sutured.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	And if the scapula is hard and thick, it is prudent that you use a sponge resembling a holly leaf.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope;	If the shoulder joint is dislocated from the bone, if it hangs by the tendon and the ball;
et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef;	If the tendons are ruptured and the ball hangs by the bone, if there are medicines that impede the blood, such as chamomile, dragon's blood, incense, and eggs in abundance;
puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder;	then apply a broad plaster bandage, so that the wound cannot stick together.
et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec;	and leave it long, and apply a bandage of dried lint.</start_of_turn>
puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	then take other treatments until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	And when the marrow comes swelling, if you cover it according to this manner, it is not abscesses that form.</start_of_turn
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	For the swelling of the marrow, do not touch with fire.</start_of_turn
des emorroides	From hemorrhoids.
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul;	Hemorrhoids are veins that swell excessively and usually do not recover without treatment, and when they become old they harden.</start_of_turn
et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	And we have said above concerning the signs and symptoms, and I will tell you those which bring about recovery.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	I say that hemorrhoids and thrombi, when they are pressed down in the rectum, and are not felt, if not treated by force.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	Those which are at the mouth of the rectum, we can feel, are those which we can cure.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses;	Therefore, let her be placed in a cold house, then hold the ankle firmly in place with your hands, and support it at its root, then apply powders of restraining medicines such as chamomile, dragon’s blood, and incense, and similar things.
puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide;	Then stretch her limb until it reveals an hour, then immerse it in cold water.
et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	And if blood appears, let her sit in a decoction of sumac, pomegranate seeds, meadowsweet and similar things, then drink barley flour, and soak it in honey and oil, and apply it to her back
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	And if it swells, that is good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir;	If not, if he makes air bubbles at the back and has worms going up towards the wound;
puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	then take lint, and soak it in juice of plantain or in juice of elderberry with old wine, and make air inside the body.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	And when the abscess is healed, if the wound remains open as long as it is healthy;
et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul;	and that which is called "albathir" is red, and is like a black head, if you cover it as I have said before
et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then the wound will heal when it is healthy.
des apostemes de la marris	Emoroids are openings of veins which without restraint usually occur; and when they are old, they become thickened. We have already mentioned in the division the signs and symptoms; and I will say here those which resolve the cure. I say that emorroids and thick blood, when they are mixed in the marrow, and are not perceptible to the touch, if not treated with iron. Those which are at the edge of the marrow, we can perceive, are those which we can cure. It is therefore necessary that you place the woman in a cold house, then extend the ankle and grasp the heel, then sprinkle on medicinal astringents such as acacia and dragon’s blood and incense, and similar things; then remove the pieces an hour later, and put them in cold water; and if there is any bleeding, if you make her sit in a decoction of sumac and pomegranate seeds and saffron and similar things, and then take barley flour, and mix it with honey and assails, and make one plaster on her back. And if it is fainting, that is good. If this does not happen, if there is still bleeding at the edge, make a wound there with a needle; then take lint and moisten it in the juice of plantain or in the juice of elderberry with wine vinegar, and make the wound bleed. And when the wound has healed, if the bleeding has ceased, that which is called ‘albathir’ is red, and is similar to a rough chief, if you cover it as I have said the thickened blood; and then the bleeding will cease. And when the wound has healed, if the bleeding has ceased, that which is called ‘albathir’ is red, and is similar to a rough chief, if you cover it as I have said the thickened blood; and then the bleeding will cease.
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	There are many kinds of abscesses that come in the belly, such as carbuncles and pierced abscesses and herpes and worms and tumors and fistula and hemorrhoids and burnt abscesses, and other diseases that I have mentioned in the previous division
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe;	It is necessary that I say that in this treatment of the cautery abscess that comes in the marrow, which is not like ordinary abscesses that are only painful
et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	And if you see the work of the iron, if the abscess is already formed at the beginning of its coming, and is full of heat and fever, and if it turns red, then you must know it.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie;	Therefore do not hasten to pierce, but let me measure until the pain is eased;
et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe;	and then make the patient sit on a seat, and take two small stools or he leans, and support his back and join his limbs together so that the limb is supported;
et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien;	and spread his thighs, and put his arms down by his knees, and bind them well with a strong bandage
puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme;	then mix the bail towards the breastbone, and bring the instrument from which we expect the pus to come out; for in this way it will form
et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide;	And it must be known that when you see it approaching with this instrument, grasp the root first in order to know the depth of the wound, so that what enters between the instrument and the wound does not go deeper than it should, and does not harm the patient.
et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve;	and if the instrument is greater, if you must cover the depth of the wound with cloths, so that the instrument does not cause pain
et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	and you must put the horn of the instrument at the base, and hold the instrument firmly.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit;	When the wound is opened and the hand is bled, if you must cover the head and the armpit with a cloth, respectively;
et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec;	When the wound is emptied, if you must put in the wound some soft cotton wads soaked in rose oil or in dry green oil
et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites;	And put the tension force of the wound at the bottom of the marrow, and put by default above the marrow and above the ribcage linen net soaked in water or cooked mallows.
puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then cure afterwards two days following this, until it is healed;
et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites;	and never lift the marrow and the wound with a clamp of water and honey, and then of water or roots of lilies and irises long are cooked
puis reveigne a l’oignement.	Then return to the wound.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	And if the wound has been closed in the wound, if you wish, that you take care not to burn it, but cure it as we have said in the division.
de l’enfantement	From infancy.
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar:	The master is first at play that he knows the figure of natural childbirth, and the signs are when you see the woman press down the jaw, and desire odor the er:
adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir;	then hasten the child to be born immediately.
adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui;	Then he must rejoin the skin that has fallen away with the movement of the fetus, following the natural figure, and this is the issue of the root, and the secondine comes with it.
et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost;	And when you see these signs, if you must gently press his belly, so that the fetus is thrust out;
car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification;	because when he descends from his head, the secondine comes with him, and the marrow of his superfluities is broken by a strong bone fracture
et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	and this does not come from any other cause than natural movement.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises;	For it never comes from its bones, but from force of the body, the head or the shoulder, the arms, or it comes from his belly or from the side, and is converted by an accident from his collar and by other harmful figures;
si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	If he is equal to the dance that she is wise and subtle in these matters, and if she warns of error and deception, and I will show her all the figures how one should help her.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent;	If she comes upon his head by natural issue, and the woman groans, and her virtue is weak, if she sits on a chair, or the women hold her;
et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	and she arose her nature of oil or rue, or whatever is fragrant, and then she must dance between her two little toes which are the form of a foot
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers;	and she must split the second toe, and hold his nail as long as the moisture which is inside corrects the fire;
et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament;	and she must press the belly of the woman as long as the fetus descends, and if it does not descend, then it must be plastered with the woman's belly with rue mixed with oil of alum;
puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre:	Then let him grasp and swallow from the stomach, and keep his mouth and nose closed for an hour.
si istra maintenant l’enfes.	If it is now inflamed
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc;	And if his hands swell up fiercely, if you must, keep them loosely bound so and so;
et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut;	and if they will not enter, place the woman on a chair and support the feet above;
puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement;	Then pull out the siege from the earth, and hold on to the woman, that she does not pluck at the pulling out;
et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	And if her hands cannot enter, and the child dies, if she bites the hands at the wrist which are placed before, pull out the child, and rest equally.</start_of_turn>
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	From the issue of the child on his feet.
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut;	When the child comes upon his feet, if you can push upwards.</start_of_turn
et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz;	Then twist it back and forth, until it is even.</start_of_turn
puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	Then take hold of two pieces and stretch them back and forth.</start_of_turn
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi;	Can it jump up to the knees, if the order has grasped, and make it vomit profusely.</start_of_turn
si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	If the leap is made, if God wills it.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it is not forced as we have said, if the limb hangs too low or too high, as long as it is in accordance with the natural figure.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For indeed it is easily done then.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier;	And if it does not come forth as we have seen, say that you take an ointment of alum, sesame oil, gum mastic, and mustard, and grind them all in a mortar.</start_of_turn>
et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz;	and put on the woman's belly and drive out this swelling, then make her sit in hot water until the ribs are cold;
et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre;	and when she is moistened, give her a compress of myrrh and put on her, and leave her for an hour.</start_of_turn
puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	Then make her sit on a chair, then make her vomit and strain her mouth and jaw, and take her pulse gently, for she is now leaping.</start_of_turn>
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	because of the discharge from the child’s genitals.
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc;	When the limb comes in this form, if he puts his hands together and together;
puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit;	then either he is bowed down on his neck, and his chin hangs down, and his eyes are shut tight.</start_of_turn>
et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval;	and folds his hands together and together, and then he grasps the hands on his belly, and rests the thumbs against the ribs, until they are all level.</start_of_turn
et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains;	and if the limb does not move, if he takes hold of his limbs and moves them, then he moves the limb upwards, and then he lets go of the hands.</start_of_turn
et ewe l’enfant poc et poc;	and the child remains thus together and together.</start_of_turn>
et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	and instructs the woman to stay close until the child is better.</start_of_turn>
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	And the child comes out of the womb with a large hand during
I covient engignier a ramener la main:	I command thee to seize the hand:
s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler;	I command thee to seize the hand: if it cannot be repositioned, if thou dost raise up the woman, and alert;
s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment;	if she cannot be alerted, if thou dost raise up the woman, and alert her, and she does not recover, thou must twist her limb towards the little toe, and pull out her legs forward.
puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit;	then apply the poultice which I have mentioned before.
et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main;	and if she does not recover, if thou dost raise her up on the seat, then rest her arm; study to reposition the hand
et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	and keep her limb quiet according to natural figures, and make her vomit, and command her to seize until she feels better
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	From the child’s birth on his neck, and his hands spread out, and his face turned towards his mother’s back.
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement;	I command thee that she bends her hand, then twist her thumb back and forth, and she must make her limb light;
et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc;	And when they are even, if you put on the fleshy nature of height and oil, as we have said, then you must command that it move little by little.
et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne;	And when you have done this, if you make it sit on its seat, and command that it rest;
et la fai esternuer.	it will emit.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	From this same measure to the second degree.
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie;	When force comes into this manner throughout the second, if you grasp the second with your nail, until the moisture is drained out.
et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes;	and if it lies flat on its face and on its neck, if you grasp its buttocks, that it should not be retained, and that the boy will die
puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois:	then take the boy from inside, as we have said, and command the woman not to move again
adonques si istra legierement.	When it is slightly dislocated.
de l’issue des gemelz	When the dislocation is slight
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent III ou IIII;	When it is slightly dislocated, it often happens that three or four dislocations occur together;
et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	and this is not an unusual thing, and often happens.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom;	For these things are strange, and many die of them
je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude;	I know that these things are multiplied, and are devoured by the effluvium of the spleen, which is bound to the gut
et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	and never comes out naturally as all the others, as we have said
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait;	If it comes out suddenly, as we have said, and the cure is made as we have said, and if the limb is grasped gently, and slight pressure is made of what it does;
et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	And make haste as if your life depended on it.
de plusors enfans	Furthermore.
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient;	At times they are formed in the marrow of I or II or III or IV or V or VI or VII, or more, up to XV, and are all formed in the shape of a child by the measurement of her noble age, and it is believed that she should dance gracefully, for by chance many things happen to her.
si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	If you do as it is commanded.
de l’enfant mort	From childhood death.
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains;	When you cure a woman of a dead child or belly, as I said in the division, and there is no great force, and you are compelled to work with your hands;
si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort;	If it is believed that the woman is of sound virtue, and has no accident or is not about to die
si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees;	If it is known that the woman is lying on her back, and her arms are clenched at her side, and her legs are lifted;
et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant;	and the minister should take hold of two parts of her, or she should be bound to the bed if she is not to be treated at the descent of the child.
puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges;	Then wipe the mouth of the patient with oil moistened with alum and fenugreek seeds and linseed, then anoint his hands with these oils and these poultices
puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief;	then put them in the belly lightly, then put on the covers or the liniment that are convenient for this, and take care that the child does not descend on his head
si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes;	if the covers are put on his armpits or on his neck or on his mouth or on his beard or on his chest or on his sides, or if the descending is on the shoulder, he will bite or scratch and have pale cheeks
et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide;	And it must be held that he grasps the ointment in his right hand, and places the elbow between his two left hands, and holds it all his left hand firmly, and pierces the ointment into neither of these parts which we have said, until it comes to the empty thing.
et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	This is the form of the ointment:
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz;	then pierce through another ointment, or the third if you have it there, so that the extraction is equal;
et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	and then hold them equally by moving from one side to the other, so that they are not injured, and hold the ointments taut by hand, as it is the form
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie;	And if some remains of it, if one sees a little of its fat there, and holds it in that part, and treats the other part;
et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	If it does not move at all, if you put on this ointment or higher up the limb, do it until it comes out completely.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote;	If one hand comes forward to the other, and it cannot be moved by stretching, you must cover it with a bandage, until it comes out whole.
puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	Then support the limb at the wrist or elbow, and so you must do in the other hand, and hold the two feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue;	And if the child’s limb is large and is twisted in the exit, or if there is swelling with a collection of blood, you must insert the bony prominence between your thumbs, and hold the swelling and draw out the blood
ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui;	or you can bind it to the instrument which is called the “almidach,” from which the form comes with the instruments or bandage which is after this
et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment;	And thus make him yield with great force naturally.
et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer;	Then stretch out the bones as firmly as possible, and if the head of the shoulder leaps out and is strained by force, even if it is fractured, until the moisture that is or has come out comes out.
et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues;	If it cannot stay in place, if the limb breaks into pieces at the muscle which you hold;
et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	If it is swollen in the belly or deforms the ribs, if you must pierce as much as the moisture comes out.</start_of_turn>
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	and if the swelling is on its pieces, if the attraction is strong, and the address at the mouth of the marrow is weaker.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main;	If it is twisted in the belly or the arm, if you must pull it out from under the covering that is around the limb.</start_of_turn>
et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre;	And make the belly or the arm until the moisture that is in it comes out.</start_of_turn
et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris;	And if another limb is affected with stiffness, and the head of the shoulder remains dislocated, if you pull his hand downwards by grasping the wrist, and stretch it out to the mouth of the socket.
puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer;	Then I oil or two, and stretch it out forcefully.
et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses;	And if the socket of the wrist is retracted by the surrounding inflammation, if I cannot pass my finger, I must bring moisture and fat things to it
et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	and bring on ointment, and soak in warm and moist things.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif;	If the shoulder hangs on its costal cartilage, and you put it back even, if you bring about what we have said in the living child;
et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	and if it does not yield, if you must force it out piece by piece, and leave nothing of the second
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris;	And when you have done this, if what we have said above comes to pass in the marsh,
et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	And when you have done this, if what we have said above comes to pass in the marsh, and blood flows freely, if there is any other cure, restrain the flow of blood and bring about other treatments.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut .i. autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman whose belly had two fetuses inside, one died and the other remained.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time, there came a swelling in the belly, and it burst open, and began to swell greatly
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I went for help, and for a long time I thought, and could not stop the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I put on strong dressing, and out came a bone, and after a while another.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I marvel indeed, for in this belly there is no bone.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	I thought it was the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point;	I wish the wound, and in treating bone as well, as long as the woman is in a better state.
et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu;	and she rests long and steadily without pain, which is almost like having no wound at all
et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	and I have never known this chapter except for the time when the master found a strange thing and had to provide aid
dou ramener la marris a son leu	when he had to reset the shoulder joint to its place.
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres;	After that comes the shape of pressure, as we have said in the books.
et a II tornans as II chiés des II liiens.	And at the second turn, two turns as two heads of two limbs.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux;	However, the ear should be more obtuse than the restriction, and be made of ivory or horn;
et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi;	and the mouth should be one thumb wide, and the edge of the teeth should be long one and a half fingers long;
et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus;	and between the two limbs should be two staples of the same size, which should be fixed in one and the other, half a finger or more long;
et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	and these two staples are placed in the mouth of the marrow to open when the two ears are turned
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles;	Another form, more obtuse and lighter in shape, is made of ivory or horn, according to the shape of the teeth
et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large;	And he has two shoulders and two elbows, as you see, of a long palm, and two must be wide.
et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes;	And when you see the marrow opened with all the instruments, if you make the woman sit down to the left, keep the pieces still and the legs over, then rejoin the two elbows together in the marrow, and hold the head of the instruments between her thighs
puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	Then move your hand over the instruments, if you have held them equally, according to the quantity that you see the marrow open, until it bites what it wants
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances;	These instruments are all dirty, and are multiplied by their resemblance;
et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	And when you see them appear, the more haste there is to work, and the more high is your home for their quantity
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	If one does not despair of the instrument when it does not appear, for its necessity is not easily excused
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis;	When the second toe is retained at birth, if you command the patient to retain its claw, and then make her expel it with force, and strain your hands to her mouth and nose;
et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	and if it breaks through for that, well done.</start_of_turn>
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire;	If not, take I pot [a vessel] and make I hole or cut, and put herbs in it that can open the mouth of the mare, like chamomile, rue, anis, camomile, cassia and centaury.</start_of_turn
toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu;	All these herbs, or some of them, be boiled or steeped in water over the fire.</start_of_turn
puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris;	then put a caustic or burn hole in the pot, and the other end in the mouth of the mare, and hold it tight until steam comes out of the mare.</start_of_turn
puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	Then let the patient spit out the fire, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If the second joint is seized with pain.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine;	Then if it remains after this treatment and is not forced out, as the physician commands, let the patient rub her left hand with olive oil or balsam of alum, and then remove it from the wound, and do the same with the second one.
et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction;	When you have found it, grasp it and stretch it both ways, so that the mark does not leave the wound during extraction
mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie;	but must move slightly to the right and left, and then pull out the fire.
si venra et se desaerdra.	If it comes out and dries out.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes;	And if there is much blood in the wound, as we have said, let the patient spit out the fire, and fumigate with herbs
et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire;	And if it is not of all that we have said, if you keep silent, you will not be punished for it.
mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon;	But it must be that what is in the mouth of the mare, that you bind to the hip of the woman, and then put the clitoris in order with four medicines.
si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer;	If she sobs and returns, and comes out strong;
mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	But all the same, when she comes out like this, if there is a bad smell in the stomach and the head, and she cries out, the patient is cured.</start_of_turn>
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu:	If it is necessary, then suitable fumigations must be given for this.</start_of_turn>
aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	None of the ancients have proved fumigation with rosemary and dried figs.</start_of_turn
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The form of the instrument in which we fumigate the woman is to retain the flowers and secondine if it is this:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu;	And it is seen like a wasp, and one puts on the head in the middle, and the large head above the fire.
et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	or the fumes above the charcoal, and the stench until it is consumed, and starts another.
de percier lou fondement	From the root to the ground.
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac:	Many children are born who do not have the solid foundation perceptible, for it is often stifled by a subtle syfac
si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche;	if you must compel her to break through that syfac at its root, and do not pierce with an acute spur, and keep the wound untouched
puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	then put on soft linen soaked in wine and oil, and then cover with ointment until it is healed.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	If you doubt that it will stay in place, put or draw a weight on it, and hold the hands still, and let the limb rest until the pain subsides.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme;	And never comes this stamping from the swelling of wounds or abscesses;
si covient coper celui soudement:	If it is necessary to cover that support:
si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	If it is necessary to cover that support: if it be cured, as we have said of the plaster.
de la fistule dou fondement	of fistula from its foundation.
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors;	Fistulas that arise from the foundation are nodules, and large ones that arise from below the foundation depart, or in the space of two parts, if there is one fistula or several.
et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans;	and when that nodule is old, if it be renewed, and has moisture with white or yellow bile, and never are these fistulas healed
et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	and are known by this that it is accompanied by vomiting or diarrhea when the patient vomits, and by an upset stomach when they vomit once
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge;	and if there are fistulas that reach the bladder, and reach half of the belly;
et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	And arrive at the hip joint, and up to the knee.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant:	And thus one knows the fistula persisting at the foundation, and does not move:
et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	And that you bite your thumb or foundation, and there is a thin needle of spider or iron in the fistula when there is no swelling
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit;	And if there is swelling, if you see a slight attempt of swelling, or a wound from a horse, as long as you feel the attempt or the wound on your thumb;
et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit:	And if you do not feel it, and there is no vomiting or diarrhea, no wind or pain, as we have said
saiches qu’elle ne perce mie;	the wound does not pierce me.
si te haste dou curer.	If you hurry to cure it.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula persists up to the bladder or the urinary tract, if in a leap the urine escapes, and cannot be retained by medicines.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu;	If it is pierced up to the joint of the shoulder, if it is attempted coming down to the root;
s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement;	If there is no twisting and the pain is not severe, if it is simply displaced, and does not deserve medicine or support by pressure.
et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	And in such fistula of the Persians there is no remedy except toil, and the vanity of the fools who intervene in it.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos;	In that which is neither Persian nor ancient, there is hope of health with fire, as I have shown, and that the patient lies between your hands on his back;
et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre;	and the limbs are placed under his armpits, and his shoulders are bent towards his belly.
puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	Then attempt an embrace, or a plunge if there is torsion, until you feel the bone or the attempt comes.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet;	If the patient feels the bone is twisted at the root, if you believe that you must bite down on your thumb index, if you feel that the attempt has perceived it;
et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans;	Or be pulled out or if you feel between your thumb and the little finger the cartilage or the bone, then grasp that it is pierced through;
si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	If it does not slip out by itself, we cannot heal it.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc;	We can only heal them well when we can keep them still
et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit;	and the pain that comes from it, if we remove the burn using the cautery instrument as we have said before.</start_of_turn>
et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement;	And the rope should be tied at the top of the fistula, as long as it comes from below the foundation.
et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil;	And do it twice or thrice, until you are sure that these charoses that are like an oil brush have been burned
et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	And then treat with soft compresses of burrs until the char is loosened, and then treat with ointment rubbing charcoal and soldering
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If he is unscathed, that is well.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez;	If so, nothing else can make it well
et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur;	and if you try it between and do not reach the root that is or the foundation, and between your thumb and the attempt put on a thick covering of charcoal or gutta, and you will see the fistula at that which sustains the covering like a cord
si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente;	If the head of the fistula approaches the attempt beforehand, and the cautery follows afterwards, as long as it arrives before the head of the attempt.
et sera delivré li tente, et cherra;	and the attempt will be delivered, and will be cured.
puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	then confirm those parts that seem like a feather of oil, and nothing remains of them
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if he does not move from you, and stands between you and the work, if you cauterize with fire or medicine at its peak.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses:	For the fire cautery joins two bones together:
c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor;	namely, the burning of these hairs together, and the incision of blood and the drying of moisture.
puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe;	then the healing of soft tissues buried under the skin or split open, until the flesh bursts open, and the hair is burned in the burst
puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	Then cure the wound of the oozing boils with charcoal powder, and these are the dry medicines.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it is restored, if it is sound and does not return.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if a fistula comes up to the root of the bone, and is pushed out of place, if its bone or root is fractured, inquire about that.</start_of_turn>
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres:	If you feel the attempt, and between two there is the cloth or the leech or burn, or it is near to bursting, if there is no other way but the way of escape and hope, by the administration of one of the three methods:
ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier;	or you cauterize as we have said, or you press just until it bursts, or if you wish so, put a poultice and cure as before.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit;	and do not go too much into the wound, that you do not cover the foundation that holds the bottom, and bring out the discharge in the natural way
puis le cure, si com nos avons dit;	Then cure as we have said
par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé;	By chance, if he is sane, or you loosen that covering and the mucus then when it is cut from its root, or by attempt or by some other pointed instrument;
puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues;	then you must cut off that which is superfluous in the wound, as much as you wish.</start_of_turn>
puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement:	then study to restore the wound and to stop the fistula at the lower part of the root.</start_of_turn>
si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	if there is something more serious with the patient.</start_of_turn
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere:	And never are fistulas according to this manner.</start_of_turn
et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	and it is when you bite the attempt in the fistula, and it is either costs the foundation from the skin under, or take an attempt pierced at the head according to this form:</start_of_turn
Et i boute .i. fil tort en .ij., et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And there is always a thread torn in two, and you must hold the attempt at the very end of the fistula until it is at the head.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement;	If the person is lying on the margin of the ground, then grasp the hair of that limb, so that you bite down on the root;
et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II;	If the person is lying on the margin of the ground, then grasp the hair of that limb, so that you bite down on the root, and pull out the head of the hair, and reunite the two hairs together, and stretch one against the other, and leave it one hand or two;
et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent;	and do not relax until the hair has overcome these hooks that are between the root and the tip.
puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	Then cure the wound until it is healed and healthy.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not perforate, if you force it to perforate in every way you can, it will not be too much harm.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it is not proper to make the wound wider by force, and then to cure it, as we have said, while it is still healthy.</start_of_turn>
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans;	The shape of the spiny bladder from which the fistula is made if it is moist and soft from one part and trenchant;
et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	and on the other hand not, for if you see this you must not do it
des emorroydes	Des emorroydes.
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres:	Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres:
ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement;	Or else they are deep within the foundation, like grains of resin; and if there are small and large ones, and in their proper order without blood, and if there is one or more, and they are loosened from the foundation and from the head of the foundation.
mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors;	But those which are loosened have some moisture, and are covered with blood or a yellow-orange liquid or blood, and have the color of flesh
et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz;	and the cure for those which are within the foundation is that you command the patient to gasp and breathe out, until the foundation is forced out, and they will appear whole.
si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines;	if you are in a hurry, and you have grasped it with your nails, or you hold it with your finger, then break it at its roots
et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot;	And if the cord that holds them together does not hold them firm by their moisture, if you grasp them with a drape or a bandage, or with a piece of chamæleon;
et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere;	and pull them down, then press them, and powder over them warm powders which shall replace the cautery.
ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	or you burn them if it is said or as the physician of cautery commands, because the cure of other cures is when they are well;
et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement;	and if the foundations cannot be plastered, if you bite the patient with a biting and rough plaster to uncover what is under, if it can be plastered open
cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere;	cannot the patient be put together, and if the strings are strong for the foundations, if it is a slight cure
et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	And it is that you grasp them at your nail or with pliers, and press, and then cure as we have said, until they are healed, and that they fear the incision with the knife.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere:	If you can manage the suture according to this method:
pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large;	I take a thread and pass it through a needle, and then pass the thread through the underside and make the needle pierce through again, and I twist the two ends of the thread around the needle, and if it is thick enough
et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc;	and tighten the thread firmly, then knot the thread, and pull out the needle, and do so to all the others, and leave one to secure the excess blood;
puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose;	then put on the foundation a soft dressing in rose oil or beeswax, and put on the foundation, and command the patient to rest.
et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then you leave them until they bleed, and when they have bled, if the treatment for swelling and other treatment, while they are sane.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	When the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir;	If you believe that you have reached the point of a spasm or a nail at the nail edge, which does not leave it moist;
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient;	then you must treat it until it is healed if you believe it is necessary;
et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez;	and if it cannot be cured, if you must renew the scraping more forcefully than before, until it is bleeding, and be scraped off;
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	then you must treat it until it is sane.</start_of_turn>
dou fremit	When the physician hears the patient groaning.
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont;	Formice is a small appearance that is forced before the body, and will bleed out by itself.</start_of_turn
et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	And never does the pain leave him, but it feels as if he is dead with fear, and comes throughout the body, and more than in any other part.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor;	And the cure is that you take a bundle of rue heliotrope, or a bundle of rue viper, and put that salve on the wound, until it circles the wound all around.</start_of_turn>
puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	Then turn your hand all around the bundle until you cover it all around the wound, and put it in its proper place, and pull out the wound from its roots.</start_of_turn
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	If you see that he does it with a spider's thread or iron in this fashion, be subtle and withdraw your hand.
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser.	Do not be afraid, for it is necessary to hold firmly and press.</start_of_turn
Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	And if you see that the wound must be cauterized, if it is before or during the cautery.</start_of_turn
de la forme dou clistere	of this fashion.
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet;	Never make a blister of silver or coin, or of gold that has melted or is soft;
et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	Never make a blister of silver or coin, or of gold that has melted or is soft, and never make a blister of these small and large things, according to the way in which they are brought about.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Those who are feeble and painful in the treatment of children are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	Their form is small and great if it is excessive; or the belly is bound up in this manner:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez;	and if there is a swelling or the belly is tied up, if you see it, and if you touch it either with your hand or with your finger
et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I;	and if there is a hole in one rib and in the other I
et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre;	and if the belly or one puts medicines in a bladder of fine leather or parchment, and if you pierce all around the large hole, and between each hole put one must of space, and then put in these holes one strong thread of strong thread twisted in the shape of an X or around it, and reassemble the belly as if it were a nail
et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize;	And when the treatment is complete, if the thread has been placed in front of a strong needle, then clip it off.
et c’est li forme dou cercle:	And this is the shape of a circle:
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement;	And let the treatment neither be too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head of the blister with oil or balm of egg, or something similar, and then cover it lightly
puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet;	Then grasp the minister with both hands together, until it is quite visible, then remove the blister, and let the patient rest his legs at the surface, and if the medicine wishes, it should suffice as long as the thread can stay in its place
et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	And if it sleeps all night, there is greater aid
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see him lying in sickness with a swelling of the belly, and the physician hastens to leave, if he resumes as soon as he is well.</start_of_turn>
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant;	And if it swells up on the skin or foundation, or abscess, if the blister is as fine as for a child
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	And this is the shape of a subtle blister on which the skin is strained:
des plaies	wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies;	We have already said in the previous chapter the treatment of wounds.
or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	or you will say the treatments of hands and medicines, according to their completion.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse depending on what causes them, and depending on the limbs or wounds that are made, and how they are made
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses;	The things which are done for wounds are done by cutting stone, and the size of spear, nail, lance or fist, or stone or similar things;
ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres;	or that are done according to the rules of the body, as when there is a wound on the neck, or the head, or the foot, or the belly, or the liver, or similar parts
et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	and I will tell you the treatment for a chest wound, and I will begin with simple head wounds, because the memory will come to you in this chapter
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut:	I say that when a simple wound comes or a fracture occurs, and the bone is not broken, if you take care that it is not from a stone or similar things, and the skin is thoroughly ruptured and the wound is large, and you doubt the abscess is hot:
si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree;	if you do so soon as the head of the skull itself comes from the wound, or if the blood comes from the part furthest from the wound;
et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	and you will hear the patient's pulse full of wine and meat.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char;	and if he does not recover, if he vomits blood or does not drink wine, does not eat meat;
et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice;	and draw out the wound, if an abscess comes, cover it with soft wool soaked in rose oil only, or in astringent wine.
et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés;	If there is no surrounding tissue around the wound, put the wound on the fresh blood, which is not moved by air, dust, or anything else; I will tell you about this later.
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the blood has moved, put on some sponges until it is whole.</start_of_turn>
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is great like the size of a spear and similar, and the limbs do not naturally unite, if you unite them with sutures, as I will say, for wounds of the belly, with sutures.</start_of_turn
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope;	If the wound is exposed to the bone, and is gaping, and only held by a thread, if the surgeon sees it.</start_of_turn
puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	Then cure the wound with medicine, and restore the flesh hard instead of leather, and instruct the patient to eat coarse foods, such as testicles and bread, as well as poultry, and the like.</start_of_turn
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure;	And if you find or leather spoiled, and there is no bone, if the surgeon sees it, pull out all the decay and throw it away, then cure it.</start_of_turn
et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil;	And if there is an artery in the wound or vein, which without support, and it cannot be staunched by medicines, if the artery is torn, and if you find it displaced, bind it with a thread.
et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	And if that does not help, if you must cauterize it.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere:	And if these wounds are small and simple, the cure is gentle:
et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	and put on this powder that will harden as soon as it touches the air
Et li maniere de la poudre si est:	The powder is to be applied in the form of a paste
pren encens une partie;	take incense in one part;
sanc de dragon II parties;	blood of a dragon two parts;
chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc;	live charcoal three parts, and the powdered [substance], and apply to the wound, and hold firmly, until it contracts well and unites with all its blood.
et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle;	and then bind it firmly, and let it loosen, if it does not swell
car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	for one must not administer the medicine until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And never shall one do this treatment alone, when there is neither incense nor blood of a dragon, but only when the wound has not moved.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre;	and if the wound has moved, even in this state, if one does not put on this powder;
mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe;	but put on some unguents that digest, or poulps of flour of barley made of water and honey, until it boils over
puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat it with other treatments until it is healed
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz;	And if a break of bone comes with the wound, and it is small, if the bone is extracted with fine needles;
et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	And I will tell you of this later.
de la plaie dou col	of the wound of the neck.
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If there is no difference between the fracture of the head and the fracture of the neck, but if the neck or the artery is cut
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire;	If it is bone marrow, if there is no other remedy except to leave the wound open, and do not put anything restrictive, because it hinders the marrow and makes it recede.
et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres;	Do not put anything rough on the wound, for the substance of the marrow is cold, and the continuation of the pain is with the brain, which is the most tender member
mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	But if the medicine be soft, like warm water in sweet oil, and mixed with rosemary oil, and vinegar washed in sweet water, and other stones of mine according to this method, and moist compresses.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, if the blood vessel and the nerves are torn, then cure as long as it is healthy.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu;	And if the wounds are deep and closed and full of pus, if the hole is high or more towards the base;
et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est;	If the artery is severed and blood flows profusely, if the swelling and the wound, and the cautery are mixed together, then.
et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel;	If the spine of the shoulder is severed, or the scapula, and the bone is held, so that the meat is not damaged, if the scapula is above the glenoid fossa, do not touch the shoulder but reset it to its natural position.
et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then strain the wound immediately, and leave it alone for a while, then treat it with ointment until it is healed;
et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier;	And if the wound has made an imprint in the bone, if the marrow;
et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue;	If there are pieces of bone, if the wounds are severe throughout, if these you cannot have, if you leave them as they are, let them burst open and align the issue.
et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	If the wound is fresh, if powder is applied as I have said.</start_of_turn>
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there is bone in the wound and there is fistula, if the wound must be closed as I have said in this chapter.</start_of_turn>
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	of a wound from a lance or a knife.</start_of_turn
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne:	If it is from a spear or a knife, and the wound is deep, look if the wound is surrounded by swelling so that the patient cannot align their limb.</start_of_turn>
saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz;	Then let the wound be mortal.</start_of_turn
et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide;	And if it is not deep and is fresh throughout, do not put anything on it for the first hour, do not bind it up with the dressing until it is painful and bursting, return to the body and comfort the patient.</start_of_turn
mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor;	But I put an attractive weight upon it, and I bind it twice over.
et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors;	And if there is no weight, put on the wound a great quantity of cotton to absorb the moisture, and let the patient rest on the wound for three days, or four, or more
si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne;	If there is no spasm, do not cause the body to tremble excessively or excessive straining of the limbs
et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	When you see the bones in their place, consider the wound to be healed
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Treat the wound and other cures, as long as it is healthy
et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule;	And if it does not heal, and there is pus, consider that there is a fistula
si la cure si com on doit.	If the treatment must be so.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant;	If the wound is a cut or incision of a spear or knife, and it is simple or deep, or at the back, if the treatment of what is before [is insufficient];
s’elle est grans, de cousture;	then it requires stitching
et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez;	and if it is small, powder is sufficient, and if it is embedded in the bone, and if pieces break off, if there is pain in the wound, and the surrounding area is blackened;
et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions;	if they are not blackened, let the wound rest, if it aligns the extractions
et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	and for other wounds, as for other limbs, it is the judge’s decision as we have said
dou derrompement dou ventre	indeed
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis;	The pain of the belly is great, medium, and small.
de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus;	The great wound of the belly never stops bleeding, or the nerves of the intestines are cut, because of the admission of blood.
et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut;	The wound is more painful, and never worth more than the small wound, because of this we must return the intestines to their place immediately, if we do not return them bit by bit;
por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II.	because they swell so much that they feel the pain, if we return them bit by bit, it is worth less than the greater wound, because in this way we leave the intestines in their place along with the others two times
Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres:	And the swelling of the belly is according to three methods:
les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies;	The two common sutures are in the belly suture and the other wound in the flesh and two other proper sutures are common as other wounds.
et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	And indeed, they are more proper with the belly suture, and I will say a little bit and declare it.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres:	I say that when the wound is small and there is nothing of the intestines inside, and if there is anything, it is by one of these two methods:
ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	or because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestine is swollen by the fruit.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere:	And when it is cold, freeze it partly in this way:
moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	wet a sponge or lay a cloth in cold water only, or you will burn in cold water stinging and pricking and spiking, and elevate the intestine until the swelling is bony;
et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	And never again did I make this wine restraining, for it is mute that it stirs the soul to burst.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose;	When you see the swelling depart, if the gut of water or the belly is high and bloated, for by this is the entrance to things aligned
et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes;	If it cannot enter, if there is a wound there, with the instrument we hold the swellings still
et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait;	The first cure is to make it mute that the size does not require great necessity or that there be no need;
et c’est li estrumens por le fendre:	And this is the instrument for cutting
si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	If you trench downwards in the shoulder and do not withdraw, and once this is done, the form:
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	And when the wound is swollen, and the intestines protrude outwards, if you stop bleeding in accordance with the natural form in its place, know that you have done well, for this is enough.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief;	When the wound is large and is in the lower part of the belly, if you must manage the patient on his back, raise his legs above his head.
et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre;	If it is in the lower part of the belly, put the head and arm higher than the lower parts, and if the wound is in the lower part of the belly, if it is in one of the two lower parts, put your hand over that which is higher than the other
et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	and so it is necessary to support what I say in large and gaping wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres;	Small wounds put what appears to be holding, then put your hands between the wounds and support the wound with your hands, and close the wound
et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort;	This is the common method of stitching, and take a needle or several, according to the quantity of the wound’s size, then leave the head of the wound at a distance, and pierce with a needle or there is strong thread.
et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble;	And pierce the two armpits with the two fingers of the siphac, which is to say the skin of the armpits, until you have pierced to that part; and reunite the two fingers of the siphac with the three fingers together.
puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille;	Then strain with a double thread around the needle of two parts, and reunite the two fingers of the wound immediately, and then leave one space, and pierce another hole.</start_of_turn>
puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte;	Then tie the thread like the first needle, and do not stop doing so until you have finished piercing according to what you have learned from the needles, until the wound is restricted.</start_of_turn
et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer:	And let the needles be neither too fine nor too thick, for the fine needles will not grasp the flesh, and the thick ones will not enter well.</start_of_turn>
por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes;	For this reason, it is recommended that they be blunt;
et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure;	and it is not recommended to press the needles too far into the flesh and skin, as they may break and open the wound before the suture is complete.</start_of_turn>
et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee;	and then keep the head of the needles still, so that they do not irritate the patient at night, and put on tension or a bandage on the head of the needles to hold them in place, and leave them in until the wound is healed.</start_of_turn
et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II.	and this way of stitching with needles is more convenient in small wounds, because there is only one or two needles involved.</start_of_turn>
Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien;	The second suture is common, and is that you join the two edges of the skin and the two edges of the substance together with a needle or there is one strong middle thread.</start_of_turn
et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras;	And when you have perceived these things altogether, if you rejoin the needle at the place where you began, in the manner in which it is customary to close the edges;
et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi;	and put some space between each stitch the thickness of a barleycorn.
ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	This stitch should be made on the flesh, and I sew a wound which has been caused by a knife, which is greater than a palm of the hand, and it is in the belly.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	I shall bring back the intestine when it has been out for twenty-four hours, and the wound has healed for fifteen days; then I shall cure it, and it will be healed.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle;	And the blood spurted from the wound as if it would die, and this was a miracle.
et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines;	and I did not care for it, because I was in the wilderness where there was no healing, no medicines of any kind;
et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	And the method more effective for the wound is to apply a compress twice a day, and to wash it with honey water until it is healed.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture:	Or thus I shall tell you two ways to suture:
pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens;	Take the needle and pass it from the underside of the edge just as far as necessary to reach the underside;
quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer;	When it has grasped the edge on the right, if there is a slip or the needle has pierced, and you have passed the needle through from the underside of the edge just as far as necessary to reach the underside again;
et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	And the understanding of this suture is that you should stitch as a tailor does the leather, and that you leave once the slip has passed from one side, and you take it back from the other, until the suture is complete
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere:	The second method of stitching, which Galiens does indeed know well, if it is so with any, that joins the two parts together naturally, and leans one chief against the other chief, in part manner:
fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac;	He sews on a hook or chief near the edge, and makes the latter pass only through the latter, and leaves the two chiefs of the spic;
puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac;	then he turns the hook, and makes him pass through from the back until he reaches this far side, as two chiefs of spic.
puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit;	and makes him pass through one and the other from the back until he reaches this far side, in two other hooks that are on the other side
et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	and that is the quiet method of stitching and the most common.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune;	Galiens if this word is false, and no one testifies, we must suture the belly with two needles, or there must be thread in the seam.
et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies;	and we must push one needle from one side, and the other from the other, in the manner of those who suture wounds
et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	and the stitches must be strong enough so that when the wound is opened again the belly does not burst more than usual.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies:	The judge of the wound is like the judge of other wounds:
et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout;	and if you find the wound fresh with all its blood, even if it has moved, you must stop the bleeding and the pain
puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe;	then apply powder to the wound and if it has moved, do not put any dressing that is present, until the wound is closed
et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach;	And the hair grows, and the scabs are soldered, and the mark is seen.
puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then cure the wound like the others, as long as it is healthy;
et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	and if you have no medicine, if you put it on, as long as it begins to swell, cotton wool, and move twice the juice as long as it is healthy
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples;	For you must not have any other medicine except in simple wounds
et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles;	and if you doubt that the wound will not heal properly, cover the principal parts with coarse linen soaked in warm oil of thyme or rose oil, and put it between the edges, and drain the abscesses
et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine;	and if there is pain or putrefaction in the bowels, and it happens many times, if you immerse in clusters of black wine it will help, and the same if the putrefaction comes up to the intestines;
et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	And the large intestines, their masses more readily cured than the small intestines.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	The intestines which are called "jeuns" cannot recover when they are swollen, because of the swelling of the veins, and for the subtlety of all the body, and for the proximity of their nature to nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres;	If the spleen bursts from the wound, if it is returned backwards just like the intestine while it is still fresh.
et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres;	And if it is black and becomes towards black or white, if you must know that you must bind the black part, because there are veins and arteries there;
puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	Then hold that which is between the ribs, and put the two thumbs hanging down from the part under the wound until they are withdrawn to align the extraction when the spleen bursts, and the wound is closed
de la routure dou boueil	Of the root of the boil.
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance;	When the intestine is round and the wound is small, if you can restore it in small pieces, because I know that one has been grazed by a spear or the belly of a lance;
et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez;	And it was the wound on the right side of the stomach, and it became filled and turned into an fistula, and in this there was vomiting and flatulence.
je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	I put it to cure as I could, and did not cease to support it until it was healed, and the wound closed.</start_of_turn>
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre;	And when I saw it closed, I doubted that the patient would be well in his belly.</start_of_turn
et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans;	and there was no longer any pain, but only in better conditions, and food and drink.</start_of_turn
et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere:	and the physicians say that when there is a small wound in the intestines, it must be ligated in parts.</start_of_turn
pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus;	take forceps of great size, and gather the edges of the wound, and when the forceps have gone over the opening, if you put on the two fingers, if it bites its lip above.</start_of_turn
et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise;	Then he grasps the head, and if it does not slip away, put in another support afterwards in the same way as before, until the wound is completely healed.
et cout la plaie.	and heals the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere:	If the head of the intestines is burnt, and there is no further discomfort for the patient, and it can be tied up with a fine thread which is cut from the intestines themselves, in part like this:
pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure;	take hold of this thread of intestine that is already discharged, and then tie at the head of this thread a thread of fine linen twisted, and then pass the thread through the needle, and sew the intestine, and hold it in place.</start_of_turn>
et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance;	and this way of stitching is not strong except according to the way of engaging and hoping;
et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	And if the wound is large and wide, even if it is in one of the great intestines, if there is no swelling or contamination, it is only due to its slightness.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	Of fistula or that it be
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	Wounds and abscesses, when they swell, if they are called universally 'fistules,' and even when they are sewn and rent bowe.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil;	A fistula is confirmed by a hard and white nodulation, and there is no pain, and is just like the foot of a bird;
et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse;	never in clear water, but sometimes thick;
aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez;	never too little, but sometimes enough;
et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes:	and I have spoken of it in the division of wounds, that every wound that is not sanitized, and there is pus, is only fierce from one of the seven causes:
c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors;	that is to say, by the small amount of blood or pus;
ou por sa malice;	or for its malice;
ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char;	or for its malice; or because there is great hardness within and on the limbs, that they do not allow new hair to grow.
ou il i a trop de bowe;	or there is too much tension;
ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit;	or the limb is twisted, and the matter is of poor quality
ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure;	or the treatment is not good for the cure
ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence;	or because corruption is like a plague
ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature;	or because in that area property is late for digestion, and late for health, and escapes by nature;
ou il i a voinnes ou os:	or there are veins or bones:
et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	and I have already mentioned these causes, signs, and treatments in the division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	Or you must know that I will tell you the cure of fistula which is made by an egg of hands.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors;	Wounds that have become fistulated appear in all limbs with pain.
car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez;	For there are fistulas that arise from great veins, arteries, nerves, or the spleen, intestines, bladder, or some bones, or the spin of the back, or in any joint of the hands or feet;
et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	and if in part it comes from the primary limb, and similar things happen.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance;	And all these fistulas of this kind are bad for healing, and there is only toil and ignorance;
et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier;	and if there is no fistula that does not go beyond what I have said, and you have promised a cure, and you see it is known, if you take an attempt to drain or burn it, if the fistula is straight, if not;
et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit;	If the fistula is tortuous, if the hook of a slender needle attempts to plunge, for the swelling swells inward towards the curvature;
et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie;	If the fistula has holes and you do not secure it well with hooks, if the swelling bursts through one of the holes, for the moisture is too strong from one hole to another, and it deflates.
puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent;	Then if the limb is hanging limply from your hand, that you know if there is bone or nerve damage, and that it is swollen, and ask the patient about the pain he feels when you press your hand, and where it hurts
et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens;	and when you know truly where it is, if it is far from a joint or nerve, or an artery or vein, or any of the bones that I have mentioned, if you have accepted what I have said, and if the fracture is displaced and the corrupt parts that are within
et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons;	And then the treatment must be continued until it is healed; and if the fistula is well formed from the outset, if you can, close it from the start, just as you would do with a wound; then put in some soft patches in medicine, and leave them until the medicine consumes the superfluous matter that is remaining at the bottom.
et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And then put in absorbent dressings to keep it dry until it is healed;
et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	And if it is not healed by that, if the burn it as we have said, and if the bone is corrupted from the fistula, if it is closed
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit;	If the vein or nerve does not swell or the main parts do not ache, as we have said
et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez;	And if the bone is discovered and there is corruption and blackness, if the limb is lame as long as the corruption is all bone, then treat with absorbent dressings until it is healed.
et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font:	If he is not sane, and returns bowed as before, take hold of his hair that you may not let him go until he is well.
si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu;	if he pulls and wants as long as you stay at the bottom, and breaks through all the corruption, then restore the limb.</start_of_turn>
et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	and if he is already sane, that is good.</start_of_turn>
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir;	If not, take hold of his hair that you may not let him go until the corruption is gone.</start_of_turn
si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature;	if there is nothing else to do but to leave it to its natural course.</start_of_turn
et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un;	and if there is a slight fracture of a bone, and you must treat it with pliers, if you extract it with a suitable instrument, and if there is a major fracture, do not leave it untouched.</start_of_turn
et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	If moisture opposes you, and there is no error or fear, grasp firmly and moisten and stretch, and deliver the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os;	If you do not remove them at once, if you put on the wound something that causes putrefaction, and leave them until the bones become soft within the bones, then indeed they will become lighter.
et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie;	And if it is a large bone, such as a limb or thigh, if you remove the corruption as much as possible until the black is entirely bony, then restore the wound.
et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os;	And if there is a great part of corruption, and comes up to the bone’s marrow;
si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez;	then cover with cloth and cover all until the corruption is gone, and then cure until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	And I will tell you of a fistula that occurred in a man's leg, so that you may take note and help in your work.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir;	There was once a young man about XXX years of age who had a pain in his leg caused by something within the body, until the matter came out through a large abscess; there was no known cause for opening it.</start_of_turn>
mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors;	but he became mad with worry about the abscess opening up so much that he bled profusely from the matter coming out, and it became a fistula, and there came out much pus that flowed over the body and moistened the wound.</start_of_turn
et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors;	and he remained mad for two years, and there was no skill in his hands, as far as I know, until I was called away, and saw his leg and the medicines that were being used, and what cured him of the fistula.</start_of_turn
et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	And became red the colour of youth, and had the colour of citrine.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	I bound a loop in one of these holes, and then circled around all the holes, and found that one followed the other throughout all the parts of the limb.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens;	And I found myself in such a plight, that I grasped one of the holes as long as I discovered part of the bone, which I found corrupted and putrefying, and the stench of corruption reached as far as the marrow inside;
je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai;	I thought that what appeared to me was a corrupted bone, and I cared for nothing else but this;
et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder;	and began to restore the wound with soothing medicines for a long time, but I could not make it stay put
et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu;	and then I found the bone just as before, and I found the corruption continuing in the bone, and I thought I had cured it, and then I fainted, and I regretted that I had not made the limb stay put
mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines;	But I cannot do more than I can bear with the palm of my hand on the bone, and I must force it out completely, then restore it with medicine.
et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	And he was healed and comforted greatly, and did not wish to continue the work for fear of the weakness of the patient, who could not endure, and for the fear of death which I avoided for him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	For often is blood evacuated with the opening of a vein, but it was entirely sound, and in place of the bone there grew a hard scale, and it was in good condition and suffered neither pain nor disadvantage of any kind, neither from the fear nor from the coming.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere:	And if the bone is broken in no place of the body, if you can manage it, do so in this manner:
pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut;	Take hold of it, and strain at the head of the bone that is broken, and command that no one extend it upwards;
et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char;	And put another layer of linen more thick than the first layer, and bind it on the edge which is above the bone, and extend the head, so that you force out the corrupt marrow from the bottom, and uncover the bone above the place where you see it is being bound, so that the bone is not bruised by the linen
et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue;	And put I a sponge or a bowl of salt on the bone to cover the decaying flesh.
et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	And keep it so moist so that one can see and feel the decay, and moist it again another time.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute;	And if the bone is corrupted, and does not open up, and the decay is in the middle or in a part, if you uncover the flesh entirely;
puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit;	then put I a sponge or a bowl of salt, and then cover the decay from one side to the other with the sponge, and keep it covered for as long as the decay lasts, as we have said
et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part;	and if the decay is in the joint, if you join the corrupted joint, and cover the bone on the other side;
et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper;	And if the corruption is in the continuation of the two joints, if there is no other angle but that of the nail;
et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert;	And if the corruption is blunt at the end of the hand or the wrist, if the nail is strong in that place, but nevertheless you must inquire about that corrosion, how it happened to you.
et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire;	Keep silent in every way, but do not let the vein or nerve hinder you.
et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce;	And the nails which cut and the threads which cover these bones are many, according to the position of the bones and the appearance of swellings, and their thickness and thinness, and their greatness and smallness, and their hardness
et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument;	Therefore it is necessary to show some resemblance of the work of the instrument
et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies;	and towels that the work will show you the instrument of which you will have need, according to the knowledge of this art, and the testimony of the methods of diseases.
si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	if you think the instrument of which you have need according to this, as it is fitting.
dou feu	indeed fire.
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer;	The head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, or by pressure, or by force;
et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre;	and when you have treated that decay by the means of medicines, and it does no good, if you can cover that limb until the decay goes away, or the disease escapes by that, for the patient either escapes by death, or by the malice, which is greater, of the defect of the limb
et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors;	and the sign is that the limb becomes black, as if it were burnt by fire, and appears after the blackness, for that decay of the limb spreads throughout the limb and consumes it entirely
si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	If you are in a hurry and it is by the percussion of venomous creatures such as scorpions of the sea and vipers and similar, if the corrosion is at the root of the tooth, if you bite and do not give it space to come until the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras;	If it comes until the hand, if the bite has reached the joint, if the corrosion does not reach the arm;
et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute;	and if it comes to the arm, if the bite is on the nail;
et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut;	and if it passes the nail, it is death, and there is no remedy but the quantity of its virtue.
et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet:	and thus do all things when the corrosion comes or the tooth is broken
s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe;	if it comes in the first joint, if the bite follows the other joint;
et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet;	And if it comes or if it is pressed, if you seize all the hair;
et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil;	And if it comes or if it is pressed, if you seize all the hair; and if it comes up in the limb, if you grasp at the joint of the armpit.
et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort;	And if it comes from below the armpit, if there is no other remedy but to leave the patient dead;
et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers;	and you must grasp the member below and above, and extend one minister of the lower limb and another minister of the upper limb, and you must saw the flesh between the two limbs at a wide space, until the bone is exposed.
puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	Then grasp the bone or the skin, and put some lint between the drape and the limb, so that the skin does not touch the sound limb, and bring to the patient other lesions and incisions
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans;	And if blood flows when you work, if you cauterize the limb too much, or if you apply some restraining powders;
puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	then return to your medicine until it is accompanied, and then bind the limb firmly with a strong thread, and cure it while it is whole.</start_of_turn>
et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet:	and I will tell you that I have seen at home in this matter.</start_of_turn>
il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet;	there was a blackness that seemed to burn like fire, and that corruption began at its root in the bone, so that it consumed the whole limb.</start_of_turn
et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez;	and when we saw the corruption, if we covered the limb and it was healed;
et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions;	and long after it returned the corruption or the bone of the hand, and I came to it, and I put on things that rebound after the purification of the ulcer, and I could not stop the corruption.</start_of_turn
et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere;	And he says that I should grasp his hand, and I will not, for I avoid all hope of recovering the matter.
et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible;	I also doubt that if I cut off his hand, he will not die, for the virtue of the man was weak.
et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez;	And he awoke entirely, returned to his land, and covered his hand, and was healed
et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	I have heard of this case only because of the other things we have seen in this matter
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe;	Never comes abscess in flesh without making great swelling.
et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz;	And then bursts and breaks, and in leaping the swelling comes out, and leaves the wound open as if it were a vessel
et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»;	And the skin that lies below is just as flexible as draped fabrics, and does not adhere to bone or nerve, and such a condition is called "sain", and is not called "fistula".
mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»;	but if it is stretched too far as to reach the bone, it is called "fistula".
et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz;	and the skin if it is tightly stretched over this skin and the same when it is flexible, is like a draped fabric
et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	and does not adhere to its corruption.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi:	And if you suspect that the skin has become loose and the corruption is not in the bone, and the skin is thick like leather, it is like a fistula
regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite:	Look if the wound is large, and if the foul odor comes from it, then clusterize the Egyptian medicine which is made like this.
prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel;	Take oil, and herbs, and beeswax, equally, and mix them up in a vessel over a fire, until the medicine is red, and becomes as thick as honey.
et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus;	And then take according to your need, and make it into water and honey, and clusterize the wound, and restrain the opening.
et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant;	And leave the medicine on for two hours, then take it out by squeezing it out
fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor;	Do this several times, until the wound is healed, and the pain is gone.
et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez;	And never clusterize with vinegar, when this medicine is not present, and only take vinegar of must of grapes, and pour out water, then drain, and clusterize, until you are sure that the wound is well healed.
et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet;	And if the patient cannot endure it, neither Egyptian medicine with its unguents, if he be immersed in water and honey or there be a little piece of butter floating;
ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain;	or you immerse it in honey and wine, which has the property of softening and washing out, and the wine makes the blood circulate.
et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin;	When you have done this, and you have confirmed that the flesh is well softened, if you immerse it in that which causes the char to grow, and you take plaster to bind it with, and do it with rosemary oil and wine.
ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens;	or you immerse it in some medicines and ointments, of which I have spoken concerning their properties or treat wounds with ointments.
et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez;	If the nail of the thumb is pierced, and the flesh around the nail does not enter, if a nail has become loose, put in an attempt of Egyptian resin, or beeswax, as much as it is enlarged.
et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	If the wound is too wide, if the thumb and index finger leave such space that the nail can enter, and if the nail has pierced too deeply, if the pulp has gone below the nail, if the nail is higher than the skin below.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char;	For when the nail is deeply pierced, if it does not leave enough space to grasp the hair;
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere:	and if you do not cover the nail end if you see, if it appears in such a manner that the nail goes below the lowest level, for when the nail is deeply pierced, if it does not leave enough space to grasp the hair and if you do not cover the nail end if you see, if it appears in part in this way
que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe;	Que le bois corrigé légèrement vitale, et ne laisse rien du bois.
et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain;	And take consolidating medicines to bring the blood back to its normal state, and keep covered with a linen drape that covers the whole body
puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois;	Then press forces inwards where the wound is greatest, for it is usually hung over on the other side by the amount of the wound, and put it on the wound so as to align the limb, and do not remove the great drape until after making sure that the wound is finally healed once
et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste;	and that which is outside the wound often helps to close the wound, and its discharge that comes from the wound, if it is venom or pus or enough, or digested or indigestible
et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez;	And take care if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is swelling or not, and when your medicine has been partly absorbed and you see the nature of the wound that comes out of the wound, if there is pus that the veins have already clotted, and approach health;
et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	Then take off the dressing in the morning, or the third day, and when you remove the dressing, if you change another bandage, renew the packing.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the wound is still bleeding profusely after the morning, remove the dressing and see if it stops bleeding by itself.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	And if subtle poison comes after a long tension, if you do not rouse me from my sickness, for your sickness is approaching.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire;	For there are some people who delay the healing of wounds by keeping cloth on them, and those who do the opposite;
et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie;	and if after remaining quiet for a while after an injury, the wound does not seem to be healing properly;
et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine;	and if the wound becomes dry, and is prolonged, if you add astringent medicines that are moist in substance but dry in effect, like oil of diaphnetum, because there is a great part of vitriol in it, which is the last medicine;
pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance;	take oil of diaphnetum and make the dressing with rose oil, and the vinegar of wine is equal in substance;
puis le confit et en use;	Then hold the wound tight and use;
et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu;	Then hold the wound tight and use; and when the wound is finished, honey and ointment are made more effective when applied together, when the flame is not present, or you take myrrh and aloes and incense, and crush them, and sprinkle them on the honey when it is taken out of the fire.
et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire;	Then hold the wound tight and use; and then bandage it tightly and hold it outside the body, and never give an aristologist a long time, and root of lilies celestial, which is also like wheat and barley;
et en use de simples ou de compostes:	and in the use of simples or compounds.
broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use;	crush them, and make them into powder, and sprinkle them on the honey that I mentioned above, and use it
et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens;	and if the cure is prolonged, and is not cured by this treatment, then take away the rotten parts that cause corruption, and makes an imprint in the bone, or has stiff limbs, or has tumors;
si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	If the fistula heals, as we have said before.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	of the abscess of the boil.</start_of_turn>
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois;	Panarice is an abscess that arises from the swelling of the pouch of the hand, or the heel, or sometimes arises in other places;
et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute;	and when it is inflamed, and no care is taken, if it comes to an abscess, it swells and causes the vein to twist as much as it can, and sometimes it even tears the root of the vein, and sometimes it tears the whole thing.</start_of_turn>
et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	and comes the corrosion up to the bone, so that there is intense pain, and the head of the bone is large and dark in color.</start_of_turn
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	When you have treated it as we have said in the division, and the cure does not help, if you must, you must do everything that remains to be done from the swelling, and then cauterize the wound afterwards.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne;	The cautery is a great help when the bone is sound, and the vein is healthy.</start_of_turn
et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout;	And if the nail approaches the hair quickly, and it begins to prick, and the blood spurts, if you can put off the root of the nail as much as the hair, and lift it up, and gently grasp this hair and put on the remaining hair medicines that burn and corrode to consume all.
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat the wound until it is healed
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner;	And if the corrosion is in the bone, if you grasp it, and break it through, for as much as the bone is corrupted, it cannot heal;
et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	And if you see the bone cracked, if you break it from the marrow as it is said before, then treat it until it is healed.
et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier;	And if it is bloody, and black, and it causes great pain, if you can make it healthy first
puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor;	Then hold the shoulder firmly at the edge of the socket with a cutting instrument, and guard that the cut does not go beyond the cartilage which is below the shoulder, because the patient would feel too great pain.
et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	and if it happens, put something above which will soothe.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	And if it happens, if you put something on that relieves the pain of the hand.
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	The two joints that naturally grow in the hands of certain people are always fleshy, and in some cases there is a part where there is bone, and never a nail, or that they are born at the root of the joint, or that the birth is in our thumbs.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet;	That which is born without fear of pain does not move, and that which is born at the joint is by chance moved;
la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere:	the size of that which is fleshy is slight, in part barely noticeable:
taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	cut at its root from a wide socket
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer:	that which is born at the root of the joint is grieved to cure
si te tien dou coper.	if you keep it covered
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	In him who is born or must afterwards without a doubt, if you must, first bend the rounded flesh around the bone, then grasp the bone at a convenient place like this, then hold it until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The sudden pains that ensue must be brought about by birth, or by wound, or by fire cautery, or by similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz;	If you suspect that the dislocation has healed, if it must be repaired according to their natural forms.
puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent;	then put between two bands or cloths soaked in rose oil, that they do not adhere;
ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	or you put between two pieces of soft lead, as long as the limb is bound, if it is suspected
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	The fire comes to neither of its two with the palm, if it covers that burn so that it must.
des vils	Des vils.
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors;	The veins are large veins enclosed in fat filled with black bile, which causes swelling in many limbs with pain;
et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	and more often come from those that are fat and lazy and work and bear burdens, than from others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	You must not give the patient any purgatives or enemas of any kind, and then afterwards the rest of the treatment.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres:	The treatment of iron is in two ways:
l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir;	one is with the cautery, and one treats the black blood
et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	And thus too, if you tie up the vein and push it out, do it with all your might.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere:	The size of this method is as follows:
arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil;	first rise the hot water-soaked limb very high, until the large vessels are not constricted, then strain the limb of the patient downwards from the buttocks to the part below the knee
puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir;	then grasp the vein in one, or two, or three places, of a large size, then cut and pull out the black blood from your hand, from the top to the bottom, as much as the patient can tolerate;
et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire;	and then bind it and command him to keep pressure with meat pressing on the black bile;
et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	And he recommences the evacuation and bleeding when the veins are full, and harms the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere:	The ailments of this sort are according to this manner:
reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes;	Raise the limb of the patient, if there is moisture in the hair, then wash it out, and elevate the limb until it turns red, and swell the veins;
et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville;	and if you have no bath, if the fire burns, and then hold the vein long at the shoulder or at the ankle;
puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent;	then cover the skin with fat, and stretch the vein carefully from the armpit, until it appears when you touch it
et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche;	and you will see it red and black, and when it enters or the skin appears just like a white thread.
puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois;	Then stretch the limb upwards until it is freed from the skin, and then pull it towards the heel with a gentle touch, and grasp it in the other hand as much as three fingers.
puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers;	Then pull the skin over the vein until it appears, then pull the thumb towards the heel as you have done before, and then pull at another nail as you have done before.</start_of_turn>
puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille;	Then grasp another size, or more if you wish, and pull it out, and grasp the thumb and index finger, and pull them until the second size is reached.</start_of_turn
puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope;	Then pull out the size by size until it is all out, and then grasp it.</start_of_turn>
et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse;	And if you do not pull it out and lift it, if there is a splinter at the root of the hair, grasp it and pull it out, and grasp the limb from the top and bottom, until it is freed.</start_of_turn
et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide;	And keep it still, for if it moves, it cannot be treated or lifted, and comes to the harm of the patient.
et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset;	And when you have finished treating it, if you remove the limb from the wound covered with soft wool in wine and rose oil
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and keep it healthy
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie;	and if its vein is contracted and tortuous and surrounded together, and is not straight, as we have said, if you must do violence to it, do so with all your might, but do not cover it over
et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	and handle it as we have previously mentioned
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne;	The shape of the iron from which the limb is treated if it is crooked, do not twist it, but only hold it still;
et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	And it is of great danger, for if it were subtle, it would burst the vein; but whether it is great or small, as we have said, this is the form:
de la voinne civile	of the civil vein.</start_of_turn>
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor;	And this vein is enclosed in the limb, in hot parts or where there are no herbs or trees, and in the earth where there is no moisture.
et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	And it appears in another place besides the limb, and this comes from the corruption that comes from the decomposition of the skin, as it comes from the belly of a serpent towards the back, enclosed between the skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	And if there is a sign of the commencement of this vein, that is to say if there comes into the limb a very great inflammation, then it must be bound up tightly, and the vein must be forced to desist, like the root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe;	When the head of the shoulder is burst, if you think you should wrap around a piece of lead from one and a half inches to two and a half inches, and the knot, and leave the lead in the limb, and every time it swells up, if you wrap around the lead the knot and the limb again
et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue;	And if it is too long, if in a part it is cut off, and it embraces the remainder, do not cover it in its root, until it is completely expelled.
car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie;	for if you cover it, if it returns to the bone, it causes inflammation and gangrene or death, and makes the disease worse.
por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors;	therefore it is necessary to treat it thoroughly and completely, and leave nothing or bone behind
et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse;	never is this vein treated with five palms of length, or ten, and one hand comes out to me, from ten palms of length, and when you cover it, if there remains even a hair or hole, and you pierce it through to the end, so that everything is gone
et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	or the matter that is inside is evacuated, and mix with the medicine that prevents gangrene, and then cure it like an abscess.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains;	And never in this vein have hands rained, even when it opens at the elbow or the wrist, and there comes forth a spurt of blood, and from which it leaps downwards.
cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	And never in this vein have hands rained, even when it opens at the elbow or the wrist, and there comes forth a spurt of blood, and from which it leaps downwards.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	And never has this vein had hands rain, even when it opens at the elbow, or at the wrist, and there comes forth blood spurting; cure it as we have said before.
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer;	And this disease is called in our land "buffalo disease," forasmuch as it often causes swelling of the calves, and is a small wound that arises between skin and bone, and goes throughout the body, upwards and downwards, and it causes pain all along the limb, until the skin is broken or it bursts, and spurts out.
et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre;	And is accompanied by the putrefaction of some humors, such as bile, serum, urine, and worms or belly-ache
et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil;	And doubt arises from its malice, for when it goes through the body and reaches the head, it comes to the oil, by chance returns, and destroys the oil.
et ceu avient maintes fois.	and this often happens.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait:	When you see it heal and abate, if one cannot force it until it goes away:
si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire;	then you must tightly bind the limb above and below with strong thread, and then hold above and push down, and if it does not go away, if you cauterize with fire above, until it dies
et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit;	and the greater harm it does is when it contaminates the oil, as we have said
et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer;	and if you see it coming or near the oil, seize its tail and push down, then hold above, and force it out
et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	And it is recommended to use the patient for the evacuation of solid medicines which solve the bad humors carried, and to feed him with nourishing foods.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	When you see it cured and treated, if you cannot force it, do not force it until it goes: if you must, then bind the limb above and below with a strong ligature, and press above and below, and as it comes out, seize it by the hair and burn it with fire; and the greater harm it does is when it comes out with the oil, as we have said; and if you see it coming or close to the oil, grasp its lash and press, then press above and below; and you must use the patient of cooling down the body with medicines that dissolve harmful humors and eating nourishing foods.
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre;	This disease is called in our land "vakirir", and is a pain that comes in the limbs, and as it moves from limb to limb.
et je vis ceu que je vos di.	I have seen this to be the case
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais;	I was called to a sick woman, and found her arm swollen, and saw a small swelling in the pit of her elbow
et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre;	and I observed that it had become like a worm in the armpit, more swollen than anything, as if alive silver when it breaks from its root
li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais;	the pain went away from that limb, and settled in the armpit, and then later returned throughout the whole limb, until it reached the other arm
puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	Then he told me that it twisted back towards the body, as I saw it.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I wondered how it managed to move from limb to limb, because I had never seen anyone with this disease before.</start_of_turn
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme;	However, I would rather keep silent than move with pain in a limb, but I do not wish to keep silent, as I saw her in the woman.
et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte;	And I thought that this was the reason why the woman had dry skin, and her veins uncovered, and because of that appeared that constraint of the wind;
et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	And it does not appear to me according to this reason to those who are delicious, and who have moist skin and veins restored
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer;	And when you see that this disease is cured, and the patient feels that pain, if she shows you if as we have said, if the swelling above and below has vanished, and then rest until that constraint of the wind has disappeared from the limb
et cauterize le leu;	And cauterize the limb;
et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	And if you do not see it at your eyes, if you cure it of what evacuates the wind, as with foul pills, and oily pills, and similar things.
des saiettes	When you see the healing of this ailment, and the patient feels that pain, if it tears open as we have said, if the flesh above and below has become swollen, and then hold above as much as this constraint of the limb is strong; and cauterize the limb; and if you do not see it at your eyes, if he cures what evacuates the constraint, as with foul pills, and pills of serpin, and similar others.
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	If the doctor gives vent to these winds, if like foul pills, and pills of serpin, and like other things of that sort.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees;	When there is variety in their points, some large, some small, and some with hooks and nails;
et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces;	and those which have two angles, and those which have tongues, and those which have pieces
et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres:	and that which breaks in no limb breaks in two ways
ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	or in the principal limb breaks, as with the brain, shoulder, forearm, hand, foot, rib, intestine, bladder, and similar members
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent:	When the limb snaps, indeed in no part of these limbs, and the sign of death, which I will tell you later, will teach you:
si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions;	When the limb snaps, indeed in no part of these limbs, and the sign of death, which I will tell you later, will teach you: if you are aware of the extraction of this arrow, for the corpse will follow afterwards in many positions.
et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	and when this bad sign does not appear to you, and the arrow is not deeply embedded, if the limb is fractured, and the wound is cured.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole;	And the sign of the brain when the arrow pierces the bone, and blood spurts from the socket which is above the brain, is like a scourging, swelling and turning inward, and redness in the eyes, inflammation and redness of the tongue, spasm and mixing of senses, and vomiting of bile;
et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles;	And sometimes it is without cause, without any bruises or wounds.
et par aventure pert la parole et la voix;	and sometimes it causes speechlessness and deafness;
et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char;	and leaps from a moist wound that looks like boils, and in the leap just like burnt hair
et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	and if you notice this sign, if you are to take care of it, draw out the splinter if it is not embedded
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide;	The sign of the splinter when it hurts or aches is that it is close to the left nipple, and it feels just like if it were stuck in something hard, do not remove it freely
et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope:	and sometimes the splinter moves just like boils, and leaves black blood, and comes with cold sweat and cold sweat, and fainting.
saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	The wounds therefore signify doubt that the blood has drained away.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of the dislocated shoulder that never lets go is when it jumps out of the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient turns pale, and breathes high and quets the food away.</start_of_turn
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes;	And if the sponge tears in the covering of the wound, if it is too small, leave the small bones;
et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire;	it gives great swelling and pain and breathing difficulty
et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	and the limb moves out of its place
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	If the spleen or stomach is broken, by chance if there is a jump from the wound, nothing of the indigestible meat is left.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	If the spleen or stomach is broken, and in the jump there is no stool from the large intestine, if there is no hope of recovery, do not attempt to extract the stone.</start_of_turn>
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor:	and if the sponge tears in the bladder, and the urine spurts out and comes out, the patient feels great pain:
saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	the wound is mortal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	As for the other limb, if the face and the neck and the throat and the shoulder and the armpit and the spine and the buttocks and the thigh and the foot and the limb mentioned above, are all in more or less the same condition.</start_of_turn
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in the nerve or artery, and it is not venomous, as I have already told you, because of that which you do.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis:	There is at home a sponge that fell or drooled in the root of the nail:
je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	I grasped it, and it slipped from the other side of the ear, and it was healed without harm.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles;	And thus he took a dart that had fallen into the fat of the oil of olives, and the dart was whole, and did not reach anything except the tip towards the foot, and the dart was as long as an arc of a Turkish bow, all in all a foolish thing to do.
li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	he game was sound, and there was no bad accident to him.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles:	And thus he took a dart from the throat to the groin, and the dart was an Arab dart at an ear
je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	I saw the barbers, and I deceived them as long as I could, and was sound with the groin
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit;	And thus he took a dart at home, that was in the thigh or belly, and I thought he was going to die;
et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition;	And then, if he does not recover within XXX days, if he does not mend his ways;
je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	I shall then cut off his limb, burn out his entrails, break his bones, and cause him no further harm.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus;	If I see that there is a fracture of bone or a wound that has penetrated deeply,
et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	I will leave the limb whole and permit him to return to his natural habits; I will find no rest in his works.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie;	If another man has fractured his face and the wound is deep,
et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor;	he will suffer great pain;
et mout d’autres semblans.	And he will groan in pain.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie;	And she drew out an arrow at home of the prince the king, who was sitting crooked among the lice, and there was a swelling downwards on the right side.
et estoit li saiette toute reponue.	and the arrow was fully withdrawn.
Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	I was called to treat her after she had been crooked for three days
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	If I find the wound very painful.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie;	I saw her with great anxiety and did not feel well;
et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	and there was pain and swelling in her right ear
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast;	I thought it was from the tip of the arrow. I put on her ear plaster with digestive medicine, so that it would not swell further
et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	and there appeared to me the head of the arrow
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis;	I put the thumb and index finger in their places, closed the wound, and held the patient’s hand tight, until he felt the arrow go out of his body.
et il le me dist.	and he told me.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu;	I put upon the wound a corrosive ointment with my hands, until it was thick, and held it, and felt the head of the arrow that was coming out of place at its root
puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement;	then I aided the opening of the wound with that ointment, until the head of the arrow appeared to me visibly
et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir;	and it passed well three months, and then it grew so large that I put in the nails and held it apart with one hand and the other, and I could not bear it anymore.
adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	Therefore, I will continue to try subtle and ingenious methods until I have firmly secured the dressings, as is done in the end of this chapter, until I have completed the treatment, and I will restore the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer:	And the physicians judge that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored.
je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	I restored it therefore, and the wound was healed, and the patient was completely cured
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre;	Or as you have said concerning the quality of the extraction of some arrows, if you apply your treatment to what I do not understand, for the books do not teach me everything;
mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	but the learned masters know very well both great and small things, and concerning what is present and lacking, true that you will find nine works and a new instrument, following the sequence of the strange things that arise in this art
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres:	I say that the arrows do not issue from members or are ficketed except in two ways:
ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part;	or by loosening from the limb or they enter, or by some other means.
et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	and that which issues forth by itself is an arrow that has penetrated flesh, and it issues forth never more.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue;	And if it does not issue forth now, if you leave it until the wound is complete, and rejoice in its issue;
et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor;	even if it is fixed in bone and cannot issue, if you leave it alone for a few days, and move it every day
et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	then it will issue, and if it does not issue, if you pierce through all the surrounding parts, until the limb is swollen, and then take it away
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide:	And if the splinter is fixed in the bone of the head, and goes as far as one of the ventricles of the brain, and no other accidents have occurred as I have mentioned to the patient.
si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	And if I do not treat it, but leave it as it is, it will be equal after some days, for if the splinter comes up to the surface, it is death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	If the hair is only caught in the bone and does not come up to the surface, and remains fixed in the bone for several days without any other mishap, do not force the drawing out.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit;	And if it is firmly fixed and cannot be removed, if I give medicine, as I have told you.
puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then cure the limb while it is still sound
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente;	And if the splinter is replaced in the bone if we cannot see it, if the patient tries in every way
et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble;	If you feel it, if the pain has no palpable cause;
et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans;	if you do not find it by the swelling of the wound, or by the depth of the wound, and there is no bone, nerve or vein, if the pain lasts as long as the wound is great.
et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire;	if you pull out the splinter if you find it, and if there is cartilage in the splinter which is split into two parts at the bone that you pull, and then break or crush the cartilage of the splinter as much as you can pull it out
et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	but take care not to break the splinter, only pull it out firmly.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you do not do it once, if the limb is already swollen, then grasp it more firmly, for the extraction will be joyful.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre;	and if bleeding prevents you, do what we have said in this chapter about the cure of it.
et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement;	Be wary of cutting into the nerve and the vein, and put them in such a way that you can easily draw out the arrow without danger, or to break or tear, or firmly or gently.
et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	Put the patient in the posture in which he was when the arrow struck him, for this is the greatest aid of all, and if you do not know how, follow what he shows you
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment:	The arrow that comes from another place, or there is no wound, or the skin is stretched at the place where it is seen or felt.
taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai:	Take hold until the bone can be grasped, and then remove it.
si saut fuer maintenant.	If the bone is fractured now.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is retained in the bone, if you twist your hand round and round, until it enters the bone, and widen the bone, then withdraw it.</start_of_turn
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer;	And if it cannot be set, if you leave it in peace, and then resume the extraction until it is fractured again;
et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust;	And if it is of an arrow, it is, if it has struck completely;
et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument;	And if it is of an arrow, it is, if it has struck completely; and if you see an instrument hanging, if you administer it, let the point of the arrow enter the hole of the instrument.
et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	Then withdraw the force, and if the arrow is caught, let the instrument with the pointed end enter in order to ease the extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	And if the bandage is soiled, if you must cover all the surrounding fat or the venom is there, if you wish, then cure the wound as it should be cured.</start_of_turn>
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope;	And if the arrow is broken or split or at the belly or in the bladder or at the costus, and it is close by, and you must cover above, if you cover it
et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est;	keep the belly and the nerves covered, and then extract it, and then close the wound, if necessary
et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And the treatment until it is healed.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	And the shape of the tweezers with which we treat the wounds is similar to the beak of an osprey, and thus is the form:
Et en sont mout de manieres:	And there are many ways to do it
grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	great, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the wound
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	The shape at the end of the bone is like that of a bird's beak, to push out the tip of the splinter, as it is like this:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	For to stop the bleeding at the tip of the arrow, if this is the shape: the form of a clamp to stop and to hold if it is like this.
des voinnes dou cors communes	it is common for veins to bleed when they are opened or cut.
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir:	From veins from which one has bled for a long time, for in this case there is either a head wound or a wound at the sixteenth, that is to say:
II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»;	Two veins that are behind the ears, which are covered with coarse hair.
et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans;	and two arteries which are in the temples appear;
et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»;	And if two veins are two cubits wide, that are called "aspires,
et li voine que est emmi le front;	and the vein that is between the eyebrows.
et li voinne que est au chief dou neis;	and the vein that is at the back of the neck
et les II guindeges qui sont ou col;	and the two cords that are in the collarbone
et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»;	and the two veins that are under the jaw, which are called "augeherich.
et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	and the two veins that are under the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras:	The common veins are five in each arm:
l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»;	one is the cephalic vein, which is on the left side of the chest, and they call it the "chief vein".
et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»;	And the marrow is called "fast," and is composed of the cephalic and basal parts, and they call it the common people "bone marrow.
et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	And the basal part is either soft or broken, and they call it the common people "bone marrow," and it is above the navel, and it is that from which we saw, which appears openly above the pouch.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains;	And the collateral vein is the one that is between the ulnar and the annular, and if there are two of them;
et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes:	and in the arm and the forearm there are three veins:
l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit;	one is from the elbow of the left side of the armpit, and the second is the sural which is at the ankle of the right side
et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei;	And the vein which is called "nesse," that is at the ankle of the other thigh;
et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	And in the other limb are three veins alongside those.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine;	The blood of the veins that are behind the ears helps as old evacuations and has emigration.
et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre;	And the qualities of the blood, as I have told you, are that you raise the head of the patient and rub the limb or the veins are rough
puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief:	Then tighten the patient's neck with a screw, as long as the two veins behind the ears appear behind the ears depending on the head:
quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche;	So you must know that when you feel the pulse from behind your ears, it is a sign of strangulation;
puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues;	Then take the lancet, and with the thumb and forefinger grasp the vein up to the bone, then keep your hand steady over the vein above, and press and tear the skin and the vein well; do this until blood spurts out; make the bleeding cease as long as you see.
puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee;	Then strain and tie, until it is healed;
et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	And I have already said about the incision and the cautery or the first book
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz;	The blood of the two arteries in the two temples is worth an ancient emigration, sode, and obtalmia accustomed, and at the root of the tears there are vesicles.
et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis:	And as for the quality of the patient if it is as I have said:
et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement;	And that the patient is groaning his neck, so that the two veins open wide;
et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche;	And he feels the pulse throbbing in his hand, and then he marks it with his finger.
puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit;	Then he places his thumb on the vein at the wrist of his hand, and grasps the lancet with his index finger, and grasps the vein at the wrist and the elbow, as you have done with two other veins, and do the evacuation of blood as you please;
puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton;	Then loosen the patient, and place your hand on the vein for an hour, then put on cotton
et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee;	And then bind it firmly, and leave it until it is healed.
et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	As for what we have said about it in other books concerning its treatment and extraction, or its commencement in the book itself.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor;	The blood of the front vein is as valuable as that of the cephalic vein, for it has ancient diseases of the face, emigration, and redness.
et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere;	And if the patient strains his neck by twisting, as the vein bursts.
puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	then take the instrument which is called the "forceps", which is like this:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues;	And put the point on the vein, and hold with your hand, or something else, and let blood flow out as much as you see fit;
puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	Then loosen the patient’s neck and ligate the vein until it is whole and never again let a wide flame do it.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus;	However, I do not recommend that the flame be too great;
et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	because the bone is close, and by chance the flame breaks the bone when it is thin
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice;	The blood of two veins that are two cubits long helps with the swelling, and with the heat, and with the redness, and with the swelling in the armpit, and with diseases of the face.
et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant;	and the quality of their blood is such that the patient strains their neck by twisting anything at all, as before.</start_of_turn>
puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	then the same, and whether the blood is thin or thick, with a little length and a little width, because there is no fat.</start_of_turn
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise;	And if the flame is subtle, by chance if it breaks.</start_of_turn
puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	Then make the blood flow, as much as you are able, and then hold above cotton, and bind it well.</start_of_turn
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene;	The blood of the vein does not flow if it is cold, and in fever, and in diseases of the face, as with measles and redness that comes on the face, and even when it is old;
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre;	The blood in the vein does not flow if the patient is shivering, then strain his neck to the left hand side, and take a long thin flame, and put it on the lip between the two nostrils, because the vein does not open well enough, and it must be corrected now.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree;	Do not go too deep with the burn, and correct the blood according to your need, then keep it bound for one night, for it is moistened and restored
et c’est li forme dou flaime:	This sentence is incomplete and does not provide any text to translate.
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes;	The blood of the two armpits helps to loosen the swelling, and to start mixing, and to cure diseases, and to stop itching, and to remove corrodens, and herpes, and stomach ailments.
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit;	And the quality of the blood is such that if the patient pulls out his collar from both sides, as we have said;
et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est;	Or let the master be above the head of the patient, and the patient sit on one seat, then open the vein slowly, and take blood temperately, or as much as is necessary.</start_of_turn>
puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle;	Then make the other part in the other vein, and loosen the tension, and gently pull the veins so that the patient does not feel choked.</start_of_turn
et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	And let him leave it until morning, when the wound is healed.
de la sainie des leivres	The blood of the armpits helps in the swelling of the groin, in the beginning of mumps, and in many diseases, and in swelling, and in corrosions, and in herpes, and in stones; and the quality of the blood is that when the patient strains his neck alternately, as we have said; either the master is standing above the patient's head, and the patient sits on one seat, then grasps the vein long and widely, then pulls out the blood gently, or as much as is necessary; and then repeat the operation in the other vein, then release the thread, and strain moderately the middle veins, so that the patient does not strangle; and leave it until morning, so that the wound is healed.
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The blood of the veins of the upper limbs helps to clot in the mouth, and to corruption of gums, and fissures of the lips, and toothaches and pains.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit;	And if the patient is able to sit before you, and you restrain his neck as I have said;
puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires:	Then turn the face up, and look at two veins, one on the right cheek and the other on the left, and know them by their blackness, and by the fact that there are small black veins running alongside them
cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	Therefore take both of them, and if you do not know them, and if you are in doubt, if the larger one is at the back of the jaw, and both of the smaller ones below and beside, for this is a foolish way
de la sainie desoz la lengue	And if the quality of the blood is to make the patient sit before thee, and restrain his neck as I have said; then turn the liver, and look at two veins, one on the right side of the liver and the other on the left, and know them by this that they are black, and that they have small black veins running through them: so do one and the other; and if you do not know them, and you are in doubt, if one of the largest parts of the spleen is pale, and both veins that are below and above are pale, for this is the same method.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche;	The blood of the veins below the tongue helps after the cephalic blood, and this is at the widening of the throat, and with eye diseases, and with mouth diseases
et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire:	And if the patient is a healthy man, if he sits between your hands before the sun, and he sticks out his tongue, and looks downwards at every cost, he will see a black vein.
saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	Then he will see both of them [the veins] together, and do not fear them too much, for these are the arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres:	The veins which we commonly call healthy are commonly sick in two ways:
ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»;	or when they are pricked by a sharp flame or olive oil as with a saw, and are called "aneurysm".
et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	And they are large and subtle according to the size and expansion of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The flame of fire is soft if it is mild, and is broad as you see.
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble;	And they have the master to open the superficial veins filled with large blood and containing great blood and trouble;
et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	And thus is the form of the olive-tree flame:
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	and is more pointed towards the tip, and is for the healthier veins, or where there is little yellow blood.</start_of_turn>
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre;	And thus is the form of the olive-tree flame: the sap of the basilisk, which is one of these veins, helps with ailments such as nausea of the throat, or cough, or pain in the belly;
et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	and it is useful to the patient that he remain quiet and that he abstain from the artery which is near.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit;	And if he grasps the artery, and blood flows out, if he covers it up, as I have said before
et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	and must not be pained by the flame, but must cut if necessary
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre;	and if the basilisk does not clearly appear, it is sufficient to grasp it, and bind another one instead
ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras:	or do you wish no rain from it, or do you keep the vein closed in the arm:
elle apert manifestement;	it will burst openly.
et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	and the cavity to the fire is stifled, as we have said.</start_of_turn>
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz;	And if you see the blood vessel, if you must restrain the arm, touch the vessel until you know the pulse.</start_of_turn
puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil;	then sign the limb of the shoulder, and then bind the arm, and restrain the vein from the fire.</start_of_turn
et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere:	and beware that you do not cut the artery when you see the limb inflamed, for that is the artery.</start_of_turn
eschui la donques.	quit you must wait.</start_of_turn>
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere:	And if you see it swell up like the urine of a child, and it is neither red nor pale, then know that it is without an artery.
haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient;	Hurry then, and place your hand over its length, and hold your hand steady so it does not move, for many times it has happened to me.</start_of_turn>
se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides;	Its limb hangs limply, and leave it alone, and do not move the patient;
et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	Or be cautious, and do not move it until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient;	And if it is not stained and it is painful, and medicine is not present, if the artery is burst, for the head of the shoulder is drawn back.</start_of_turn
et estainche li sans.	And he must remain still.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor;	And take an escort of assistants, and make him sit, and take one of the halves and bind it well up to the other side;
se li sans estainche, c’est bien;	And if he remains still, that is good;
se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc;	If not, if the physician, as we have said, gives powders that stop blood
et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	and the staining does not last in multiple situations because of the small quantity of the wound, and the fear of the patient’s hand.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit;	The blood of the vein in the middle helps that it heals without difficulty from the root downwards, from the head downwards, because it is composed of the basilic and cephalic veins, as we have said
et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner;	And it is proper for the patient to grasp with his thumb the nerve that is sore, and if he does not grasp it too firmly, and he finds the nerve, and it swells, and the patient is either seized or by chance cannot recover.
et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil;	The nerve often opens, and if it does not open in some home because of its slightness, it is proper that you leave it from the anesthetic instrument.
et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	And hold the nerve to your side
Et se il a voinne entre les .ij. ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if there is a vein between the two nerves, if it has a long loop.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz;	The pain of the cephalic vein helps, that it brings blood without head, and helps the eyes;
et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	And it is proper to cauterize with the olive or myrtle flame, because it is the safest of all veins, because it does not contain any nerves or arteries.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence;	Whatever, it is better to ask for the lightest, and do not grieve if it fails the first time, and we shall begin again.
et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	And by chance it swells up at someone's home, which cannot be done the first time, but it does not grieve anything.</start_of_turn>
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of the blood is according to your thoughts.</start_of_turn>
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir;	The first thing you must know about health is that blood should only be drawn for the preservation of health and to avert future diseases.</start_of_turn>
et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute:	or the blood is taken from one of the three veins that are or should be.</start_of_turn
c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique;	namely the cephalic, facial, and brachial veins.</start_of_turn
et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent;	and the sign of repletion appears; that is, when swelling subsides in the beginning of the pain, in vomiting and after eating.</start_of_turn
et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	And if one must restore the first or third joint, after two hours or three-quarters of an hour.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens;	The healing of the ailments has no definite time, but whenever need be for joint or nut, in every hour and in all tension.
et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	And must not be restored more than twelve years, and women carrying for more than four months until the seventh month
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez .lx. ans.	One must not strengthen the ones who have passed sixty years.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz;	And when anyone sees that he has been healed in any way, if it is necessary, if there is a hernia of a lesser fistula, if there is much retained saliva, so that the veins do not draw out the nutritious humors from the principal limbs
ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques;	Neither must one keep oneself too fat with meat, nor drunk, when it is necessary, for there is need of it; neither must one be overly cold nor too hot
et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors;	And if one suffers from madness after a fierce passion, and vomiting, and belly distress, and many times of urination in women, and childbirth, and watching and lying down, and all that is good or bad;
puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir;	Then subtile the humors, if they are not great, by foods and drinks and medicines, if you can.
puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit;	Then bathe in cold or hot water, so that nothing hinders, to subtilize the blood, and restore from the vein to the third part, as we have said before
et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses;	And keep yourself from work, from worry, from luxury, and from similar things;
et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans;	And bind and soothe, and keep the patient higher than the one who is caring for him, and wipe the hands twice or thrice, and then extract the thread slowly, because if it is too tight or loose, if cannot correct it without
et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on;	And then he rubs the limb with his hands, until the veins swell, and one feels them.
puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	And then he moistens the skin with a little oil, then puts his thumb of his left hand on that vein below the limb a thumb’s breadth or as much as he wants to make it bleed.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus;	For there are veins that flee just like strings to the wound, and if they are of such a kind that are filled with blood, so that when one puts on the flame, if one takes it away from the flame, it cannot open the vein, and that is what is often the result of this
et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	and if it is necessary to open the vein, if the wound is too wide, because of this one must be cautious so that the patient is warned about these things
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin;	And if the vein bursts the first time, that is good;
se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	If not, if it bursts again, even more so, one must hold the limb still or at least as much as possible, for if it is not done, the wound will not heal.</start_of_turn>
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras:	If the limb is swollen and the patient groans, and if one leaves it for a day or two, and does not bind the arm:
par aventure i venra apostemes chaus;	then there will certainly be pus.</start_of_turn>
ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait;	do not enter or bathe, then reset the blood if it clots;
et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement;	and if the blood vessel is small, or if it is without support and you doubt that there is not as much blood as you see, if you are confident in the loss itself with all your might.</start_of_turn
et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez;	And the work a little patient, even though his limbs are swollen.
car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	for often in this work, when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile;	If you see the limb swollen, do not renew the bleeding, put on a little oil, for it softens the flesh of blood and makes it limp in this limb the oil that you put on it
et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc;	and give the oil to absorb the blood that comes out to stop the flow of blood;
et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu;	and this also makes the limb tremble and bow down when you put it on the limb.
si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	if you do it carelessly and it comes out when it is too large
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre;	And if there comes a large abscess, which often happens, even if it is not very serious except for this time or the opening of the vein is small, if you are in a hurry, put on the wet sponge and roll up a bandage, and bind for an hour.
et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie;	And do this after the evacuation of blood from the vein, and if it remains fixed afterwards for some days without any blackening or greening, do not trouble me with it.</start_of_turn>
et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	And if you see it, put nothing of aloe or myrrh moistened in calamus juice, mustard, or the like.</start_of_turn>
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique:	And often happens an abscess and appearance of blood from the basilisk.</start_of_turn
met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	Put your hand on it, and if you find the limb soft under the compression of the hand, that is an evil sign.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere;	Heed what we have said and do not place anything on it, for by chance in this way without an artery;
mais li fai I emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	but it makes the limb swell dry to strengthen the limb, then treat it with another treatment, until it is healed
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	Treat each wound according to the quantity of its virtue, and the color of the blood.</start_of_turn
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges;	For if it is without color, if you leave it to its swelling as long as it is red;
et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez;	and if you see it big, if you leave it until it is faint
et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	and if it is too yellow, if you leave it cool.</start_of_turn>
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges;	And it is expedient for the plains and strong person, and has the skill of extracting blood, to make the wound wider and the flame bigger.</start_of_turn>
et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant;	And for the weakling, do the opposite; make him whole again quickly and often, and one must make him whole by cutting across, not by pricking.
et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	And this method of healing is useful for the restoration of blood and the preservation of nerves, and is better than if the blood were long rather than wide.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates;	And for the one whose limb needs blood, it is recommended to give soft bread soaked in pomegranate juice
s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	if he is pale, if there is three or four times more blood; and if he has a cold complexion, let him beforehand eat soft bread soaked in sweet syrup or honey with spices, as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cloves, and fragrant syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	If he pricks at the blood vessels after the evacuation of blood, it is necessary to know that he will spit frothy bile, an odoriferous sweat, and use other things that we have said in the division or chapter of syncope for the evacuation of the vein.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he sees his arm turn pale, and recovers again, if it is known, when he is filled with great blood, that he must rise up and rise up again, according to the quantity of his continuous virtue.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine .vij. houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And whoever has seen his arm swollen after the first bleeding, and has great pain, if he stays like this for three days after the first bleeding, or after the ninth hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And whoever has seen himself recover from the other side, if he must recover by the second or third day.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre;	For there is much blood in the limb that is already pale, and it causes fever.
si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson;	if it is necessary to manage a great quantity, and to widen the opening as much as it bleeds in the palm of the hand.
puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens;	then you must restore all the blood vessels and put your hand over the wound while it is still bleeding in the palm of the hand, for many times the blood escapes when the vessel is neglected
et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus;	and do not hesitate to pull out the limb if you see it slipping again, and close the wound, pressing firmly over it;
ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz;	if it is crooked, extend the limb as much as possible, for that would be bad
mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois;	leave it until it is healed again
ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	or you put on the tip of the flame, until the blood vessel that is frozen at the opening of the vein comes out, and put on some water above it and press lightly.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein has escaped, if you leave it and do not restrain me, as long as the incision is calmed.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if necessary is to drain blood a second time, if the same in this limb or in another vein, or in the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein in the arm is stained in leu of the vein of the head because it is composed.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges;	And if the patient’s hand is plunged into hot water, as long as the flesh is red;
puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc;	then it should be firmly bound so that the wound opens well, and that the limb is neither too wide nor too long;
et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez;	and if it cannot be closed, let the wound be large and close to the joint of the hand, and if it does not heal, plunge the hand into hot water again and leave the blood to clot in the water until enough time has passed
et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit;	otherwise do not reinsert the hand into the hot water, for we put more in danger than in this state;
et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	The blood of this vein is more valuable than all the others, for there is neither artery nor nerve.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere:	The saliva from the right hand is worth for all the diseases of the liver, and this is the manner:
estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie;	The saliva from the right hand is worth for all the diseases of the liver, and this is the manner: strain the hand and bathe it in warm water, until the swelling has gone down, if you see it
et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien;	The saliva from the right hand is worth for all the diseases of the liver, and this is the manner: strain the hand and bathe it in warm water, until the swelling has gone down, if you see it all the way through, and if you handle it carefully, it will not grieve anything.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	Do not handle it too much, for the nerves are already loosened from their sheath, and then reset the hand in warm water, if it is not frozen in the wound, and do not attempt to move it.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have treated the blood as much as is necessary with the cautery, if you put oil and lint on the wound to close it, do so carefully.</start_of_turn
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The blood in the left hand is worth the disease of mice, and do the same as I have said before for the upper part.</start_of_turn
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	The blood of the armpit is worth for all diseases that are in the chest, as with diseases of the marrow, retention of flowers, disease of the reins, and of the calves and the ancient legs, and similar diseases.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet;	And the quality of its saliva is that if the patient has been soaked in warm water, and has rubbed on the swelling until it has gone down, and has placed a bandage over the joint of the limb.
et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains;	And if the vein is at the ankle, and below it there are loose threads of hair in the vicinity, there will be a discharge of blood.
saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	healthy or bloody discharge, or at the ankle, that much blood flows out.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant;	And if you see blood on the hair near the nail, protect the nerves that are below, and drain just as if you were grasping;
et soit li flaimes anesil.	or the fire is extinguished.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if it cannot be kept in place, if you reset the bone in water, and let the vein drain well.</start_of_turn
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz;	And if the blood vessel must be reset the first time, if you do it again later, because the blood vessel is salty;
ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	do not doubt the nerves, as we have said, and do the same with the other nail equally
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The pulse of the sciatic nerve is at the ankle of fire, and its blood is worth the pain of the groin, when it is for blood that is hot.</start_of_turn>
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne;	When the patient is between or in water, and pulls below the ankle twice in twisting, because otherwise the vein will not open;
et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant;	And if she [the wound] opens, if the same in all ways that you can, and through and through.
et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	it is better that you close it, for the wound is deep and it is likely to burst again at home.</start_of_turn>
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners;	And if you do not manage it, if the same does not bleed from its opening or its depth, and toward the little toe, and guard against nerves.</start_of_turn
et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint;	and make so much pressure on the blood that you see, and then loosen the knot, and put on cotton and bind.</start_of_turn
ele est maintenant sanee.	it is now healed.</start_of_turn>
des sainies de ventouse	of bloodletting
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre;	Bandages are made of horn, or cobwebs, or wool.</start_of_turn
et ventosation si est faite selonc II manieres:	And if the dressing is done in two ways:
ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Or by cutting and drawing out blood, or by cutting only.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres:	And this bleeding which is done by cutting if it is done in two ways:
ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu;	Or it is very hot, or it is done with heat;
et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief;	And the bleeding which is done by cutting and by drawing out blood if it is done in twelve days of pain, for in that case one is all at the head of the sufferer.
et li autres est emmi le col;	And the other is at the collarbone;
et II autres en II costeis dou col;	And two others in two ribs of the collarbone;
et li ventouse desoz lou menton;	And the patient should suck on a ventouse to loosen the wind from the belly.
et li ventouse des II espaules;	And the patient should suck on a ventouse twice to loosen the wind from the belly
et li ventouse sus les crupies;	And the patient should suck on a ventouse over the crupies
et les ventouses emmi les II bras;	And the patient should suck on the ventouse at both arms together
et les ventouses des II jambes;	And the patient should suck on the ventouse at both legs together
et les ventouses des II chevilles;	And the patient should suck on the ventouse at both ankles together
et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne;	And the vomiting does not help in any way, for there are many veins that are scattered throughout the body, and for this reason it does not do any good to vomit, as if we were draining blood from a vein
et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	It is only useful to vomit when it comes from repletion, without any fire or sensation of fire, in no disease that comes from eating, until all the food is emptied from the stomach
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens;	And if necessity or custom demands it, if the physician must give a sneeze at the beginning or at the end of a month, or at any time, and must do so with every yawn and sigh.
car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief;	for there are those who, when they must sneeze, feel a heavy head.
et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz;	and there are those who experience swelling and redness in their face, head, neck, and eyes
et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc;	and those who have a discharge of blood in their mouth, and have lost their tongue, and are spitting blood.
et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	and those who think, and see nothing but blood and fear and death and similar things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés .iij. houres dou jor.	When these signs appear, and even if it is only lightly moist, we command the patient to wind after two hours.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors;	Blood from the vein helps to relieve the pain in the head … which comes from the eyes, and it is not permitted to do anything else before evacuating all the pus
et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement;	And if this vomiting is in lieu of the blood of the cephalic vein, it does not suffice only those who are of cold complexion in use, or who have a dullness, for this can cause great discomfort.
et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	And for this reason it does not suffice only those who are of cold temperament in use, but those who have or suffer from chief colds illnesses.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And for this reason I advise you not to use it on patients suffering from cold or severe diseases
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion;	Vomiting in the collar is in lieu of the blood of the chief and the basal veins, and for this reason it is worth at the greatest extent to the point of pain in the chest, and to swelling of the channel of the windpipe, and all that is similar to this.
et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	It is not to be forced too much, for if it stays too firmly, it can cause an obstruction of the belly or the stomach or the bowels.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique;	The winds blow as two ribs of the collar cause pains of the head, and swelling and inflammation, and constriction, and pain at the root of the teeth, and is in lieu of the blood of the vein.
et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	And you must command the patient to express his hand to put it in, that he does not cut the artery, and does not bleed excessively.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche;	The vomiting of these days is like a disease of the mouth, and corruption of the gums, and similar diseases that are in the mouth.
et est en leu des sainies des II levres.	And is in lieu of the blood of the two livers.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	The winds of the spleen are harmful to health, coming from heat and congestion.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes;	The vomiting of the belly is as much as three veins of the arm, because it draws blood from these three veins.
et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	And instruct the patient not to fear too much pain, for the blood is thick and knows the bones and nerves and arteries.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire;	The swelling that is on the buttocks is worth as much as blood clot at the foundation, and has diseases of bones, and it is recommended that the swelling be large and of hair, that it has to be well treated.
et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit;	And by chance, if it should be subtle, if it breaks;
et i fai grans plaies.	it makes great wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors;	The swellings of the legs swell open, because they draw blood from all over the body, and cause as much pain as the ancient rains, and the marrow, and the bladder, and restore the flowers
et sont en leu des II sophenes, et des II chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	and are in place of the two shoulders, and the two knees, and all of them weaken the body after a long time, and cause death in many positions
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc;	The manner of applying the ventouse is as follows: if you apply it at first sight, and with immediate effect, and put it on firmly, and move it evenly, and do not cease doing so until you see blood flowing freely and bloodstained, and open the wound.
puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez:	Then be quick, and remove the ventouse, and take care of the body, for there are some who have sustained severe pain and opened wounds:
si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes;	if it is necessary to wound only once, and to make large wounds, and a deep wound;
et suce legierement.	and do so gently.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir II fois:	And if it is not too big, if you can wound twice:
la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	the first time in order to narrow the large wound
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois;	And if it is not very thick, if you must wound it for the third time.
et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	and when our veins swell with blood, too much, too little, if we must puncture it once more.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent;	and when our veins burst with blood, if we must repeat this treatment often;
et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif:	and if it is not very thick, if you must wound it for the third time; if you perceive that the wound has become perceptible, and it is for those who have thick skin and tough nails, and who have swollen pores, that you must apply liniment of essential oils which are aperitif and dissolving:
se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite;	if it is in this state, with violet oil, or sweet almond oil, or pumpkin seed oil;
et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	If it is in the armpit, with oil of cresson, or of poppy seed, or chamomile, or something similar.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the swelling is large and cold, if you take amaranth oil, or balsam oil, or rue oil, and the like.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	If he has a tender pulse and large pores, one must not put oil on, but it is necessary to wash afterwards with rose water, or cold water, or lime water, or pumpkin seed water, or porcelain water, or something similar.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And if there is moisture in the mouth, if it lifts easily, or with vinegar of myrtle, and sumac, and similar things.</start_of_turn>
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans;	And if there are yellow spots, they rise from old wine, or from sea water, or from a decoction of elderberry or chamomile, or from other similar things.
et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II;	Do not put on a suction cup in front of the bath, but after the bath for an hour or two.
et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	Do not sleep after the suction, but keep warm when you must suctor and when you are sucturing.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez;	And take care that the one who is being suctioned is not feverish, and that he is not too rough or inflamed;
si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses;	If he grasps cold things, such as pomegranates, grapes, onions, and lettuce at ease, and similar things;
et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	and mixes herbs, mustard, and fat, and moist meats.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons;	And he who has a cold complexion, if he grasps honey syrup, and fragrant wine which is between autumn and summer, and broth, and herbs and small oils and marjoram;
et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier;	and when he has a cold wind, he must drink more than eat
et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz;	and must give to others homes never three times in a row before or after, because of the ventilation, or for comfort of the main parts;
et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	or be silent about it, but do not say it unless the cold ones drink it.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne;	The wounds which are made to be cauterized are those which are made upon the liver, and upon the spleen, and under the kidney, and upon the belly and the buttock and the groin and the heel, for in no limb does the fire cause any wound except to draw blood from limb to limb, as we do when we put on the cautery to the nipples when they are bleeding.
por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre;	in order to reduce the viscosity which is in the limb, as we do when we make incisions on the belly and the buttock to lighten the limb.
et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu;	and to stop the pain, when there is swelling or fracture, if by its attractive virtue it pulls out the swelling, or evacuates the fracture from its place
et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement;	and in this way when it is put on the liver and the spleen when there is retained moisture, these incisions are administered empty in order to suck up so little
et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	Neither fire nor water is ever administered together, and neither is it ever plain water that is used for these diseases; for in such cases we fill the sponge with hot water, or water alone, or we add herbs that are conducive to this.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The form of the wound administered with fire is as follows:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre;	And there must be two broad and half palms of butter, and there must be oil or cost oil at the bottom of the mileu, as for extracting an awl, and whether it be hair or wool in front so that it does not burn the patient when putting it on the limb.
et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent;	And there must be in the mileu a rod of barley or iron, to put a bandage in, and there must be both large and small according to the diseases and the extent of these which take them
car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	For the wounds of the veins are different from those of meats, and fats from bones.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre:	And must one place this ventouse upon the limb:
empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide;	And must one place this ventouse upon the limb: grasp the sleeve of silk or linen and put it between the ventouse and the limb, so that it closes either at the bottom of the ventouse or that it does not burn the patient.
et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse;	and then place it upon the limb, and you must either place it upon the opening that we have mentioned, so that when we see that there is vapor, and the bone is loosened, we can remove the ventouse.
et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	and grasp the lining as before, and repeat it often, if you are skillful.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement;	In the ventouse, which is administered in cases of pneumonia, at all severity, there is no opening or hole, and it is only administered when it is clear of inflammation, and is placed upon the limb only slightly
et c’est li forme:	And thus it is that form:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus;	The wounds do not yield until they are treated in limbs or where it is impossible to apply a bandage due to their smallness, as with books and gums, and similar things.
et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans;	And in such things as flesh stripped of hair, if it is desired or not, and other similar things;
et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren;	and the quality of the sufferer is that when you find wounds that are in soft and delicate tissues without sensation of pain, if you touch them, they bleed
et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres;	and put them in hot water, until they are soft, and do not have any pain in their bellies
et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues;	and then either drain the vein and apply a bandage, then rub the limb until it is red, and apply the wound
et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	When they are even and smooth, and shine, if it is bone or we can put on a suction cup, put it on, for it is worth more afterwards.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint;	If not, if you lift the bone easily, then slightly with water, move it well, and then release it;
et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés;	and if it remains too much afterwards, wet the edges with cold water, and put on, until the wound is closed
et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez;	and if the wound is multiplied, put on crushed glass or fragments of tile, and similar things, until it is closed.
ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant;	or you remove half of the burnt bones, and leave them until they are consumed by the bone, if it stops now.
et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	If you have more pain, take other medicines.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent;	If the medicines do not suffice, rub the limb with fresh blood, or insert a needle into it until blood flows, and then withdraw the needle.
et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	When you see that it is bleeding, sprinkle some alum or bruised herbs or ashes on it, and it will stop now.</start_of_turn>
Ci comence li livre des brisures	This is the end of the text.
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and is restoration of fracture and displacement.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent;	Beware, dear son, that in this book, you will not find anything that the ancient books do not contain, no letter or writing.</start_of_turn>
et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin;	And for this reason it is strange in our land, for I have never found it elsewhere.</start_of_turn
et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie;	And I know of nothing, except by the science of ancient books, or because I have studied it so thoroughly that I have mastered the science, and by experiment, and by the habit of my life;
et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	And I have described in this chapter what is contained in it, and I have abbreviated at the end, and I have made it clear the forms of the instruments which are mentioned, as I have done in the two preceding chapters.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	Therefore, I say that the prologue of this book and the chapters contain the essence of the word and that the learned man who reads and comprehends them will find true understanding, for those who have been proven to be skilled in this noble art and have learned it well.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars;	I say that when a fracture or dislocation or twist or sprain occurs, if you can, you must hasten the healing of the patient from one side and the other, if nothing else hinders you, if there is weakness of the limb, or immaturity, or old age.
ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois;	or if the tension is not very strong, or too cold;
et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre;	And eat cold juices, such as broth and ale, and do not drink wine, do not eat greasy foods, and do not eat too much meat that fills the veins of blood, until you have no doubt of the post-cautery, or of the swelling of the limb.
si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	if he returns to his senses at the first moment, take governance as he used to.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken bones begin to restore, if you must know that you must nourish the patient with foods that make great nourishment, or that have viscosity, such as barley cooked in broth, peas, and beans, fish, eggs, cheese, and fat, and similar things.</start_of_turn>
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For at a part of nourishment, rest returns muscle and more easily breaks the fracture.</start_of_turn>
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans;	And know that bones that are fractured of splintered do not mend well together, neither do they knit according to their nature because of the drying out of the limb, nor those that are too tender, as bones of small children
mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant;	but there is no remedy, rest on the fractured bone that is large and firm which is found and joins the limb together, as long as it remains firm as it was before
et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	And do not eat anything from its source, and for this reason we advise nourishing of coarse foods, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And know that fractures are of various kinds in many ways.</start_of_turn>
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the fracture of the skull is different from that of the limb, or of the bone, and I shall tell you in this chapter all the ways of fracture.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there are fractures that go only skin-deep, and others by cutting, like the size of a needle to write with.</start_of_turn>
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if there is a fracture with a wound, and a fracture with a small tear.</start_of_turn
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu;	And if there is any reason that has its own instrument and its own method in restoring, according to what is remembered to come into its place
et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main;	and is known to break bones by this that it leaps up well by pushing and by the pressure of the hand
et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure;	and when there is no swelling or pain, and the patient does not feel great pain, there is no break
mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	but it can well have swelling or fracture or small break.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	If you do not know with certainty whether it is twisted or broken, but only that the hand is moved, but put on medicines that will come afterwards, and then strain it now subtly.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne;	And the veins that break that go into the marrow, and are the two parts of the joint, it is necessary to put them in place equally, even as after the abscesses have gone away
et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez;	And if a boil comes out with a burst, do not leave any hair, until the boil is calmed;
puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces;	then put it equal to the muscle that you must grasp firmly and steadily, and hair that the healing is more gentle than the healing of this or that there are pieces.
puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	then hold it, as it should be after that
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main;	And if there are broken bones, if they extend from two parts, if it is hands or feet, or at your hand if it is a small limb, or at two strings, or at a string and at your hand;
et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor;	and put the limb in its natural position, so that when the parts of the limb break, if they are dislocated, remember by all means to keep the addition to the bone at the muscle that you must grasp, and keep that by your work no wound or pain comes to the patient
et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	And hold the arms firmly by the bones according to the best forms.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien:	And he should feel well in the hand if it seems that it is not well:
si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	if it is twisted well, and do not constrain it too much, do not press as those who do who cause it to come out at the incision and contraction of the limb as we have often seen
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere;	When the limb is at a point, if the patient feels well that it does not move, do not watch or sleep or turn or move in any way;
et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	and keep the limb so secure that he does not feel any pain
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor;	For when he does not feel any pain, if it is not at a point, and you can put it in partial disposal that he does not feel any pain;
et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez;	And keep it properly aligned, so that no twisting arises when you restore it.
et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	And the quality of the limb is as I have told you
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	The fractures of the limb are diverse in small and large size and in shape.</start_of_turn>
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans:	For there are small limbs like arms and feet and the like:
si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz;	it is necessary to cover them with soft and fine linen cloths
et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe:	those which are large, like thighs and legs
si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche;	it is necessary to cover them with a wide and strong thread, for the large threads embrace the whole large limb and constrain it evenly, so that there is no tension;
puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure;	then take hold of the limb firmly, three turns or four according to the size of the limb, and grasp the hand one hand at the top of the break and strain less, so that the break slips a little bit;
et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet;	And soften the limb a little more, both front and back, as much as you grasp a large part of the limb still sound, then take hold of the limb once more, and turn the dislocation back to its proper position.
puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus;	Then raise up the lower part of the break, and hold it moderately, neither too tightly nor too loosely, as we mentioned before
puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	Then put between the broken bones some flaxseed or bandages, so that they are all even, and then bind them up above with a bandage, and put on your crutches well made above, if there is no abscess or swelling
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors;	And if there is swelling or an abscess, put on something soothing to the abscess, which will soften the swelling, and leave it untouched for a few days
puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	Then strain upon your thumbs, and let them be half the length of a broad cane resting firmly, or of the kind made from sticks, or of barley straws, and let them be as follows:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres;	But it is necessary that the thumb which you put on the fracture be thicker and wider than the others.
et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor;	And be as long as it is necessary for the little finger or the great toe
puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure;	Then strain upon the thumbs as you did before, and then bind them with a thread conveniently, as you did in the first instance on the fracture
plus estroit est ensus, adés moins;	The closer it is bound, the less.
et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol;	And let the thread be neither too thick nor too thin, and be of hemp.
car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	For if the thread is thick, as I would like works of fools who make their knots like twisted linen threads, this is a great error, for the knot will not be even if it is too subtle, and it will hold only if there is between the thumb and the index finger some space.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	If the patient is scorched by the nails after the stretching of the limbs, if you put on stockings of linen or coarse cloth, so that it does not bleed.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is with a splinter, and the bone is fractured, I will tell the cure of that later.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And the wounds which he cannot restrain must be stripped off from these bones to break them first in order.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant;	For if the limb is large, I will not put in stitches until after five or seven days, or more according to the severity of the wound coming out;
et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion:	and thus the manner of old bandaging to restore a fracture, dislocation, and torsion:
et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	and take flour that is held in the walls of the mill, and mix it with an abundance of eggs, and make this confection, neither too clear nor too thick, and use it. This is the common manner of bandaging that restores the fracture in various positions, and even for women and young children, because it is neither too tight nor too loose
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion:	Other methods of treatment restore fracture, dislocation and torsion.
pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana X З.;	Other methods of treatment restore fracture, dislocation and torsion: barley, lentil, alum, saffron, Arabic gum, mugwort, and vinegar in the amount of X times three.</start_of_turn>
mirre et aloes, ana V З.;	Myrrh and aloe, in the amount of five times three.</start_of_turn
alechil VIIII З.;	Mustard seed seven times three.</start_of_turn
et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef;	And make a powder of them, and mix them with egg white.</start_of_turn
se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	If the complexion of the patient is hot, use this plaster, for it is of good composition and restores broken bones quickly, and is worth more than many homes.</start_of_turn>
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion:	Other methods of plastering that are worth for torsion.</start_of_turn>
pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.;	Pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.
mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.;	Take mugwort and vinegar, at ten parts; and aloes and salt, at seven parts.
acaice VI З.;	Juniper berries six parts
bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Juniper berries ten parts, and grind them well, and mix with water or egg yolk, and administer.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure:	Another method of treating joints and bones that have become loosened from their sockets, and relieves pain, and strengthens bones, and breaks down swelling:
pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	Take fresh linen, and moisten it with oil and broth, and put it on the wound
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	These treatments do not restore health, but are good for relieving post-cautery pain, and bones properly relieve the pains.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez:	Another method of treating bones that have been fractured
pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Pren feuille de figuier sèches, et feuille de pavol terrestre, et broie ensemblé, et fais emplaustre.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	Another method of treating is to restore the fracture of the bone and to diminish the remaining post-cautery swelling.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie;	Take dry fig tree leaves and terrestrial chamomile leaves, grind them together, and make plaster.
et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Grind them, mix with wine, and if the limb is swollen, soak it with moist coriander water or water, and use it
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	Other methods of restoring the limb are more forceful than the first, when an abscess hardens during restoration of the limb.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie;	Take root of vismalve, linseed seed, marshmallow, quince seed, violets and chamomile flowers, of each kind an equal part
et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Grind them, mix with salt water or sweet water or wine, according to the heat of the limb and its rest
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Ypocras in his book does not put anything on the broken limb to restore it except for some wax and oil, and nothing else, and he says that it should be between two things not too soft not too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems Galen recommends placing something dry and warm upon the affected limb to restore it, such as myrrh, aloes, incense and the like, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor:	Other means of immobilizing that is worth for lesions and pain:
pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Other means of immobilizing that is worth for lesions and pain: take mugwort and chopped onions, or poppy seeds, and beeswax, mix them evenly, and grind them up, and make plaster of it and bind it tightly.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu;	And then loosen a little afterwards, and take care that the patient feels no pain, that the bones are not fractured in their place;
si ne lou deslie par mains jors.	otherwise loosen by hand day and night.
Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant;	If pain comes to the limb, or swelling, rest or move slowly; if you delay, and loosen it, and bind it up again immediately
et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor;	put on a lighter drape, and a wet sponge of sea salt, and immerse in water, and elevate the limb until the swelling ceases and the pain is relieved;
puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut;	Then let the limb rest for an hour, then put on dry linen, soak in water or oil rose, and bind up with a knot, until you are sure of the afterburn of the cautery.
et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant;	And rest the inflamed limb, and if it swells, then begin the ligation again, and a little displacement, and do not strain it more than necessary;
et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	Until it is healed.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	If you see that the abscess is inflamed, swollen, red, and painful, and that it returns again after you have placed it and bound it, as you did the first time, then you must repeat the procedure.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII;	And if no improvement appears in the limb for what we have said, if you must remove the dressing after three days or four, or five or seven;
et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus;	Never leave it for twenty days, according to what we see, until the wound has healed, and approach the joint slowly over the wound
adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant;	When he has received more restraint than before, and engrosses his flesh, as I have said before.
et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir;	and if you see that his limb is drying out more than usual, do not permit that nourishment should come from nourishment alone;
arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure;	it is necessary to give him warm water, every time you loosen it, and this every third hour, and cut a vein every fourth hour
par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement:	for in this work, indeed, nourish the limb well and quickly restore what the fools make fall, that restore the limb violently
c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	it is wrong, and if it is urgent, and I see nothing else but to leave it and do it violently.
des diverses manieres de brisure	from various breaks
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees;	Many ways of breaks are, and various figures, and the causes are diverse;
car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust;	For there are fractures that are made by percussion of a spear, and the collarbone is broken all the way up to the syphus which is the socket of the bone, as if made by a saw or an axe.
et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	and for this reason this kind of fracture is called "haichure".
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»;	Or the spear pierces the bone from the inside outwards, and is called this kind of fracture "absolue".
et est li plaie de ces II brisures grans ou petite.	And there is the wound of these two fractures, great or small.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is embedded percussion, or fissure or split of the bone, or dislocation of the shoulder or fracture of the bone, or other similar things.</start_of_turn
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is a burst vessel, which approaches the gut that is adjacent to the bone, or it is on the bone, this wound is great or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»;	And if the wound is sutured in the bone as subtly as a hair, and the split is small, and for this reason this is called a "capillary" fracture
et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres;	and if the wound is made or by cutting with a knife, or by a thorn, or by something similar, and it causes the piece of bone to enter the hollow, and the limb is bent like the cauldron when it boils
si entre li piere dedens.	If between the teeth.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant;	And this often happens under those who have or chew moist bones, like children's teeth;
et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles;	and often results from bites of various kinds that split into small pieces like stars;
et je em parlerai en son leu.	I will speak of it later.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And we know of all the ways of breaking due to the subtraction above them, the inquiry into tentatives, and the corrupted flesh which is above.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The capillary appearance is known by that which when we have discovered the bone, and we wipe on it, if there appears a black break.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of the break, take care of the patient’s condition, and if you see no bad accident, such as vomiting of bile, loss of understanding, extension, and swelling, and fever, and the eyes to become pale and flushed, and other similar things in various situations, if you cannot do otherwise
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	If you do not see an imminent mishap, and you hope for health, if so, commence the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	When you come to the aid first, and it is in sweat, if so, it is necessary to obstruct the bone before the fourteenth day over the muscle that you must support.</start_of_turn>
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	If it is in this state, if you haste to obstruct the bone before the seventh day over which the cloth of the bone is corrupted, then comes the accident that we have said.</start_of_turn>
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi:	And if the fracture of the bone comes up to the skin that covers the brain, you must cut off the fractured part immediately
et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset;	and take hold of the patient’s head and uncover the bone thoroughly in every way possible, and if blood comes out from uncovering the bone, or from a wound, use what is necessary and soak the wound with oily cloths
et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc;	And keep the wound closed until the swelling subsides, and be sure to drain blood;
puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige:	Then begin to set the bone in place, and this is done in two ways:
l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	The first method if the fracture is close in front, and this is the shape
Et puis i boute .i. autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then there is another fracture more extensive than the first.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde;	The second method if there are several different sizes, some narrow and others wide, and they are pointed and iron-like
et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	And gently support it, that you do not bruise the head
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou I cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os;	And if the bone is tough and hard, if you must pierce to set it, even though you administer splints, do not pierce through the bone beyond the test, and should have under the point a margin or circle, that does not allow the point to pass beyond the bone;
et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test;	And you must know that many die if the scapulae come into the place of the bone ends, if you have filled them up to the test.
et c’est li forme des III manieres de tareres:	And that is the form of three ways of testing.
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes I tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez;	The quality by which to perceive the broken bone is that you place one finger on the bone and press two until you are certain that the bone is pierced;
puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures;	Then put the finger back in another place a little later, and do everything around, and close the gap between the fragments of the bone as skillfully as possible, and gently, as we have said, until you have brought the bone to your hand, or to any instruments that you may have like tenailles, pins or sutures
et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	Leave the brain and the jaw untouched.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire;	And when you have grasped the bone firmly, and treated, if it is possible, restore the fragment that is loosened from the bone to all other instruments resembling an incisor, but it must be more tense and slender than the others.
et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens;	And if it loosens no small bones, no nails, if the bones rest lightly on other instruments;
puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	Then treat the wound with sutures and bandages as we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus;	And another method of work is like the Galicians do, which is more common.
et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And the voice is very strong, and that is its word
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is necessary first that you uncover a portion of the bone, either where it is fractured or broken, so that when you have uncovered that part, put on gloves and grasp the handle of this incisor lens, for this is its form:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os;	And do not cut from one side, but from the middle of two ribs, so that the cut reaches the bone.
puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz;	then hold a little mallet above, so that you can easily break the bone and take care of the clot that is below;
s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	if it is close to the bone, if you break it slightly, because we must break it properly without fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if a bone breaks without piercing the skin, it is only slightly fractured from above; there are small pieces [of bone] which, if necessary, can be removed with a rasp of various sizes, to bring about the greatest possible healing, according to the work and the nature of the fracture.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If there is a great deal of razing beforehand, and after that more subtly, and it does not cease to do so until it is well done.</start_of_turn>
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement;	In these other small cuts and breaks, you must bring the cause according to its place;
et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	and this is something that is not reported by him who has studied in this art
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie;	and if the scab is discovered, you must take one bandage of linen, according to the quantity of the wound, and moisten it in rose oil, and put it on the wound
puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil;	Then take another bandage doubled in two or three, and wet it in wine and rose oil, and put it on the first bandage.
et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement;	and make it lighter than you would like, so as not to press too hard on the surface, then give him another linen, and do not tighten it more than is necessary to hold the wound in place only.</start_of_turn>
et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses;	and leave it for an hour or two, until the swelling of the wound has subsided, then remove it, and give him medicines such as elderberry root, oatmeal, and incense powder, and an astringent; and similar things.</start_of_turn
et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication;	and grind these things into a powder, and put it on the wound, and give him other medicines as before, with a bite.</start_of_turn>
et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice;	And keep that the wound is perfectly closed, neither leaving it open nor letting it gather pus, for when pus gathers on the brain membrane, if it breaks and bursts, it causes great harm to the patient.
car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	for when one puts on the side of the jaw any biting thing, if it does not desist downwards.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Beware then, if no other misfortune befalls the patient, as we have said, if there is any doubt or suspicion.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac;	And if the swelling does not go away except by the medicine that we have put on, if it has strength, if you can take a part of honey, and three parts of rose oil and one drape of gum, and put it on the jaw;
puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then you must manage the healing in the way that is necessary, as long as he is well.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les II parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont II os;	Never break the two parts of the nose, or one of them only, for these are two bones;
et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	And thus the cartilage is brittle, and does not break easily, unless it is forced to bend or twist, and then it is whole again.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil;	And if one of these two parts is broken, if you drink a little wine or open the wound, and put the broken piece back into your index finger and the palm by forcing, until it returns to its natural shape.
et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	Do it gently, and beware that the patient does not feel pain from your work.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	If the fracture is in the upper part of the limb and cannot be brought down naturally, as is often the case, you must assume that the limb is fractured at the root of the bone like the head of a club.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues;	And if the break is of two parts, do it again, and hurry to restore the first joint if you can;
se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	If not, after the seventh or tenth day, when the inflammation of the wound has subsided, then bind up the wound at the head of the bone, if the break is in one part.
Ou tu boutes I autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est;	Or you bite at another part, if it breaks there;
et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	Or you bite at another part, if it breaks there, and the teeth are so wide that they fill the holes of the gums.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	And they say no restorer should mill the tents in the burrow, and die every other day.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin;	I do not think it is good, but it is right that they should be soft in confection of egg yolk and flour dust
puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	Then leave the tooth until the bone is firm, and the cartilages hardened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a I souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi;	And never put goose feathers or pins in place of teeth, and if there is sulfur cloth around, and it is held by the break, and blows on the patient among;
or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	or make him do what you see
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en .i. poc de dyaquilon.	If blood clots come to the surface while you are working, if you put some lint or gauze soaked in rose oil, or some alum, on it.</start_of_turn
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis;	And if the afterbirth does not come, if you put on plaster by default, of oatmeal flour and incense powder, confirmed with egg yolk, then put on light covers, and do not bind me more
et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu;	And if the bone of the limb breaks but is only slightly fractured, and is broken into small pieces, if you have suitable instruments for this, then extract the fragments, close the wound, and treat the surrounding tissues with oil and poultices.
et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if there is no visible wound on the limb, if you treat the pain, and apply ointment, as long as it is necessary.</start_of_turn>
de la routure de la mandibule	Of the root of the mandible.
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the mandible is fractured without any wound, and there is no fracture displacement, and the fracture is not displaced too much, except for the curvature inwards, if one knows it lightly
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide;	It is proper, if the fracture is in the lower part, that you bite your thumb of the affected limb in the patient’s mouth.</start_of_turn
et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	And if the fracture is in the left mandible, if you hold your right thumb of the right hand, and hold the fracture lightly, and support it with the other hand in front, and make it even.</start_of_turn
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en .ij., si covient que tu aministres extension de .ij. pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the fracture of the mandible is displaced in .ij., if you must administer extension of .ij. parts, as long as they are even.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus I drapel double;	And if movement of the teeth comes, or swelling, if strained by a thread of gold or silver or silk, then put on the broken jaw cerate and put on a double drape.
et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And put on a great sponge well made, or a piece of leather equal in size, long and wide according to the jaw, and tie it on to the bone that you put in, and command the patient to rest, and eat soft food.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet;	And if you see that the figure is changing, if the pulp comes loose at the third joint, and then reset it to its place.
et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote;	And put on plaster, with powder of almonds with abundance of eggs or flour of linseed, after that you have put on the cerate.
et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez;	And put upon the wound a linen bandage, and if it bursts open, and the patient remains quiet, leave it as it is until it heals;
maintes fois est sanez en III semainnes.	Often it heals in three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if postmortem comes, if it is as we have said many times before.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee;	And if there is a break and wound together, repair it so that no part of the bone remains exposed;
si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	if the bone is slightly bent, cover it with covering instruments.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, if it has flared up as required.</start_of_turn>
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus .i. des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have boned all these fragments, and there is no more displacement, if the wound is wide, put on appropriate dressings to protect the wound, as long as it is necessary.</start_of_turn>
de la forcele	because of force.</start_of_turn
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc III manieres:	The forcele breaks several times in front of the shoulder, towards the armpit, and the fracture is in three positions:
ou elle est brisie et desevree en II, et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer;	or it is fractured and broken in two places, and there are fragments, and it is the lightest to restore
ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	Or there is a break with wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies II ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie;	When there is a break with a wound, if there are two attendants, one should hold the limb that feels the force of the break.
et li autres estende lou col vers la partie;	and the other extends the head towards the part;
puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	Then set the break even, so that its formation is as it should be, and there is neither swelling nor bruising
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit;	If you must extend further, put a round ball of lead or lint on the patient’s shoulder, and make it large as needed;
et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And extend and hold the force with your hand, so that you can make the break even as it should be
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule .i. oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	If you do not manage to push back the head of the shoulder, because it comes out of its socket, you must know that the patient lies groaning on his belly, and put a cushion under the shoulder blade, that is, the middle rib, and support the shoulder from below, until the bone of the shoulder is raised.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus;	And then address the fracture to your shoulder, and if you find debris there, if you can, make an incision above.
et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as;	and draw out the fragments lightly, and if the bone cannot reunite by any means, if the pulp has gone from one of the incisors that you have done;
mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	but put the forceps in place, for to hold the tissue in place.
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre;	and appear like a spoon, and is not at all curved, and be as wide as it can be, according to the size of the bone and the extent of the work;
et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os;	and there are two holes, as you see, and one is large and the other is small, as is the fracture of the wound that you made when you treated the bone.
et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	And when you are certain of the depth of the wound, if the wound is small, or if you doubt the depth, if you employ the dressing and bandage, as much as is necessary.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille .i. drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	If there is moisture in the wound, if it is oily, apply cloths soaked in rose oil and balsam, and wine, and put on top.</start_of_turn>
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier;	The stiffness of the bone, when it is painful and swollen, is that you put on the bone the plaster of fine powder and egg yolk, and put on soft dressings above, and put a sponge below the socket if you need it.
puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre;	Then take a very broad bandage of a palm of good size, then put on two layers of dressing and plaster it on
puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant;	Then take a staple of about three fingers wide and long, and wrap it around that bandage, so that the head of the bandage is resting on the edge.
et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide;	And place the heel on the trochanter, and turn the bandle on the collar, and drain the right hip, and drain the left hip.
et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint;	And retain the thigh part, and when you see that the ligament holds the trochanter in place, and you clearly see that the heel does not move from the greater trochanter, if you rewarm the thigh again, and when the thigh is released;
et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut;	And make the patient lie on his back, and put under his buttock a little cushion to lift the shoulder up.
si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors;	if you align the fracture of the scapula with the alignment of the shoulder, or if you bind the arm to the collar, and do not release it until it is well healed, for up to 20 days;
puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez;	Then resume the support, if you see that it has shifted, hold and leave it as it is until it is restored.
et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	and it is restored in eight days, and in less than a fortnight.
de la brisure de l’espaule	Then resume the displacement, if you see that it is necessary, and hold and leave it in place until it is restored; and it is usually restored in about 26 days, and less in most homes.
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement;	There is no break or wide displacement of the bone, and only by force can it be moved;
si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	if it appears according to the figure of the fracture, and is repositioned according to its natural form, in all the ways that you can
puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double;	then put out the limb powder with millstone with abundance of egg white, and bandage lightly, and put on a double dressing
puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment;	then put on a broad and soft cushion, a cushion wider than the shoulder, and when the cushion is set, do not let it rest on any part of the shoulder, if you use this braid of hemp, so that the cushion rests evenly
et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor;	And then the stretching at the whole great bend firmly, so that the limb does not move from its place, and look at the mark of each joint.
et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit;	And every time that it quivers, if the stretching is made, and makes the limb equal to its place if it has gone out of its place, and lies the patient upon his chest;
et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en XXV.	and the dislocation is restored in twenty days or in twenty-five.
Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	And when this number is completed, if the limb is loosened, and the pain and swelling have subsided, because it is not a bone that has moved too easily.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a piece of the bone bends forward, and not a little, if it persists, and the bone, do as we said at the bursting of the forceps to calm the abscess.
de la brisure dou pis	And if a piece of the bone bends forward, and not a little, if it persists, and the bone, do as we said at the bursting of the forceps to calm the abscess.
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc;	The limb is never broken in a thousand, but this is often the case.
mais il brise sovent au defuer.	but it often breaks suddenly.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	When it is broken in the middle, if it declines downwards, and causes the patient great pain, and there is no marrow, and swelling, and by chance vomiting blood, and opens the marrow cavity in the broken bone, and all this is felt.</start_of_turn>
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met I cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des II costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient;	And if the patient lies prone on his back, put a cushion between the shoulder blades, then press the shoulder blades together, and unite the edges of the two ribs with your hands, and slightly force them into place until the bone is set as it should be.
puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en I drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve;	Then place on the wound dressings and stamp below the tip of the collarbone, or some other soft substance, and cover with a bandage, and bind over the bone break, so that it does not move.
et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint;	and twist the limb round at the back, and hold it firmly, and give it time for the swelling to subside, and if it relaxes, do it again
et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures;	and if it comes loose, by corrosion or by inflammation that comes from within, or pain or swelling, if you are hasty, do not delay, loosen the wound and scrape away the pus, and address the cause of the trouble
puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then restrain the shoulder and hold it steady until it is healed.
de la brisure des costes	Of the fracture of bones
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses;	The wounds that break the ribs only come forward in the buttocks and at the head of the thigh, and do not protrude except because they are slimy;
et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	and he feels well at the interrogation as two should.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	The restoration is when you put the fracture back in its place as it should be.</start_of_turn
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	And then put on the dressing and bind it with an elastic bandage if necessary.</start_of_turn
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile;	If the ribs break downwards, if he feels great pain and itching, like with pleurisy, for the bone is touching the gut
et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	and the limbs are pale, vomiting and spitting up large amounts of blood, which is a grievous disease, and the old men have put great effort into it
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if any of those who say it should administer food that swells the belly, to push back the pangs of hunger.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not do this, for after these things have been eaten, they do not go away unless they have already begun.</start_of_turn>
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if they have already begun, if they are well.</start_of_turn>
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison;	They say that no one has ever seen a wound there without causing harm, for it seems to be the reason;
toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	All that remains is doubt that the vacuum does not pull out the superfluous matters at once by the arrangement of weakness.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And they say that on must not cover the limb with coarse linen soaked in oil, but put on bandages between the ribs to measure an even inch of the circumference, then either cure with the cure for pleurisin, meat and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac;	And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot bear from the bone that points the toe, and there is doubt in the patient, if it is to be suspected that the fracture is broken, and if it is necessary to put in instruments to hold the fractured limb;
et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then one must break the bone again, and treat it lightly, and then suture the two layers of the wound, if it is large, and bandage it, until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu;	And if there is pus coming from the wound, put on damp cloths soaked in rose oil, and put on the limb.</start_of_turn
et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And cure while the limb of that which you must incision, and be without any surplus on the coast, or it must, as long as it is sane.
de la brisure dou col	of the fracture of the collarbone.
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie;	There is never wanting to break a bone of the collarbone, and indeed it happens that it rains;
et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	And also at the spine of the back
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	If this happens to anyone, and you know whether it will heal or not, take care if you see his hands softened and limp and dead, and do not move them or extend them, and when you prick them with a needle, do not feel it.</start_of_turn>
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	The veins that are deadly in many situations, if you move them and feel well when you stretch and pull them, the veins that the joint of the bone is saved, and the patient will be cured, if you put on cure.</start_of_turn
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit;	And if something similar comes to the spine of the back, and you know if it is sane or not, if you take care that the pieces are softened, and that the accident which is in the hands and on the back is from the wind and the egestion of the will;
et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	And when it is softened on its belly, if you make an egestion of the will
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	When it is soothed on the back and it vomits, it cannot be stopped
Saiches qu’il est mortelz:	Wounds that are mortal:
si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	If he does not toil diligently in his treatment.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	If this mishap does not occur, then the matter is lighter.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez;	If he does not toil diligently in his treatment, and if there is an abscess at the root of the hair, if you put oil of thistle or oil of rue on the spine, until it is calmed down.
puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer;	Then put on a soothing and drying dressing, and bind it with a thread, and command the patient to rest
et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	and do not sleep on that part where he feels pain, until he is healed
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur;	If the bones break, if you can cover over that part quickly;
et oste l’os, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and fix the bone, then gather the two edges of the wound, if it is large, with a bandage, and cure it with ointment until it is healed
et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier;	And if the head of the shoulder is broken, which is called the "shoulder dislocation", if you have twisted your left hand pouch and placed it equal to the other hand at your side, then place the support and stay on, if you need them.
puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	Then strain it, and if there is a displacement of bones, if it remains so, and the bone, cure the wound until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	Of the fracture of the thigh bone
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief;	When the thigh bone is broken, and if it happens, if there is no sign of improvement at the head;
et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	then it is long and declines downward, and brings pain to the patient, and swelling, and breaks the limb.</start_of_turn>
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure;	And the restoration is that if you extend your hand over, as long as you are over the breeze;
et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li;	and the sleeves which are the breeze and the form of the limb.
et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	and if the breeze is at the shoulder only, if put equal this breeze, as long as it is in a natural position.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the fracture is long, or it bends inwards, if you make the patient sit on his belly, until the restoration of this fracture is apparent.</start_of_turn
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve;	And when you have put it equal, if put on the socket, then put on a cushion of cloth or wool, and restrain the breeze, so that it does not move;
et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	and hold the limb steady, so that the limb is even
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And instruct the patient to sleep on his side, or on his back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit;	and if there is a spasm of the limb, do not touch it, until the spasm of the limb is appeased, and put on what we have said before
et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident;	And then return to the restoration, and tighten if it is necessary, if there is no mishap.
et c’est li maniere.	This is the end of the text.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	De la brisure de l’ajutoire.
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des II manieres:	The assistant is that which is between the shoulder blade and the head of the shoulder, and if it is fractured, it must be restored in one of two ways:
dont l’une est que tu pren I fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	One is to take one fist full of myrrh, according to this fashion
Et lie as II chiés II liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus I siege;	And hold the two thumbs and two fingers upwards, and hold the patient above a seat;
puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval;	Then gently pull down the arm until it reaches the armpit, and there put a fist of myrrh, then do not put any weight on it or the attendant will extend it backwards.
puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	Then he puts his thumbs together in his hands, until the thumb returns as it should.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a .ij. ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout .i. liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	Or the other method is to hold the patient’s arm at his collarbone, and bind the hand to his neck, and command the attendants to hold the part above the break at his hands, and the other to hold below at all the joints, and extend the chest towards the part.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	And if you see that the extraction is more forceful, if you strain the limb from the shoulder to the elbow, and from the elbow to the wrist, extend the thumbs of the assistants to their part.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure;	And if the thumb is close to the head of the shoulder, if you must, put one thumb in the middle of the elbow and the other towards the wrist, from the thumb.
et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute;	And thus if the thumb is towards the wrist, if you must, put one thumb lightly and gently, with some force, until the thumb is even on the palm and on the wrist
puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	Then put the thumb even, if you can, and hold it, if necessary, for fear that the thumb does not come back
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a VII jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez;	And if the thumb comes back, if it does not stay put, do not hold it for more than seven days, put on moist linen and rose oil, until the thumb is calmed down
puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein;	Then the strain, and the manner of straining if you place the dressing over the wound, then assemble the arm on the shoulder, and put your hand on the shoulder or on the breast.
et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	Put the bandage on, and strain on the shoulder, and on the arm, so that the arm is in its place, without any hindrance, or without moving the bones.</start_of_turn>
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele I doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure III dois de chescune part;	And if you doubt that the bone is not moving, if you use staples, put on the wound a wider and stronger staple than the others, and put between the knuckles two staples at least one inch apart; and let one staple be as long as to pass through three knuckles.</start_of_turn>
puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	Then strain on the staples, as I said at the beginning of this chapter, more strongly and less loosely.</start_of_turn>
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit;	And if thou seest the elevation of the shoulder-blade, and the stretching, as we have said, in the course of restoring the limb, and thou doubtest the incision, if thou leave it until the seventh day, as we have said;
puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	Then look carefully for three days after the limb has been restored, that it does not swell or cause pain, or that the swelling does not return to the limb because it is too taut.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	If the sufferer persists, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac;	And if no such things occur, if thou must remove the dressing only after three days or more, and the patient lies down on his back and rests his hands on his stomach;
et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens;	put on the shoulder-blade a cushion of plain wool equally, and look for an hour or two to see whether the limb remains broken or whether the ligaments are softened
si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz;	If by the power of medicine, and you do the meat which we have before us, in part as much as the meat is at the first degree;
et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	and when it starts to recover, if it be large
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout;	It is customary that the shoulder and limb should be taken back in 40 days in all cases
et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	and then one must loosen and administer poultices and medicines for the limb in question
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	And if the constriction is painful and embedded, if it stays for more than a day or two, it must be loosened.
de la brisure du bras	And if the fracture of the arm is displaced, leave it undisplaced for one day or two months.
Li bras est compos de II os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet;	The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the two “humerus,” of which one is small, and is that which supports the pouch;
et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi;	and the other is large, and is that which is below the little thumb;
par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	By chance, the great bone breaks alone, or the small one, and by chance the wrist is fractured together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations;	When the small bone is fractured, restoration is easy, and the healing is quick.</start_of_turn>
et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	When the great bone is fractured, if the healing is bad, it is more painful than when they are fractured together.</start_of_turn>
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	If only the small bone is fractured, if the limb is slightly extended and put in its place.</start_of_turn
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort;	And if it is the great bone, if you must extract it, do it with greater force.</start_of_turn
et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor;	Hold the thumb above the wrist, and grasp the pouch of the hand higher up than the other, and the small one must be lower than the others, and let the patient cross his arm over himself, and the thumb in front of him higher than the patient, so that the patient does not feel any pain.</start_of_turn
puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	Then extend the minister's arm at the shoulder to the outside of his hand, or at I liien, and one other minister at I other at the base.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And then he sets the eye equal, following its best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if in the burst (dislocation) it breaks into pieces, if you place some support in its place, and if there is no slippage that pricks like before, you shall not be able to restore it to its place; then leave it as it is and support the bone, as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler;	And if with the forceps the wound is open, as I have already spoken to the singular chapter;
si pren la cure.	take the treatment.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz;	And if in the beginning of the restoration blood comes out from the abscess, if glue I drape it with a cloth made of rose oil and white wax, neither too thick nor too soft;
et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	and tie I drape it above all subtly, until the abscess blood vessels are calmed down
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres;	and then put on the cerate, and put in the plaster of the powder of the mill with abundance of eggs, because put the staples, and let the staple of the forceps be firm, and one space wider than the others;
et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions:	and the wicks which he must have six stars or arms in more diverse positions.
soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II;	or if the fracture is in one of the bones, or in two.
et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre;	and is strained more above the fracture than elsewhere, and all the days less in aligning, as I said at the beginning of this chapter
et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres;	and the cloths that are above the fracture are soft and moist, and are neither hard nor rough
et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	and the thread, which is strained, should be of linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And rest the limb and the tendon afterwards for some days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez;	And if other bad accidents come to the limb, if there is itching that comes to the limb, you must raise the limb with warm water, until the itching is appeased.
et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	and let the limb rest still.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And then resume the traction, and if the tendon is softened and the bone is loosened, and similar things, if necessary
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses .i. poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	If you take care that the nourishment does not come to the limb because it is too stiff, then you must soften it somewhat, and leave it for a while, until the nourishment returns, and then strain it.</start_of_turn>
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	And if none of these things that we have said happen to the patient, keep it detached for twenty days.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos;	or when it hangs limp, then he must hold the hands to his throat, and let his collar be even, and guard against movement and vomiting, and sleep on his back;
et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	and the swelling that caused this fracture will disappear in XXX days or in XXXV, and by chance in XX days, according to the compositions and temperaments of the virtues
de la brisure de la main	Of the breaking of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	The nails on the back of the hand, and we have had two breaks there, often comes from fractures, and comes no more than once or twice.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement;	and when the limb is broken or twisted, if he must believe that the patient walks crookedly, and stands directly in front of him equally
puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint;	then put his hand on the extended cloth, and extend the minister the broken bones, and put them even with the eyes, until they are well joined
et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu;	and put on the plaster and the supports, if the incisions do not come out, then I put in a splint as much as is necessary.
et soit envoloupee en I drapeil de lin.	and be enveloped in linen cloth.</start_of_turn>
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie;	And if the fracture is at the edge of the bone of the limb, if you make a ball of gauze and command the patient to hold it against the fractured limb.</start_of_turn
et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	Then I bind it with a long bandage, and put in a splint as thick as the limb, and bind it firmly.</start_of_turn
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the break is outward, if you command that you place a pin above and another below at the joint, so that the hand is overextended and straight, then hold it firmly around the hand, and staunch the bleeding between the two.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient;	And if the fracture comes neither from above nor from below, if it is a pouch, if I put it even, if it is right.</start_of_turn
et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve;	And with the pressure, strain the limb, and if you see that it will not move, put in a small right pin to raise the swelling, and do not move it.
et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés;	And if the swelling is like others, as in the index or any other, if you put it even and hold it with the sound thing that follows
ou tu les lie toz en I tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet;	or you bind them together while holding it, when the movement is finished, or you put on a pin, as with a pouch.
et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	Take care in restoring and disposing of the burnt tissue, and cure what comes from it, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	and if the break is outward, if you command that you place a pin above and another below at the joint, so that the hand is overextended and straight, then hold it firmly around the hand, and staunch the bleeding between the two.
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier;	The thigh bone is often fractured, and one can see it when it is twisted before and behind
et li restauration si est c’on lie I liien desus la briseure, et I autre desoz.	and the restoration is when it is bound under the swelling, and the other below
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment;	And the patient lies on his face, then extends his chin slightly so that his tongue rests evenly on the part below.
et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	and this is when the fracture breaks through the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	If the fracture is close to the root of the thigh, if one of the tendons below the bulge and the other below the fracture.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval;	And in the same way if it is close to the knee, then either the tendon is detached from the knee, or the lower extension is stretched out;
puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	then put the eye of the bone even with both hands, so that it is in its natural position, and then put on the dressing and bandage, and do not move from this place until it heals
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure;	and if there is excessive swelling, if you leave it calm and come back to your work and your treatment;
li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	the limb is made in a crooked way
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus;	It is proper that you wrap around the armpit, a bend of hair doubled in two or three, and hold the superfluous hair, then stretch the limb until the nails reach the root of the nail, and keep the thread long between the elbow and the limb, from below the elbow to above the wrist;
puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe;	then stretch the limb and the elbow the hair, and put on the bandage, and put on the bandage on the bone of the limb.
puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure;	then use the remaining cloth between the limb and the elbow of soft wool to make it even, and start to bind in three tours or four on the armpit;
et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint;	and the more you go up the armpit, the less you will strain;
puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet;	Then take as I said two fingers that you have placed between the leg and the hip, and join them with three nails that are below, then raise the head of the nails to the foot, as long as you see below the bone.
et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	Then hold it tight, if it does not move from its place, then leave it alone, and do not cause any further bleeding or swelling or anything similar.</start_of_turn>
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois;	And if there is swelling, if the dislocation is addressed, and you address this which has come, as we have said many times.</start_of_turn
et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet;	And if there are pieces of bone that prick, if you cover it well, it will not matter.</start_of_turn
et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer;	And if it will not stay in place, if you must cut the limb and drain it.</start_of_turn
et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the treatment is as we have said, when it is sound.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras;	And never is the limb broken in this way that we set it, as in the shoulder and the arm;
toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	although in the setting that is done it does not please the patient.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en .l. jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And sometimes the bone is restored in a day, or less or more, according to the diversity of complexions.
de la ruelle dou genoil	of the groin area.
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	Hair that in the groin has often burst, but it falls many times.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	And if it breaks, if not a mere tear, or an opening, and there is pain at every wound, and sense of pain, and this is well known.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet;	And the setting is done so that what is round is put back in its place, as long as it is put together firmly
puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant;	then put the bandage on, and put a round cushion in, if you must, and hold it firmly, then reward all the precautions that we have said before, as for cautery and other like that
si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	if there is any other accident that may occur when it is sound
de la brisure de la jambe	And if it is set right, do this: put the rounded peg back in its place until it is well assembled; then put the stuffing in, and put a round pin in if you have need of it, and hold it as it should be held; then restore all the arrangements that we have mentioned before, as for example incisions and other similar things; if you put in every mishap that it should be put in, as long as it is healthy.
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»;	Hair that is on the leg has two bones, of which one is called the right non-muscle and the other is called the fossilized.
et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	And there is often a fracture with the arm, and because of this the restoration is just as it is with an equal arm, and the work is all the same. And if the two bones are fractured together, if the limb is broken throughout.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if a subtle bone is broken, it will twist forward.</start_of_turn>
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien;	And if the big bone is fractured, if one sees great pain, and it is well seen;
et torne desoz.	it breaks apart
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement;	Therefore bring extension, and put it equal, and tie the laces equally;
mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere;	but always if the fracture is serious, and there are many pieces, that the extension be less strong and lighter;
et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	And do likewise according to your skill.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren II faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz;	And when you have finished your work, if you take two strips of cloth that are long enough to circle the limb from hip to knee, and bind them from hip to ankle;
puis envoloupe en II leus I bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien;	then wrap the limb with two bands below and above, and bind them in the middle, and with this binding the limb will not droop to the right or left, and that is good.
et aucun i aministrent I bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie;	and no one should administer any medicine that has a long duration, and if there is cloth, and you put it on the limb to prevent movement, and do it quickly in the fracture or wound
et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident;	and move the limb around to see if there is any other fracture or accident.
si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the wound is clean and healthy.
de la brisure des os dou piet	Of the fracture of bones due to violence.
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle, fracture does not arise; but in bones of violence, fracture never comes alone, and there must be two together; and there is no other cause of death but certainty and fear.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus;	If there are broken bones that are seen to be moving against each other, if you put the limb down on the earth as though it were falling, and then put the limb back onto the ground, where the bones were lifted, then press down until they return to their proper place
puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a II chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	Then place the dressing and bandage on, and put on a small weight on the limb at two fingerbreadths, then support the limb steadily, and when you have bound up the limb with cloth and other things as needed
Et quant .iij. jors ou .iiij. seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when two or three days have passed, if the limb is loose, because you will find the bones equal, whether fractured or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main;	And if there are any broken bones that you have restored, as we have said above;
puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment;	Then set the bone with a pin according to the length of the bone, and make the hole a little wider, and then put on the weight that I mentioned above, and support steadily
et s’il en i a II ou III, ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en I drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet;	And if there are two or three, or more, break [the skin], and put upon each two stitches according to their quantity, covered in one layer of linen, and strain the wound from below the heel.
et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	And keep upon the head of the wound against the belly of the heel if it is held firmly.</start_of_turn>
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit;	Remember also the other things I have said about other breaks, as we have mentioned.</start_of_turn>
et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And treat each case as it should be treated.</start_of_turn
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	of the fracture of the clavicle bone
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier;	When the bones of the nature of a woman are broken, if you make her sit enlarged, then incline towards the back part and be held behind.</start_of_turn
puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto;	Then fill in the belly the nature of the patient's condition, and put in as many as I stop.
puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto;	Then empty the woman, and keep her back and belly firm, and then leap the cotton, as long as it comes to the limit of the nature, and returns the bone with the stop.
et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor:	And when she vomits, if she has grasped the cotton, and when she has vomited, she returns, and thus make seven days or more
si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature;	If she is restored the fracture, and if you see it, take a bladder of rhubarb, and bind it to the belly with a bandage, and squeeze the whole bladder into the nature
puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens:	Then blow in the bandage forms, until the bladder is expelled completely.
la nature si revenra li brisure;	The nature will return the fracture.
puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then fill it with cotton and leave it untouched for days until it heals
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche;	And when the bone of a man or woman is fractured, if you restore it as we have said concerning the thigh bone;
et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	and they are not hidden by those who put their studies and their work into it, and they understand my book.</start_of_turn>
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration:	For the fracture means in many ways the right way of restoration:</start_of_turn>
enten le donques.	except that.</start_of_turn>
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge;	In the limb, when it is fractured, take a gooseberry and hold the limb.</start_of_turn
puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse III jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	Then cover the wound with a cloth, and leave it for three days or until it is healed. And it will be completely healed.
de brisure avec plaie	Of sudden with wound.
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	In the case of sudden fracture with wound, even if it is great, as with the bone of the thigh or the shoulder or the like, that it be set right now, as the symptoms which we have mentioned bear witness.</start_of_turn>
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound is well closed, if the vitriol has been retained, if you have nothing else, then repeat the restoration of the fracture in this way, or that way, for if it does not come, after these measures.</start_of_turn
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if the swelling comes, if you must leave the restoration until the swelling has gone down, as long as the swelling is appeased, and do not touch either the third or the fourth part, for you will otherwise cause a worse accident.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if a bone breaks suddenly, it appears above like a wound discovered, so you must cautiously hold it at a slight extension with your hands.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a VII dois ou VIII de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie;	And if the swelling does not disappear so that you can make your hands even, if the disease has this instrument which is of iron, which is seven or eight inches long, and its size is according to the extent of the wound.
et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne III ou IIII, selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure;	and because of this, when it grasps three or four, according to what is necessary in the bruise of a wound
et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	and be round and somewhat thick, that it does not cause pain in the compression on the limb at your work, and be thick in front, and large from the middle forward, thus:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent;	It is called "palainche", because it must be placed on the head of the visible bone
et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	And the limb has once again, as it returns, and be equal the one meets the other.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And if the break is slight and the instruments cannot firmly grasp the bone, if you must cover the head of the bone, as long as the instruments have possession of it.</start_of_turn
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir;	And if you are unable to restore the limb, as we have said, if you see that the edge of an instrument, or an incision or suture, approaches this, at your peril;
puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	Then restore what is displaced from the bone with rough grasping and little pressure.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	And when the bone is reset, and the patient feels great pain afterwards, it is because the marrow is not in its natural place.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit;	If you do that, then moisten it with black styptic plaster, and hold it in place;
et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption;	and do not put anything on the wound except cerate or anything else that may cause oil, for it will cause putrefaction and corruption
puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure;	Then administer stars when you have restored the limb, and leave the wound uncovered, and bind the covering around the wound, according to the extent of the wound, and take care that the wound is not strained with a fracture
et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois;	And often have I seen that this has happened to fools, that it has caused the patient to become mad or to die or has caused no less damage.
et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	Or it is more flexible and softer than the other breaks.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles;	And if the wound is small or large, and you doubt that the treatment will suffice, as we have said, and you feel pain in the limb, if it does not suffice to put it on stars;
mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	but cover it around with soft cloth, instead of stars, and bind it tightly
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	When you see after one or two days that the swelling has gone down at the wound, if the one you put on previously has fallen off, put on a healing bandage, as with a bandage of four herbs and similar things.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre .ij. fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And it is necessary that you bind the limb three times a day, in the morning and in the evening, until it is healed and sound.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And it is necessary that the limb be supported in a gentle way that the limb can move slightly without causing discomfort
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	If the limb persists, and cannot be reunited at its proper place, because there are small bone fragments, it is necessary that you close the wound with great care, and remove all these fragments which cause pain
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	If a fistula arises in the limb, or other sign of corruption, if it is possible to cure it, according to what is written in this chapter above
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse;	When the bone is broken and is opened on the limb, as the bone of the thigh or the shoulder, and other similar bones of the large limbs, if I do not treat it, for often death comes from this, but I leave it as long as it bleeds
par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues;	By chance, after twenty days or thirty, then cure the wound if you wish.
et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	and if you do not wish, leave it alone.</start_of_turn>
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	Hair that comes out with the scab
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre;	Many times after the brightness of the breeze, even close to the joint, the good thing is to see the shape of the limb.</start_of_turn
et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	and by chance cannot make the limb move naturally.</start_of_turn
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres:	Therefore take care lest it be fresh.</start_of_turn
si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil;	if you administer astringent medicines, such as aloes, incense, and myrrh, and sarcocoll, acacia, and similar things, that you take none of these things, or all together, and mix them with a stiff wine or with egg white or with vinegar.</start_of_turn
et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors;	and puts them on the knot in dumplings, and holds them well, and does not loosen them from the hands for days.
et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee;	and then dislocates it again, and starts another one until the swelling is bony;
ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite;	or you strain on a piece of flesh well made;
car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres;	for the owner of the flesh is that if it is bony all the swellings under the limbs
et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent;	and if the swelling is already converted into hardness as much as stone, and it is necessary to pierce, if the swelling above is large, and make the apparent surplus disappear.
ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	or you leave it without any support, until it is bony, and cure it until it is healed.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	Weak limb after care
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes:	When the fracture has been restored, and remains fixed after the limb is weak and limp, if there is any cause for it:
de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit;	or because it was too tightly bound and was not allowed to move as much as it should have been.
ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre;	or because there were too many bands on it, and it could not move freely.
ou por multitude d’arosement;	or for excessive bruising.
ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre;	or because of too great a movement, which did not suit it
ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	or because there was too much blood in its substance, if the limb is weak.</start_of_turn>
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui;	and the treatment is to give the patient rest and make the limb firm, until the swelling is reduced in it.</start_of_turn>
et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce;	And he gives a bath, and he does rejoice and is merry.
puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre;	Then he puts poultices on the limb, so that the poultices attract at the great nourishment, and the swelling often becomes acute, until the nourishment returns to the limb.
et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	and returns to its natural shape.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	The limb is twisted after the seizure.
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil:	When the limb is twisted after restoration, and the bones are broken open, and the limb is deformed, although it does not lose its natural work
si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre;	since it is not believed that we must break the limb anew, and many have experienced this in our land;
et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors;	these works are blamed, and there comes great evil, and by chance the patient dies
toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses;	Whenever swelling and pain are fresh, if it is caused by hot water, or soft herbs are boiled, like rue malve, and radish, and honey, and similar things;
et li fai I emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus;	and you make an emollient plaster, like aquaint well made, and you take the bruise of rue malve, and confirm it with fat of gelatine or oil of alum, and make plaster over it.
ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	or you take fat figs, and grind them with dung, and similar medicines that appease the swelling.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	And never is the bone loosened by continuous rubbing and length of time with moist hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	Or else be moved to the limb from the armpit hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement;	And if the swelling is thickened and hardened, like stone, and the bone needs to be cauterized, if you cover it just up to the bone, make an incision slightly deeper;
et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And put cushions and study in the treatment.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	And so begins the book of dislocations.
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation comes to no more, if you can now restore the limb to its proper position.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu;	For if one delays, if by chance one should reset it, there will be pain in the limb;
por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez:	because it is painful to move it when it is swollen.
maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors;	causing great swelling and other pains;
toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez;	although when this happens, if you make the patient comfortable, then leave him, until the swelling subsides;
puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	then the limb will grow hot and oily, and move gently, and cure each limb as it comes into its place
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have ordered the chapters concerning dislocations of the shoulder joint to the end.
des mandibules	Des mandibules.
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc II manieres:	When the jaws are loosened and the dislocations are done twice:
ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc;	Or they are a sign of bony lesions of their limbs, and soften a sign.
ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	Or they are completely loosened, and hang towards the side, and cause him to spit out saliva from his mouth that he cannot hold, cannot close his mouth, and engulfs his tongue with speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is small, if it returns by itself in several positions.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie;	And if it is whole and accompanied, if you must certainly hold it firmly, and do not delay me;
et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars;	and in such a way that the minister holds the head of the patient, and look with your eye at the pocket of one of his hands at the root of the dislocation of the jaw in the mouth, if the dislocation is of two parts
et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal;	and the other two hands are displaced, to put them even
et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	And command the patient to soften his teeth, his jaw, and move them all around.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And behold the eye that is beside the pocket, until it returns to its place.</start_of_turn>
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les II mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement;	And if they are gripped, even if both jaws are together, if they arise with hot oil, as long as you keep them slightly soft;
ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	do not force the return, as we have said before.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens;	And when they are returned equally, and the patient’s mouth is closed well with soft pressure, put upon moist cloths soaked in rose oil and wax, then bind them lightly with thread;
et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules;	and keep the patient lying on his back, and his arms resting between two cushions, so that they do not move forwards or backwards, do not attempt to force it, but take hold of the teeth lightly, until the pain is gone, and close the jaws
et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	Then let him swallow what he wants lightly, and do not make him open his mouth to swallow or drink, until his jaw is well oiled and healthy.
Et se les .ij. mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	If the teeth do not return to their place at a single hour, and are not otherwise converted, fever and nausea will ensue, and sometimes vomiting of pure bile.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions;	When you see this, then know that it is a loss;
et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en VIIII jors.	And many times death comes to him who has it, in eight days
de la forcelle	of the forceps.</start_of_turn>
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The forceps cannot grasp deep within without causing displacement, and is worth nothing when removing it, and it is often felt.</start_of_turn
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras;	And the restoration is that the patient lies still on his back, and extends his arms;
et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra;	Then press the limb near your thumb, and it will return
puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint;	Then put on the bandage and bind it well, and restrain it;
et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer;	And whoever is beside the knife must not loosen it
se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit;	Leave it be, and if it slips once, if you keep it in its place as we have said.
puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then put on the support and the bandage, and strain it, and command the patient to rest until he is well;
et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	And the same must be done with the head of the shoulder when it is dislocated from its place
de la dislocation de l’espaule	Of the dislocation of the shoulder.
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres:	This must be done three times in order to restore the shoulder
de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz;	One must grasp the bone at the armpit towards the elbow
et li seconde est a la partie dou pis;	and the third at the base of the shoulder bone
et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc;	and in this way it slips upwards; thus it is done
et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners;	And do not damage my behind for the scapula, and do not damage my insides for the nerves.
et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment;	And many times damage the bones towards the buttocks, even those that have little flesh, because at these leaps there is great suffering;
a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	For those who have enough flesh, these leaps are painful and return painful.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And sometimes there are percussion or fractures, and the shoulder is inflamed by a thick abscess, and care must be taken that it is not dislocated by this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains;	You must therefore suspect it until you are certain
et adonques encomence la cure.	and then begin treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste;	And it is known that a dislocation is when it is tilted towards the buttocks, and you will find between their deviation the difference between the diseased and the healthy limb
et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes;	and at the head of the shoulder there will be a hollow, and the bones of the buttocks will touch the head of the shoulder, as if it were a knot
et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens;	And he cannot move his hand back to its place, neither by any movement.
et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier;	Likewise, if it has been displaced upwards, if not hidden, because you will find it clearly on examination.
et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	And this method of dislocation is not strong enough to return it, when it is new, or when the patient is suffering
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu;	The method is that the physician grasps the painful limb upwards, then puts his thumbs under the armpit, and grasps the joint forcefully upwards at the root
et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz;	The physician grasps the limb and extends it upwards, because he puts it under pressure;
si venra hastanment.	If it comes to pass.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude;	And if it does not come as we have said before, if it is necessary, the patient should be bathed in warm water.
et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree;	and the doctor should administer a soothing and comforting treatment, such as a decoction of alum, fennel and meadowsweet in warm water, and be given to drink.</start_of_turn>
puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide;	then should the patient be laid on their back, and put under the buttock a cushion of linen even, not too soft nor too hard, and put the eye on their thumb on the cushion, and keep the shoulder joint firmly in place, and treat the hand of the patient.</start_of_turn
et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval;	and another assistant should hold the patient’s head still, if it does not move downwards.</start_of_turn
celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere:	the shoulder will be restored immediately, and if you see that it remains dislocated do it in this way:</start_of_turn
et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides;	And it is that you make yourself present at home which is greater than the patient.
et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar;	And be right next to the patient’s side, and hold the patient’s buttocks away from the belly, and keep the belly raised, so that the patient hangs down from the head.
et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	And another attendant should treat the patient’s hand behind the belly
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And if the patient is too weak to bear any weight, if he can manage without anything heavy, the dislocation will return immediately.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere:	And so we must keep it in another way:
et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile;	And it is like holding a long cushion in the earth, from which the head of the shoulder is just as round as a ball, and is neither too thick nor too thin
puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust;	Then put the patient’s hand under the patient’s armpit, but leave a cloth under the patient’s arm, and the patient’s arm should be long from the elbow
puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment;	Then let the patient extend his hand forward from the other side, and the joint will return to its place instantly.
et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure:	and if it does not return by these things that we have mentioned, if you do this cure:
pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	take two thumbs and three fingers wide, which have the head bent inwards to enter under the armpit, like this
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide;	then hold the shoulder firmly wrapped with a bandage so that the patient does not feel pain, and then put it under the armpit of the patient
et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus I eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part:	extend the arms above the shoulder, and hold the shoulder at the arm, and the hand at the head of the hand, and put the hand on the inch of a thumb wide, and let the other hand hang down:
li jointure reva ens maintenant.	The jointure reva ens maintenant.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is restored, in whatever way, if you put on his seat a ball of wool as big as an egg, put on the plaster bandage of powder of wheat, with incense and balm of egg, on the whole shoulder and around, then strain off the seat immediately, and turn the limb on the bandage, and embrace the hand at its collar, and keep the hands still.</start_of_turn>
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost;	And it is necessary to keep it moving until the limb is comfortable, because it will heal more quickly.
et puis menjuce plus aprés V jors ou VII, et le mueve;	then move it again after five or seven days, and move it
et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	and if it is stiff and is not softened, it is healed.</start_of_turn>
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint is forced out of place by moisture or for some other reason, if you can, administer cautery three times over; as is done before or alongside cautery.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés VII jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis;	If you do all of this and it still slips after seven days, and the limb does not hold, and cannot lift the upper arm, then the nerves of the shoulder are compressed or stretched or softened.</start_of_turn
et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	and the dislocation will never be fixed in its place.</start_of_turn>
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure;	The dislocation which is towards the elbow, and the arms, or behind, if it is done by impulse, and extension of hands, and is administered with another support.
et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and cures as long as it is sound.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	If after healing the limb grieves and becomes stiff, if the patient uses the limb many times, until the grief is relieved and returns to its former state.
de la dislocation dou coute	If after healing the limb grieves and becomes stiff, if the patient uses the limb many times, until the grief is relieved and returns to its former state.
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient;	The joints that are loosened by blows are loosened at points, and return at points.</start_of_turn>
et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien;	and are loosened throughout, both front and back, and the dislocation is not remedied, for it is seen and felt well.</start_of_turn
et desalue selonc chescune figure.	and is loosened according to some shape.</start_of_turn
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	And when you join the painful limb with the sound limb, if you see it clearly visible.</start_of_turn>
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	For the joint is dislocated, and cannot bend the arm, touch its shoulder at all.</start_of_turn
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener;	And it is necessary that you first stabilize it before and after the hand is placed back, for if the hand is placed back while the bone is still moving, this would cause great pain to the patient.</start_of_turn
et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier;	And by chance it cannot be brought back at all, even when it is at the back.
si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	It is better than other dislocations, and causes greater pain, and by chance death ensues from it.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes II mains;	When it is restored, if it is like this that we can bring it back, extend your hand with both hands over it
et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	and its arms are spread out, and the hands down towards the navel, with the thumb and little finger bent inward, and hold the joint together with its joints bound together, or at the root of its bone, until it returns to its place
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is in front, if it returns when you double your hand over your hand, and hold from the root of the bone that is loosened.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension;	And if it does not want to return to its place, administer great extension;
et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension;	and two assistants extend the limb and support it with two assistants, so that it does not move at the extension;
puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large;	Then turn the shoulder away from the chest, and when you have enveloped a double-length and wide bandage around it;
et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne;	And when you look at the joint with the hand, if the oil of any kind has been applied to lubricate the joint, then hold the joint together until it returns to its place.</start_of_turn>
et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	And when it is in its place, if you put on dry plaster with egg white, and tighten it, and hold the limb to the chest of the patient, and leave it there for a while, and then take it off.</start_of_turn
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse;	And if the joint is fixed in its place, leave it alone and leave it.</start_of_turn
et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis;	And if you see that the joint does not hold well, repeat the plaster and the bandaging, and leave it like that until it is firmly set.</start_of_turn
puis le deslie.	Then he must be loosened.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez;	And if he feels pain after the resetting of the joint, and it moves, if you bathe and rub gently, and press until it is eased;
ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain;	or you put on the joint a fat mutton marrow nail, then leave it in for a day and a night, then the bone, and let it enter or bathe;
et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain;	and when it sweats, you wipe the joint gently, then put the nail back on, and then enter or bathe.
et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and do this two or three times, until it is healed.
et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus;	and if you see, put upon a moist foulard soaked in urine, and strain over it;
si revenra a sa disposition.	If it returns to its place.
li dislocation de la main	The dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures.	The joint of the limb is loosened, and the return is easy, more than the others.
Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	However, it is necessary to reattach it immediately while it is loosened, even if there is swelling or if there is an opening
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne.	And it must be repositioned if you place the affected limb on a table, extend the limb, and look at it so that it rests with the palm against the surface of the joint, and hold it until it returns
Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu;	However, note that you must watch if it is truly back in place;
adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	Then put the patient’s hand on a table at extension and flexion
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	And if the dislocation is at the back of the hand, let the patient place the back of his hand on the table, and I will look and put his hand on the appearance of the joint.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien.	If it returns now, that is good.
Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If not, if the strain of supporting muscles relaxes after the incisions, and you leave it in its place, let it return naturally.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte;	And if it cannot bear it, and you do not wish to put it back in place after some days, the joint will become stiff
et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout:	and causes no further pain for the patient as long as the limb is soft, and cannot move anything at all
adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere;	therefore if nerves or arteries are cut.
si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	if there is no other remedy except to drain by cutting with fire, this case is not worth anything.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse .v. jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	When the hand is at rest, if you put on the bandage which we mentioned earlier, then strain and leave it for three days, then remove it and leave it be.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it does not move well and there is no pain, if the swelling is of warm water, and you rub it until it is healed
de la dislocation des dois de la main	of the dislocation of the shoulder of the hand.
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre;	Sometimes the forearm must be drained downwards, sometimes at the back of the palm or belly;
adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins;	Therefore, hold the shoulder firmly, and keep the dislocation in your pouches until it returns, then support the head of the shoulder, and bring it towards the part where it is joined.
et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor;	Leave it for two days, and then put it even again;
et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut;	And do not bind it, as we have said, but leave it loose, and let it move freely, and bind it again.
et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Do this often, until it is straightened, and do the same if it is loosened at the root of the arm, doing as you have done before, until it is healed;
et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	And do the same in any other case.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	From the loosening of the shoulder joint at the back.
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the shoulder or neck joint is loosened, or there are several such loosenings, if no cure is found, for the patient’s death is imminent.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I.	If the signs are that the blood vessels flow in the opposite direction, do not hold it, for many times it is softened in no limb, or the two thighs or two arms or one foot.
Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars;	And many times it moves the scapula to its three parts.
celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»:	that which moves at the back is called "gilbositez".
li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance:	the cure is that if it comes from childhood:
si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	if there is no cure or healing for all that
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit;	and that which comes from fear or percussion or similar things, say the old physicians in great words, or there is no benefit at all;
mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	but I have abbreviated it according to my intention, and I have made instruments in various ways
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit;	I say that in the scapula that comes before the elbow, there is no healing at all
et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis;	And thus also when it comes directly from two sides, and one cannot cure the fever except for that which comes from behind, as I have said.
et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece;	And that the patient is stretched out on his face in one league even, and has strained his eyes from him, that they do not close.
puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles;	Then take I cushion at the head in the earth forms, and I another has pieces, and I bind one limb outside the patient’s buttocks, and I another has haunches, and has knees, and has ankles;
et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons;	and two ministers know the strings, one at the head and the other at the pieces, among the two cushions
et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	and be well closed, the cushion as we have said, and the patient puts his palms on the spine forms, until it returns.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee;	And if it does not return with this treatment, take a thumb three fingers long, and hold the skin taut over the part, and let the patient lie on their side, and hold the head of the thumb taut over the part, then put the middle of the thumb over the spinous process.
et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu;	put the thumbs side by side over the other head of the thumb, and press firmly, until it returns to its place.
et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	and if you see that it is fractured at the wrist, do it at the nut that turns at the hand.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc;	And put two stitches at the head of the patient’s arm from a great hand, and over the pieces two others, and have between each stitch, a suture and a piece of cloth, a palm of spice long;
et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent;	And every time a tick is pierced, or the thorn is twisted, and the hairs remain firmly in the earth, if they do not move.
et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet;	And between two hairs there is one hair that has twisted, so that the thread that has twisted is twice that of one palm of its length, because of the thorn.
et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	Then the thread which is among the armpits towards the thorn at the head, and the other thread towards the pieces towards the other thorn, and the hairs of the servants twist their thorn at the whole thread, and the master puts the thorn even as we have said
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And when it is even, put on a dry dressing with a lot of eggs, and then press, and then support with a tablet of three fingers’ length, which covers the area of the swelling and the sensitive part of the spine, and then bind with a thread, as we have said, and use the patient some nourishing herbs until they are healed
et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant;	And if nothing comes to an end of the sickness, if it is necessary, administer soothing and calming medicines, with the exception that we have mentioned before.
et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations;	And never administer on a piece of lead, and never does its appearance appear behind the shoulder bone at the back, and take care that this is not a dislocation.
et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption:	And it is the bone that opens, for which we must not presume
par aventure feroit venir la mort.	because of this there may come death.
des dislocations de la hainche	Dislocations of the shoulder
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures;	The joints of the thigh and the shoulder only come loose with dislocations, not as with others
et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc IIII parties:	and the joint of the thigh is loosened in three parts:
dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier;	Within and outside, before and behind;
et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	More inward it goes, the more it swells outside; and more inward it comes, the more it unvalues before and behind.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu;	And the knowledge of its dislocation inward is that when you join the painful limb with the flesh, if it is longer, and opens more the patient’s joints than the known, and cannot double his elbow at the fire;
et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	And this is the cause of the displacement of the shoulder socket from its place, because the head of the humerus comes loose from its socket
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of the one who comes to the rescue, if it is that this accident is contrary to those mentioned above.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement;	And the signs of that which happens in front, if it is well supported, are that the limb is well placed according to the completion;
toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	Thus do not double the elbow in pain, and if you see it happen, do not do it again, but retain the urine, and swell the groin, and when he goes, it passes over the heel
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the sign of the one who comes to the rescue, if it is that he cannot extend his knee, cannot double it, and that this limb is shorter than the other, and the ankle is softened, and the shoulder is dislocated at the root of the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure;	When this semblance of dislocation is repeated, if it is an ancient dislocation and remains fixed according to its nature, there is no cure.
et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	and I do not know that there is any presumption.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des IIII manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre;	And in such cases where the dislocation is fresh, and there are three ways of dislocation, if you hurry to rejoin the limb, and stretch it inwards and outwards, and move it to the right and left;
par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	it will return by itself, and there is no need for any other cure.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil;	And if it does not return in this way, if you must, apply four strong fingers, and stretch the limb with two hands, or with one hand that is bound to the groin
et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe;	And another minister extends his hand downwards almost as far as his elbows, then grasps with a loop of thread the hair on the buttock;
et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien;	and another holds the head of the thread there.
et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	and extends upwards and downwards together until the patient is lifted from the ground at once, and remains suspended
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as .iiij. semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This method of extension is often used as in three similar cases, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is well.</start_of_turn>
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance.	If not, if you must put an antidote for its appearance
Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele;	When the dislocation is loosened, if you must that the patient rest on his chest, then put the thread on the root of the buttock, and the limb which is below the ankle, then stretch the thread upwards towards the ankle, and downwards towards the heel
puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment:	Then take another assistant and grasp the great head of the shoulder of the ailing person, and extend it towards the front.
si revenra a son leu maintenant;	if it returns to its place now;
et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	and this method of dislocation is lighter than the others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres;	And if you do not tighten it in this method as we have said, if you must, bind the two feet of the patient together with a strong thread over the two toes and over the two knees, and let the limb be extended two fingers more than the others
puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc;	then either suspend it above the head of a pole, or on the ground two long arms;
puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	and command one minister to grasp the head of the shoulder, and that another minister hangs alongside the patient, who graspes the shoulder, because the joint is now coming back together quickly
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi;	And when the dislocation is urgent, if the patient is conscious, as we said in the case of gout, and is strangulated by the limb on the painful side and on the thigh also.
puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme;	then put two fingers, one at the head and the other at the toe, and grasp the thumb between the thighs of the patient as in the shape of a cross
et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	and lay moist towels around, so that it does not bleed the patient, then extend the thumbs and the ministering hands towards him, and I look with my eyes that the dislocation is even with his hand.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	If it comes back, it is well.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If not, put on the table as we have said in the previous instruction, and press on it with our hands as we have said, and keep the patient lying on the edge of the table.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit;	And when the dislocation is before, if it is possible to extend the painful limb immediately, and as I have said;
et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	put your eyes on the painful area above the limb, and press with the other hand, and extend towards the groin.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches;	And if the dislocation is upwards, if it is not possible to extend the patient horizontally, do not lift them up from the earth, but rather keep them as they were when they were dislocated upwards, as we have said above concerning the two fingers.
et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table;	And either hold their face, and the limb is extended as we have said before, and must press on the joint at the table.
et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz;	It will be known when the patient extends their limb, and they will be even;
adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve;	Then join the thighs, put the cushion in, and strain with a bandage, so that the limb does not move;
et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus;	And rest for three days or four, then loosen, and put the cushion back on
et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors;	If you see that they are even, if strained, as before, leave them for three days.
puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	Then loosen it, and leave it alone until the limb is comfortable.</start_of_turn>
de la dislocation dou genoil	of dislocation of the shoulder
Li genous est desaluez selonc III manieres:	The shoulder is loosened in three ways:
c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier;	namely, by pushing inwards and outwards, and backwards.</start_of_turn>
et ne desalue point devant.	Do not pull forward.</start_of_turn>
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez;	And the sign is that you order the patient to bend their limb at their hip, and if they do not rise to their hip, their limb is loosened.</start_of_turn
et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez;	Then restore them all if you make the patient sit upright, and extend their limb if they can, and put your hand behind their back and put their hand on your knees.</start_of_turn
puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment;	Then take your thumb and spread your palms apart, then fold in the two ribs of your thumb forming;
et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement;	And another minister extends his finger, as long as the thumb returns to its place, and the sign is that it has firmly grasped its limb slightly
et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie;	and put the dressing on, and make the limb move towards the thigh, and bind them together firmly for three days or four, and then take it off
et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	and do not move the patient any more, until the limb is comfortable.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	And if the limb is not at a point, if the dosage is strong, as we said in the treatment of the hernia, until it is healed.
de la dislocation dou talon	of dislocation.
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The talons never is esteemed, neither fully dislocated, but always partially.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee:	And the sign is that the ankle is swollen, and try before at the part where it is devalued:
li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	it must be gently returned, and it must be gently extended with the hands when it is only slightly swollen
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville;	And when he is completely drained, if you order the patient to sit upright, and hold him firmly by the leg under the ankle;
puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut;	then take hold of his foot with your right hand, and then with your left hand twice, and then extend it upwards, and hold it firmly in place;
et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet;	do it twice as we have said, with a slight pull and stretching the foot.
s’elle revient, c’est bien;	if it returns, it is well done.
se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient;	otherwise, start the work again, for it will return.</start_of_turn>
et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide;	and if it cannot return, order the patient to lie on his back on the earth, and fix his heel firmly on the ground between his thighs, and cover him with a blanket, so that he does not move the patient.</start_of_turn>
puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet;	Then grasp the limb with the minister, and another minister extends the thumb of his hand or on the wrist, which lies on the collar of the limb.
puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent;	Then extend the fingers of the ministers equally, and grasp either above or below the limb between the joints of the patient to hold the patient when stretching
puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	Then place the thumbs equally on the dislocation with the hands, and another minister grasps the limb firmly at the shoulder, and the dislocation will return immediately.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois;	And when it has settled, if you put on the plaster and stamp on it, and strain it, and grasp the thumb to the limb, and hold the nerves that are above the ankle behind, so that they do not stretch too much
puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain;	Then leave it for two or three days, and if the limb is comfortable, if the strain is gone
puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors;	Then loosen the third or fourth rib, and tell the patient to abstain from food for three days.
et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	and if he goes before this end, it is not certain that he will not vomit again.</start_of_turn>
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If he persists thus, if you must restrain him, as we have mentioned elsewhere, until he is well.
des dois	then.
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the bones are dislocated, if you can extend the limb well, it is a light thing.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne;	And if the dislocation is not in the buttocks or at the hips, if you must make the patient sit on one leg or on the ground, with the limb resting on what is open from these joints, then press on the limb until it returns.</start_of_turn
et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie;	When it is equal, and there is no opening, if you put on the limb a stool two fingers wide, then press until it is strained, and leave it for three days, then loosen it.</start_of_turn
et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And rest it until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	This excerpt describes various medical procedures, including cautery for hair removal, treatment of dislocations and bleeding, and setting of dislocated shoulders.
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert:	When a wound accompanies the dislocation, and it is seen to restore itself, many times it happens that the patient dies.
si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis;	If you are not cautious in the treatment, and if you are not skilled in the art and have not used it for a long time, and if you are not merciful, compassionate, and timely, do not attempt it;
et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit;	and at the beginning of the treatment, use calmants and stay with the patient, until you see hope of healing;
et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne;	and when you see hope, if you now reset the limb in its place, and the abscesses have vanished;
et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis;	and when the limb is set, if you administer calming poultices and treat the wound, as it is fitting, with desiccant poultices.
et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples;	And if with the dislocation there is a break, and the bones are loosened, if the bones, do as we have said in simple ailments.
et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	And keep away from danger, as I have said, for this will bring you misfortune according to your Creator, and for the safety of your arm and body.
