O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	O ye, most dear sons, I have completed this book which is the end of the science of medicine, embracing its applications and terminating with its demonstrations and pronouncements.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it has come to my notice that I should accompany this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, namely surgery
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of hands is rare in our region and is strange to all, if it is omitted from the science and left out, only the small descriptions of the ancients remain in books that the hands have done.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this comes the error and the emptiness, and the closures of the understandings and the displacement of the science.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	Or I seem to recall that I may restore life together with the arrangement of this physician according to the mode of exposure and declaration and abbreviation; and I shall bring together the forms of the instruments of cautery, and the other instruments of the work with the arrangement of the declaration and preparation of it, as is proper
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And it is proper that he who interferes should learn in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, as long as he grasps the judgment of members, and the forms and the joints and the separations of these, and knows the bones and nerves and limbs and the number of bones, and the movement of veins and the resting of them.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And thus Hippocrates teaches us that one must not fear the unknown, for with work comes reward; and the same in the art of healing.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	We must say at the outset of this book that whoever is not acquainted with the things to be learned is often led astray by fear and scorns the homes; just as I have often seen more of these things which are interwoven with this science than those which depart from it and from sense.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa .i. apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	For I have seen a foolish man who, when he has opened an abscess or the head of a woman, has so bled that the woman died between his hands.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens .iij. jors.	And thus there is another case which treats a stone of a bladder of a pig, and the stone was great; it carried away with it a piece of the bladder, and remained in the hon [bladder] for two days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	I have already been called to treat this case, and I saw the condition of the patient and the greatness of the stone, and indeed if it were to be pulled out, it would surely kill him.</start_of_turn>
Et vis .i. autre mire qui prist en cure .i. duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi .i. termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And thus there is another case which treats a duke from our land who had a broken limb, and with the bandage it caused a wound; and the physicians of this place constrain the fracture above the wound as these stars are by strong ligament, and do not allow any blood to come out, and leave it thus until the limb is whole; and they command that it not be moved; and when the limb is whole and the piece is gone, it is lost forever.</start_of_turn>
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I am ordered to come to him, and I hasten to come to loosen the limb; and when I see it dislocated, it is without pain and without feeling any discomfort.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	But every way the corruption is already confirmed or the limb is unsound, and I cannot heal it; and it continues to displace until the limb is entirely lost
Et vis .i. autre mire qui effondra .i. apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And thus another sign which makes the swelling worse is that it bites and stings, and then becomes inflamed by the malice of its lord.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For a wound that is infected with melancholic humours, I do not know that it can be cured except by touching it with fire so long as anything corrupted can be removed from it.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en .ij. divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And thus, know well, that the work of the hands has become divided into thirteen parts: that is to say, there is peril in many things; and I shall show in each chapter where there is doubt and peril.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	For you must certainly guard your arms, lest the fools speak abusively of you. If you take up your arms in custody, and undertake your patients lightly and firmly, and use the better way if by the grace of God you reach salvation and be healed; and leave the fearful diseases of grief behind; and keep your arms from that which makes you doubt, and believe that you will reach from this world to the next in glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	He speaks at length of his admonitions: "Do not take me for a healer of every ailment, for I am called a fool.
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	I have devised this treatise in three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapter deals with fire cautery and medicine, and the chapter orders from the head down; and forms of instruments, and instruments of cautery, and everything necessary for the work
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapter deals with amputation and incision, and abscesses and wounds, and the extraction of arrows, and cutting into stones, and similar things; and the chapter orders and the forms of instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapter deals with restoring dislocations and fractures, and similar matters; and it orders the lord chief justice to bring the instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Just as we recalled from the work, it is proper to say the quality of the aid and the gentleness of complexion
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the quality of the aid and the gentleness are the longest words and the most subtle science and the greatest secret; and about this there are many sayings, and they agree on this; and I am silent about their words, because I fear their length.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que .ij. complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that the fire cautery helps universally for any complexion or matter, because there are two complexions: that is to say a complexion hot in matter, and a complexion dry in matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In complexion chaude et seche, mixed with matter, some say that cautery is a great aid; others say that cautery is of no avail for disease except when it comes from heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	For indeed the nature of fire is hot, and should not be a cure for fiery diseases by heat, nor from dryness; thus those who say the opposite that cautery does great aid to fiery and dry diseases that arise from the humors of the body
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you compare the body and its moisture to the complexion of fire, you find the body cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this statement.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have never found it to be otherwise by experience
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And every way, no fire has come between me and fury except that which has experienced it, and which knows by long experience the chapter of cauteries, and the diversity of the complexion of men, and the dispositions and causes of their illnesses, and the issues and the space of their pains; for other temperaments we have no fear, even in cold and moist diseases.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all of them are settled and agree with the cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know this, child, that cautery with fire is more effective for secret healing than burning cautery.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For fire is simple, and comes only from the member that is being cauterized, and does no harm to any other member except its name.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	Arising from one member to another, medicines cause various diseases of grief to vanish; and by chance, the patient. The fire due to its height and the goodness of its substance does not make me do this, unless there is superfluousness.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	And this I have learned through experience and the length of my service and study in this art, and it is based on truth; and for this reason I apologize for the length of my words, for it does not please me to hide the secret which is returned or fire, and the quality of this work, as it demonstrates the healing of diseases of the body, as the philosopher demonstrates; or you may consider it in your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	Know this, son, that it is necessary to apply the cautery at the proper tension and without haste.</start_of_turn>
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	I say that the cautery is useful in all tensions, for the harmful effects that result from it are driven away by the action of the cautery; and even though the cautery is for necessary pains that are violent and urgent, which cannot await the tension of a greater harm to the limb.</start_of_turn>
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And think not, dear son, if like madmen they make; for the disease which is cured by cautery has no return; and he says thus; but it is not so easy, for cautery is but a medicine which moves the complexion, and dries up the humors which are the cause of the pain, and is worth more than medicine for its haste of value, and for the excellence of its work and its lordship.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	And indeed, it is known that the disease does not come once according to the complexion of the patient and the cause of the disease and its virtue; and are assembled in him the superfluities by the acquisition of food and other things, if these cauteries are administered in place or if there is little excess of superfluity and moisture, as with dense cautery for pain, and other things, and part of the pain does not return again; but this is often the case.</start_of_turn>
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And many people do not understand that cautery is not called medicine, and it is seen; but they do not believe that cautery is worth more than medicine, but their understanding is false, and it is cautery that is behind medicine because whenever we administer remedies for any disease and they do not work, we then administer the cautery, and it is worth more.</start_of_turn>
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Therefore although cautery is at the back of medicine, it does not go against the intention of wise men.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	The ancients say that gold cautery is more subtle than iron, and they do not say that fire is better, but only by the quality of the gold and its fineness; and they say that the leaves of gold do not burn, but this is not true, for I have seen it happen in many people; and gold cautery is worth as much as iron, as they say.</start_of_turn>
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	And indeed when you burn the instrument of gold, you do not know how much it is charred by the color of the gold, and when it has cooled; and if you burn it too much, it will be charred by the fire; and there will be enough hindrance.</start_of_turn>
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And for this reason we use our fire cautery, as we have often observed in our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	Or you have ordered this chapter from the head down to the feet, because in this way it is easier to see it
dou cautere olivaire	the olive cautery.
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	These cauteries are useful for moisture and cold on the brain, and there are two things that cause them: a disease called “soda,” and many humors that descend from the head causing swelling of the eyes, ears, and the like.  There are also many dreams and pains of the teeth and throat, and even many diseases that come from the cold, such as paralysis, soda, apoplexy, and similar diseases.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief .iij. nuis ou .iiij., selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The form of this cautery is that the patient be purged with a medicinal solution modifying the head, either twice or thrice, according to what is useful and agreeable and accustomed to the patient; and then repeat the head of the patient.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses .ij. eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	And then make him sit comfortably between your hands, and put his hands under his belly; after that put the root of your thumb on the root of his elbow between his two fingers; and there or will come your two means, if it bleeds from the inside then evacuate the cautery which is called "olive", for this is the form:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os .i. sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren .i. poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse .iij. jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	And take out the sign of ink, and make descending and extracting your hand back and forth; then keep your hand steadily, and renew the cautery until you see the bone somewhat; and if you do not see it, continue the cautery until you see the bone as I have told you; after that take up one-tenth of a spoonful of aloe, and put it on and cover with cotton wool, and take out the wound, and leave it for two days; after that put on a soft dressing.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And the elders say, the more time the wound is left open, the more it purges; and for this reason it is useful to apply pressure.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And the elders say, one must not leave the burn cautery on for too long, lest part of the bone should burn; then one must rese that which is around the bone, and it must be healed.</start_of_turn>
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme .i. vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And the elders say, one must not leave the burn cautery on for too long, lest part of the bone should burn; then one must rese that which is around the bone, and it must be healed.  One must also keep the wound open for a long time; after this it must be cured and dressed.</start_of_turn
Et ces .ij. manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And these two methods of cautery do not seem to me to be of any benefit in all bones, except in certain homes or where there is doubt; and I believe that I must leave it alone; for the head of the shoulder is easily damaged by continuous solutions of nature, as we have witnessed in other limbs; and even when the patient’s condition is feeble by nature, the first semblance of cautery is more effective and gentler for me, and for this reason I will abstain from it.</start_of_turn
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	From the ancient pain of the head.
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	When throughout the head there is chronic pain that lasts a long time, the patient must be given rest and drugs that are called «cochie», and vomiting of the head and oil and poultices; and if we make the cautery as we have said before, it is of no use.</start_of_turn>
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Take care that if the patient’s ailment is of great nature, and that it is not too painful; then the cautery should be made as we have said previously.</start_of_turn
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai .i. cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est .i. leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	After having made the cautery on the bone of the head as we have said, and having made the cautery of the vein which is called the «vasselz», which is under the skin where we put the sponges; keep your hand still so that you do not see blood until you reach the bone: the patient feels much more pain in this cautery than in others, and I will speak of it later; and it is better that the cautery be made on the corners than on the middle of the head, for this is the form:
dou cautere dou chief	Dou cautere dou chief.
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc .ij. manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When in a part of the shoulder there is sudden pain, and the disease is prolonged, and the head of the shoulder is expelled by means of medicines, and other treatments have been made as I have said in the division of diseases, and all this has availed nothing: then make cautery as I have said before, namely by means of medicine and fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope .i. poc as .ij. chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi .xij. houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi .ij. jors ou .iij.; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	The cautery of medicine is like this: if you take a dose of alum, and burn the skin and cover it. If there are two bones, then do the temple or the place where the pain remains in order to be able to reattach the dose of alum to the skin; and when it is reattached, if you bind and constrain it well and leave it for .xij. hours; and then take it off and treat the wound for .ij. days or .iij.; and put on a bandage as before until the swelling subsides.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the cure of inflammation while it is still sound; and if you see that you must do something of these remedies that I have written or dose to treat these remedies.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	The fire cautery is as it is commanded in this manner.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Leave the hair long and even for the fire cautery; if you prick them at the root, hold the eyes steady until they grow.</start_of_turn>
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait .i. poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And it is called "closed" because its head is made in the shape of a hook or with a slight curve, and in the middle there is a small projection; grasp the painful area and hold your hand firmly, until half of the thickness of the hair is burned; and keep your hand steady so that the artery does not burn, which is dangerous, and discharge abundance of blood.</start_of_turn>
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par .iij. jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	After putting on cotton wool around the area, take out the limb by two days; then put on moist cotton wool again, and finally cure the limb of inflammation until it is sound; and if you cauterize this hernia with the cautery which is called "cultellare", at the point, and keep it covered over the artery in this hernia which is not ancient.
de emigraine	De Emigraine.
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	When the armpit is cauterized as we have previously mentioned in the discussion of diseases, and it does not yield, and you see that the burn precedes the medicine and does not suffice, then it is necessary to abandon the cautery which is called the "knife" while it is still soft; and sign the limb with a line half an inch long, and hold the hand once, and strain that you do not cover the artery and that life does not depart until the bone; and be careful of the jaw that is mute when you move it, and that the blood does not clot except for the spasm and tension that arise from the disease; and be careful of excessive bleeding from the artery when it is cauterized, or from the cautery itself which often causes great pain and even to those who are unskilled and inexperienced. And leave the work in peace; but I will tell you later how to retain the blood when the artery is cauterized, and I will show you where it is written in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait .ij. coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	And if you see that this cautery does not suffice for the disease, and the patient is suffering, cauterize the area around the chief as we have said, and treat the wound until it is healed; and if you see that this is not enough, administer the cautery that we have mentioned or the chapter on the extraction of the artery, with the cautery that has three needles. This latter cautery is better and more effective than the former
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	From the cold of the ears to the part of the head.
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When pain arises from cold in the ears, and we have applied various medicines and other cures as mentioned earlier, and the pain persists, then withdraw this cautery which is called "poins," for this is its form:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les .ij. se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait .x. poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After having cauterized around the painful ear, or around the root of the ear if the pain persists, grasp the earlobe from the root and pull it outwards until the bleeding stops; and there should be ten cauteries around the ear; then cure the wound when it is healed.
de la torture de la bouche	From the torture of the mouth.
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	Torture that must be cured by cautery is not fierce except for those that move from phlegm, as we have said in the division of diseases; and do not make any cautery that resembles that which comes from drying and swelling of nerves.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de .iij. cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des .ij. levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When you cure this semblance of torture that moves from hydropic swelling and vomiting of the head and hiccuping, and this is not worth it, then you must cauterize the patient with two cauteries: one at the root of the ear, and the other a little below the temple, and the third between the two eyebrows; and put the cautery on the part that is open without causing excessive damage, and cauterize the area under the chief of the ear below a little of the cartilage of the ear, and another at the temple as long as a bean; and leave the cautery on for as long as half of the current is burned; this is the form of the cautery.
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And this is the semblance of the burn that we put before you, but it is a more subtle and effective cautery than the knife, because it is a deeper incision; after curing like this as I have said, as long as it is sound.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai .iiij. cauteres: .ij. sus les .ij. cornes dou chief, et .i. emmi le chief, et .i. ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When apoplexia is ancient and you cure it as we have said, and it does not profit, and the patient does not have a fever, then you make three cauteries: two on the two corners of the head, one in the middle of the head, and one where it is called "vasselz" as we have previously said; and the last cauterization is on the mouth of the stomach; and it is cured as we have previously said.
de litargie	When apoplexia is ancient and you cure it as we have said, and it does not profit, and the patient does not have a fever, then you make three cauteries: two on the two corners of the head, one in the middle of the head, and one where it is called "vasselz" as we have previously said; and the last cauterization is on the mouth of the stomach; and it is cured as we have previously said.
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	When this disease is present, it is necessary to give the patient large doses of urine and medicinal pills that modify the brain; after that, raise the head of the patient all the way up, and put on the occiput the plaster of sinapis which is written or treat with poultices; and this is the manner of cautery: as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai .iij. cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere .i. doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai .i. cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, .ij. autres sus les .ij. cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If he is sane at the start, it is well; and if he is not, two cauteries must be made upon the head, descending to the collar, and there must be space between each cautery of one hand's breadth; and the cure must be as with the others. And if you see that the patient is suffering, and the patient is fainting, make one cautery in the middle; and if the patient is in pain, make two further on the two horns, and cure until he is sane. And let the cautery which is called "olive" be as I have said before.
de la froidor dou chief	If he is sane at the start, it is well; and if he is not, two cauteries must be made upon the head, descending to the collar, and there must be space between each cautery of one hand's breadth; and the cure must be as with the others. And if you see that the patient is suffering, and the patient is fainting, make one cautery in the middle; and if the patient is in pain, make two further on the two horns, and cure until he is sane. And let the cautery which is called "olive" be as I have said before. For from the cold of the head...
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et .i. derrier et .iij. sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai .iiij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	It is necessary that the head be made limp with herbs and what we have said before; after which the head of the patient is to be raised, and then make the cautery upon the head and upon some horn, and one behind and two upon the spine of the collar; and if there is more need, and the limb is moist and the patient is fainting, and the disease is strong, make three cauteries upon the spine of the back; and leave it until more than four fingers are gone, and hold your hand; after which cure until he is sane, and let the cautery which is called "olive" be as we have said before.
de l’epilempsie	Of epilepsy.
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	Epileptics must not use fire cautery except when the patient is feverish; and it is first necessary to modify the brain by herbs and other cures that we have mentioned in the preceding chapter when the patient is great and suffering from great pain requiring medical attention.</start_of_turn>
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai .i. cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et .i. cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if it is a young child who cannot endure suffering, make him gargle and chew modifying the brain often with bones of meat; then take the head and make a wound in the middle, and make .i. cautery as we have said before, and .i. cautery on the vein and on the spleen; and if the patient is strong and suffering, make cauteries as we have said to those who have paralysis and softening of bones, on the spine of the back and neck, or let the olive cautery proceed as we have said.</start_of_turn
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai .i. cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is a child, make .i. cautery superficially as follows:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When melancholy is the cause, superficial humours or corrupted moisture and large phlegm, then we must cauterize with some of the cauteries as we have said for those who have paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And when melancholy is the cause, if the superficial humour is declining towards melancholy and the patient is moist with moisture, then we must give him something to drink to moisten the brain, as is seen in the division
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai .i. torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com .i. cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After that, take the patient’s head; then make a circle of lint about the head well-made, as for a circle; put it on the patient’s head; the patient should lie crosswise, and be well held from all sides; then bring the circle over the head and put on a bandage of elderberry juice; and burn the fire moderately, so that it should not be able to cause him pain; after that, empty the circle from the head and let it cool; do this to the patient once every week with another good treatment, until he is healed.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	For in this work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things.</start_of_turn
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	This method of cautery makes the brain swell immediately; then put on a wet cloth in butter and grease with gelatine.</start_of_turn
de l’awe des eulz	Or if you see the hair cauterized in making many pricks throughout the burn. This manner of cautery somewhat soothes the brain; then put on moist cotton wool in the burn and grease with gelline.
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When awe comes first, as signs that I have said in the division, then begin and do give the patient something to drink which will temper the head, and guard against all moisture, and cause him to sweat or bathe several times on an empty stomach.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as .ij. eulz ensamble, ou en .i. se li dessendemens est en .i.; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	After you have commanded him to rest his head, and you have cauterized the head, and you have made three cauteries on the two temples if the head has descended from the awe, or two if it has descended only slightly; and you should cauterize all the veins and arteries that are below the shoulder, and make the cauteries long according to the width of the temple; and guard against excessive bleeding, and if you see too much blood issuing, if there is a danger of infection as you have.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les .ij. os derrier.	And I shall teach you concerning the extraction of arteries and the incision of the cautery how you shall extend it; and in no way shall you make the cautery or cautery oil touch the marrow of the last three bones behind.
dou cors des larmes	And I shall teach you concerning the extraction of arteries and the incision of the cautery how you shall extend it; and in no way shall you make the cautery or cautery oil touch the marrow of the last three bones behind.
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: .i. cautere emmi le chief, et .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples, et .ij. cauteres ou haiterel desoz les .ij. os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout .i. petit cautere.	When the tears of the eyes are old and accustomed and are on the veins, or if you cut the arteries that are in appearance like wounds of the chief of the forhead; and you see that these are cold fleumatic superfluities, then you must make the cautery as I said at the beginning of this section: that is, cauterize the chief and two cauteries on the two temples and two cauteries or cautery oil on the marrow of the three bones; and if necessary, if there is swelling below the eye, make a small cautery there.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	Pain au corps des larmes par dedens les yeux.
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide .iij. nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai .ij. cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les .ij. sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you have treated the patient as we have said in the previous division, and it does not help, then give the patient two drinks of wine; after that, raise the head and do cautery or a mild cautery of olive oil; and make three cauteries of the cautery which is called "claw" on the three nipples, two below the armpits; and be careful not to touch the artery that you are working on.</start_of_turn>
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	This is the form of the cautery which is called "claw":</start_of_turn
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	When the shoulder bone is softened by disease and moisture, then the cautery of this cautery which is called “olivare”.</start_of_turn
de coi ci est li forme:	The fire cautery is as it is commanded in this manner.</start_of_turn>
Et se tu vues si fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you see that you must perform two cauteries on the two nipples which are as long as the nipples are; do not hold the hand but until the third part of the areola has been burned, as I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	And if you see that you must perform two cauteries on the two nipples which are as long as the nipples are; do not hold the hand but until the third part of the areola has been burned, as I have said.
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	Never have I seen that the hair of the oil has been converted into ointment, and pricks the oil, and makes cauteries in two ways: that is to say of fire, or burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they grow and are even, then command the patient to keep the hair long; afterwards mark on the edge of the hair a figure as big as a mustard seed or the beginning of a bristle; then put a moist cloth on the oil and a little ointment on the hair, and cover the cautery as follows:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi .iij. jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After cautering at the mark that you have made, and doing this several times, until the hair curls up to the root; and the sign of the work is that the hair retreats from the oil, and the hair stands up at the root; then hold your hand there, and leave it for two days; then put a moist cloth on the wound until the scab has hardened; afterwards cure the wound until it is healed.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	If after this the hair comes away, and the papere is softened, then renew the fire on this same place as you did before; and if the hair is burnt, burn the papere until it returns to its natural state, and is even, and do not prick the hair with the oil.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en .i. oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en .i., et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse .i. poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The burning cautery of medicine is that you command the patient to let the hair grow large and even, then make a parchment like the shape of the laurel leaf; then take French soap and live salt, each a third, and grind them together well; and make it boil rapidly, if it does not freeze, then apply it upon the shape that you have made like the laurel leaf, and put on the papere eggs; and if the patient holds in one oil only, if you must open in one, and if in both; and put on the cotton oil soaked in egg white. And let the patient's arm be steady and put your hand showing on the medicine, and press it once and let it move every time the patient feels a biting of the medicine, for he feels a biting like of fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done this for a while, if the medicine has reached your hand.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	When the biting [of an animal] has passed, if you lift the limb up, and you see the wound raised just as high as if it had been raised by the contraction of fire or by incision; and if it is firm, it is well.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If this is not the case, if you repeat the medicine on the limb or the medicine has not worked, as long as your wounds are even and your eyes are fixed; then put on a wet compress on the wound until the boils have disappeared, and then cure the wound which is called the «dyafenis» and others, until they are healed.</start_of_turn>
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	And if you are well protected at your wound with great care that it does not bleed, there is no need for any medicine anymore.</start_of_turn>
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	If the patient’s pain becomes milder afterward, and the hair prick at their base, if the medicine is recommenced as before on that part which is softened by the pain, then treat as before until it is healed; for this is the form of the fiery ordeal.
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	Know that the spirits of men are diverse in greatness and smallness, and according to this be their constraints; and do not be afraid to reply to him in the right way to him who studies this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	Of the healing of fistula by cautery
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you cure fistula as we have said in the division of diseases, and your cure does not help, then you must cauterize according to this manner.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	Instruct the patient to hold their head still; and grasp their hair between your hands in a firm manner so that it does not move; after that, put a cotton swab moistened with oil or vinegar on the wound; then heat the cautery which is partly burnt: and hold it to the hair if it forms like a pine cone; gather the hair that it is burnt; if you see that some hair is pulled out from one root to the other, and if you see that there is as much as with a try; but in any case, this is worth more than your work.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	After pressing the fistula until it is over, and draining the pus, and drying; and if it is closed, if the wound has healed, and drain the pus; then put the cautery on the wound, and hold your hand over the cautery at the part where there is no oil, so that your hands do not make a mess; and put the cautery in the fat of the oil, and compress it.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	If you come to the beginning of the cautery up to the bone, it would be well indeed.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	If this is not the case, if you must repeat the cautery once more, and you must do so until you have mastered it, and leave it for three days; then put on a wet compress in the wound and treat the drying of the wound until it is healed, and if forty days pass and it is not healed, put on an corrosive medicine until the bone is discovered; and proceed as is customary in this chapter
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	And there is a method of cautery for fistula which none of the ancients have mentioned.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	And in the fistula, open the wound; afterwards put into the cleft I came upon subtle of hair, thus is the form:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	And one makes for the quantity of a third of a pound; and keep your hand or sponge firmly closed, and do not move the patient in any way, except the melted sponge comes out by itself; and it is necessary to put on the patient a moist cotton swab in the place of oil, wool or awl: the sponge if it is like that will come out from the fistula itself and will leave the remainder perfectly preserved and whole.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	And if the fistula is healed by the cautery we have mentioned, that is good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	If not, if you must administer the pierce to the nerve, and bring the fistula back to its natural place as it should be in its proper limb
des crevaices en levres	If the fistula is cured by the cautery as we have said, that is good. But if this does not suffice, if it is necessary, it is permitted to perform a perforation on the nerve and bring the fistula back to its original place as it should be in its proper place.
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	If the fistula is cured by the cautery as we have said, that is good. But if this does not suffice, if it is necessary, it is permitted to perform a perforation on the nerve and bring the fistula back to its original place as it should be in its proper place
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe .i. petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you have treated these fractures as we have said in the sections, and the cure does not help, then you should perform a small burn cautery as follows:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	When you have treated these fractures as we have said in the sections, and the cure does not help, then you should perform a small burn cautery as follows:
de l’aposteme de la goule	from the armpit of the arm</start_of_turn
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies .i. cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou .ij., aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When the armpit of the arm or the elbow or the shoulder or the root of the tooth comes loose, after making a perforation and rounding it off and it becomes swollen and forms a fistula; and you must cure it as we have said in the sections, and it does not help: therefore you must make a burn cautery according to the quantity of the fistula; after making the hole or opening the fistula, and keep your hand as long as it takes for life to return to its place; or behind the limb; and do it once or twice, after the cure of what we have said in the cures, until it is sound; and if it is cured once, that is good; and if not, you must uncover the limb and remove the corrupted bone, according to what you find in your chapter.
dou movement des dens	Pain du mouvement des dents
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you have cured it with medicines and that does not suffice, then put the patient’s head in your hand; after remove the cautery whose form will come afterwards in this way as if you were putting on a pincer on the tooth; and put the cautery into the tooth cavity immediately, and hold your hand as long as the patient feels the heat coming from the root of the tooth; after let go of your hand and repeat the cautery as you please; after fill the patient’s mouth with salt water, and hold it for an hour and spit out the water.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in this way the tooth which was moving is confirmed, and the softened gums are restrained, and the moisture corrupts dries out.
de la dolor des dens	Of toothache.
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc .ij. manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When toothache comes from cold, or there is cold or heat, and medical treatments are of no avail, then there must be recourse to cautery in two ways: cautery of the carbuncle and cautery of the fire.</start_of_turn>
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus .i. fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	Cautery of the carbuncle is like this: take burnt barley and grind it to a powder; take a spoonful of the powder and place it on the tip of a rag, and moisten the bottom of the toothache with saliva; hold the toothache firmly in the barley until it is cold; and do this until the root of the tooth is softened.  When you see that the barley is limp and the cotton is wet, put the toothache back in place and put the iron on the tooth until the fire has died down at the bottom of the tooth.</start_of_turn
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	The cautery must be held as if you were grasping a nail or an iron, and if it is large so that the flame does not reach the patient’s mouth; then burn the cautery, when it is formed like this, put it on the wound and hold your hand until the cautery is cool; do this often, for the pain will be great or even greater the next day
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it is proper that the patient fill his mouth with thick saliva in the haste of this cautery, and then withdraw it forcefully; and this is the form of the fire cautery.
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	And make cautery of whatever part you wish, and as you please; and that is the form of the burn.
des scrophules	And the size above the pierced vein and the moisture, if it is less severe, because they are of little blood. And if some of these veins or arteries or there is no moisture, and these are the veins that I cauterize or tie up with an old woman; and I find the vein just like a hardened stone, rough and pale, and cannot break it. And if no blood comes out, we would do just as well to make a wound like a stone. In other veins coming or arteries, because these come from the head of the children and have roots of the ears, they open if they are at all dependent on the limb, for the pulse is stiff; and they cure as they should.
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the scrofula is of phlegm and cold moisture, and is not subject to digestion by medicines, then evacuate the cautery from the throat, for it will cause the formation of the blister; and make two incisions for the fumes to escape from the other side; and put the cautery on the abscess once, or if it has spread, as long as it reaches the front of the abscess; and if the abscess is small, put the cautery on according to the quantity of the abscess, and leave it for three days; and put on moist cotton wool until the wound is healed.
Li forme de la cainne:	The form of the cane:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	When moisture overcomes the channels of the pores, and even when this comes from a cold complexion, then it is necessary that the patient be relieved first by soluble medicines; after that, perform the cautery at the root of the throat, and keep him until he does not cough up any further.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	After that, perform another cautery at the joint of the neck with the head of the scapula, which is called the "clevis"; and burn as much as necessary until it is healed.
de la toust	When moisture prevails over the wind and cold, then it is fitting that the patient be relieved first by soluble medicines; afterwards perform the cautery at the root of the jaw, and hold it until you reach the jaw without causing further pain. Afterwards perform another cautery at the junction of the neck and the spine, and let the cautery which is called the "clamp" remain in place; and cure the limb as we have said above until it is healed.
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et .i. autre cautere emmi le pis entre .ij. mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When all and diseases of the wind are from cold moisture, and the patient has no fever or sweating, and is an ancient disease, if you perform two cauteries on the forcele in their veins; and another cautery between two vertebrae; and let the cautery which is called the "clamp" remain in place as it is before said.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	And if you see it, burn in pricking at all the burnings that are called "points" which are like this in the disease of the ears; and let them be until XXX, or until they are bent over
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	After treating the limb according to what has been said above, and when the cautery is finished at three rains according to this fashion:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais .iij. a cop.	And for this reason the cautery is lighter, for this reason that you do it twice as many times as before.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners douqueil ci est li forme:	Afterwards, hold the patient’s shoulders and chest; then take the thumb which is inside the armpit with your left hand; and if the joint is loosened, if it has slipped out of place, if it is showing, withdraw the cautery which is just as wide as the nail of the index finger:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble .iiij. cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a .iij. ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a .iij. ners:	and burn the thumb until it reaches the chest, and comes the escape of the cautery all together three times; for this is done with the cautery which has two nails, because the figures of cautery are these two nails; and the nerves are in proportion to the fineness of the attempt and this is the form of the cautery which has two nails.
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce .i. nerf por coi il i a .viij. cauteres.	And never is the suture placed upon this nerve for there are six cauteries there.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After placing the cautery over the broiled boils with silk; then rest the patient and do not allow the limb to hang tense for too long as to cause discomfort.</start_of_turn>
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	And if it has been dislocated beneath, whatever the cause, then make a cautery upon the thickness of the callous callous, or several incisions in pricking.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	For the joint is closed, and the moisture is dry, and the patient is healed.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	When in the stomach come chills and moisture as much as it is taken away from its complexion, and there is an increase in vomiting, these are customary methods of treatment and they do no good; therefore it is only right that the patient be anointed upon his back, and extend his legs and arms
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture; et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	And thus make three cauteries: one at the heel of the elbow towards the quantity of a bean, throughout the callous callous, and two cauteries between the two coasts as much as the figure of the cautery is at three angles, and has some space between one and the other that they are not joined together when they swell; and let the cautery be so strong that it blackens the two parts of the forearm, and let the figure of the cautery be as described above, with a slant adjustment.
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme; et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche; puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if you see that a great burn is made in the stomach following this form; and he who has fear of this burn, burn at the prick and mark upon the stomach with a point according to the quantity that you see of the burn; then burn the whole burn that is called “points”.
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the treatment of the burn that we have seen previously, as long as he is well.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez; et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil; et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient; et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi; et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere; et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez; et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais; et c’est li forme:	When the liver comes with pain of fruit and moisture and great swelling, as long as it is forced from its natural complexion by the humours; and the patient is cured of what we have said in divisions, and he does not benefit from it, if he is not kept quiet on his hunger; and a sign of the burn is three burns made in this form and this figure and this quantity on the liver, driving away the hypocondria, the spleen or the belly of the worm; and let there be space between each burn of the thickness of a hazelnut; and let the burns be long as the forearm, and do not press too hard with your hand over the whole burn; and let the burn be only as deep as half the thumb, and let the patient lie down on his side; and if he cannot, let him lie without moving, and extend his legs, and keep his arms; and this is the form:
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors; et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	If you are so bold, if you cauterize these sensitive cauteries, if you are subtle and prudent in the art, and take care that you do not burn all the hair, for you will burn all the body; and that it does not come to a boil, for the hair is very subtle in this place, and the scaldings will be seen.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile: s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort; et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	When there is swelling of the liver, and you see that it is in the hollow of the liver or in the gall: if it is in the hollow, the patient feels little pain; but if it is in the gall, the pain is severe.</start_of_turn>
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste; et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	When this treatment is finished, if you think the patient is cured, sign that the vein or abscess is closed, and then raise the cautery that is similar in shape to a thorn, for this is the form.</start_of_turn
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers; aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez; et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	And cauterize I cautere while the hair is coarse, and come until the root is fully burnt; after the cure as for wounds until it is healed; and do not attempt this treatment save for one who has studied long and diligently in the art of medicine, and by whom these diseases have never before been corrected.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	Therefore he must be strong to undertake this work, and in my opinion it seems that it is worth leaving it undone.</start_of_turn>
dou cautere de pleuresin	because of the wound of the cautery
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize .i. cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et .ij. petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et .ij. cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et .i. cautere emmi le pis, et .i. autre sus l’estomac, et .i. entre .ij. espaules, et .ij. as .ij. costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre .ij. espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	The ancient said that we must make for tears the cauteries of the root of Aristotle, and in part manner: take a root of Aristotle long, the greatest that thou shalt find, and dry, and as thick and as long as thy thumbs; and moisten in oil, and stamp at the fire, and cauterize. I. Cauterize between the forcele and the collarbone, and II. A few cauteries one at a distance in the part which is below the beard; and III. Cauterize between the fifth costal cartilage and the rib, declining behind one at a distance. I. Cauterize over the testicle, and I. another upon the stomach, and I. between two ribs, and I. two costae from the testis which oppose the cautery which is between two ribs; and do not press me thy hand, but make it open as when smelling.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	And they say no ancient has ever used a fire cautery resembling a razor, and has applied it between the ribs, until it comes to this incision; and great pain accompanies it, as we have said concerning the liver.</start_of_turn
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	But in this work there is fear or the patient dies immediately, or an abscess comes which cannot be cured.
de la mice	of mice
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent .iij. manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the disease of the mouse of what we have said about the divisions of the cures, and it brings no profit, then there remain two methods of cautery which are good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos; et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	If you must make three cauteries, or four, in proportion to the length of the hair, according to the shape of the fire cautery of the liver which we have said before; and do not press your hand on the entire cautery, and let the patient rest on his back; and another method of cautery is if you are afraid of the cautery which has two hairs, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; and keep the head which is at the root of the hair, or the edge of the patient’s shoulder comes towards the left, and keep the elevation which you tie the head to according to the head, according to the length of the limb, and the cautery must be according to the size of the limb.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	After that, take the second finger and flame it until the kernel is perceived from the other side; then withdraw the cautery and there will be three. If you see that the cautery has been applied to all three nails, stop the cautery when there are three nails remaining.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After that, when the boil has grown by long tension, and this is as much as the other boils mentioned earlier.
de ydropisie	of dropsy.
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	The cautery is not worth hydrotherapy, except for the manner which is called "asclytes".
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	When you treat according to the methods we have said in the divisions, and your cure does not benefit you, then you must make three cauteries around the navel, one on the stomach, one on the liver, one on the spleen, and two behind the loin on the backbone, and one on the hip; and let the cautery be close to the root of the hair
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les .ij. ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	After leaving the cautery open for a long time to stop the bleeding, do not leave the wound closed in the patient after the cautery; rather, let healing haste, and they will be bound together with the help of God.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The shape of the belly cautery is like a nail that we have before us; and the back is olive-shaped, as is seen here.</start_of_turn>
de l’enfleure des piez	of the swelling of the pieces
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	When the fingers are swollen in the hydropsic patient and are full of yellow bile, it is necessary that you cauterize on the back of the thumb between the auriculaire and the anulaire; and keep your hand with the cautery in this direction.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	And do not enter too deeply with the burn, for fear you will burst out the yellow bile; and let the cautery be made in this fashion:
Aprés fai sus .ij. jambes .ij. cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After having made two incisions in the thigh, cauterize the area around the knee; let the cauteries be long, one above the kneecap and the other below, in the middle of the thigh; leave the cauteries in place for a while, that they may adhere; then perform the other treatments that we have mentioned.
de la menoison	After having made two incisions in the thigh, cauterize the area around the knee; let the cauteries be long, one above the kneecap and the other below, in the middle of the thigh; leave the cauteries in place for a while, that they may adhere; then perform the other treatments that we have mentioned.
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai .i. grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et .iiij. cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout .i. cautere clavile subtil, et .ij. cauteres sus les hainches.	When solution of the belly comes from cold and moisture, as the protective and digestive virtue which is either the stomach or intestine is evacuated, and cannot be cured by means of treatment; and you see the patient very suffering and very pale, if you make a great burn on the stomach as it has been said above or burn the stomach, with the burn circulating; and three burns around the small intestine to all but the staple burn, and two burns on the flanks.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et .i. cautere sus chaicun yle, et .ij. petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see moisture abundant and the patient suffering, make the fire cautery on the navel, that is, cauterize on each side, and two small cauteries on the stomach below the great one, for the cure is profitable when there is good aid.
de la cure des emorroydes	And if you see moisture abundant and the patient suffering, make the fire cautery on the navel, that is, cauterize on each side, and two small cauteries on the stomach below the great one, for the cure is profitable when there is good aid.
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois; et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	When hemorrhoids are deep-seated, or one or more of them, and are old and are of large cold and moist humors, corrupted; and they are cured in the same way as we have said in divisions, and it is of no use to burn them; III burns on the spine of the back, which is all that is sufficient from the ankle to the elbow and from the elbow to the thumb, and I burn two on the buttock; and if you think that the stomach is cold, and the meat is not cooked, and you see swelling, then you must make one great burn on the face, as it has been said before, and one on the liver, and one on the spleen with all the burn cloth; and leave the burn uncovered for a long time tense.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After treatment, let the limb be sound.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	If you think the stomach is cold, and the meat is not cooked, and the face is swollen, then the face must be subjected to a great cautery on the stomach, as it is said above; and another on the liver, and another on the spleen throughout the entire cautery clamp; and leave the cautery open for a long time. After that, cure the limb until it is healed.
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou .ij., et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you feel the thelul, if you withdraw the cautery which appears to burn, and then put it all ablaze on that thelul which is grasped; and leave it until the blood vessel comes to birth, without tension; do this once or twice. And if there is much thelul, if you cauterize each as we have said; after that, cure the wound with useful remedies until it is healed; and if you cauterize with a great cautery on the belly, it will be of greater help.
de plaie mal curee	From an unhealed wound.
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot endure pain or opening, as we have said, if there is some disease which can only be cured by cautery, then
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	When there is no further risk of fistula, and it is swollen and emits foul matter and corrupted moisture, if the physician desires at all a slight attempt, and keeps that you drain all the way to the bottom as much as it has burst
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	After the cautery has been sufficiently withdrawn, which appears to have rendered the fistula less painful, and has been placed in the fistula according to the quantity that it was intended to enter, restart the cautery until the charred parts and corruption are gone; once, or twice, or three times, according to the quantity of matter required; and take care not to burn any nerves or large veins.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	If the fistula approaches the bladder or intestines, if you take care of these areas, and do not burn anything except in the charnut, and think that it is not dangerous; after treatment let the limb be sound, and if the parts are swollen and the matter is solid long stretched, then drain that the limb is completely healed; and if the matter is not solid, drain only until the limb is tender and corrupted, and do so as one of these things that we will tell you about it in this limb
de la maladie des reins	De la maladie des reins.
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra .iij. cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When pain in the flanks comes with swelling and great wind, and does not take nourishment from a woman, then it is necessary to cauterize the kidneys from one side to the other with the cautery needle which we have mentioned before; and if we cauterize it in the middle, if there are two cauteries in a line, it will bring more relief.</start_of_turn>
de la vessie	Of the bladder.
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et .i. a destre et .i. a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais .i. cautere defuers le dos, ou .ij. se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladder is full and weak of fruit and moisture, and the patient holds back urine, then one should cauterize on the lower part of the bladder, where the hair begins to grow, both towards the belly and towards the flanks, and make as many cauteries as there are pores; and one should also cauterize the back, or if necessary, the needle should be passed through the navel.
de la marris	De la marris.
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice .iij. cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et .ij. cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the marrow is cold and moist, and does not allow me to conceive, and the flowers are corrupted and their endings are late; and when they come, if they cause great pain: then it is advisable to make two cauteries around the knee, as we said before, or a cautery of the bladder, and two cauteries of the buttocks; or let the cautery be applied to the navel, as we said.
de la hainche	Of the hip
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a .i. cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When viscous moisture descends to the hip socket, and because of this the limb moves differently, and the sign is that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and it is found that the hip joint is painful, if you must cauterize the patient on the hip socket like a circle, and sign in front of the limb around the socket if it turns, so that the socket is within the circle; and if the cautery is made like this as we have cauterized the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai .iij. cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if these cautery treatments are not present, make two olive-shaped cautery burns, and let the cautery be as strong as all the others; and cure until it is healed.
de la dolor de la hainche	And if these cautery treatments are not present, make two olive-shaped cautery burns, and let the cautery be as strong as all the others; and cure until it is healed.
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain comes to the groin, due to cold and moisture, and the patient is cured of what we have said in the previous section, and the cure is not lasting, and the disease is old: therefore it is advised that you purge the patient of the foul humors through foul pills, or other solid pills that resemble them.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	After the fire cautery; and he must do the cautery as it is said in two ways: that is to say with assembled medicines in the fire, and fire cautery.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	If the fire cautery is done as it is said in mouth, there are two ways of doing it: one is thus: you burn on the hip three triangular cauteries as in this form, and make good depth and great, and put between each cautery an inch of fat, either olive cautery; never make the cautery in the middle on the head of the hip, for there are always three of them in this form.
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you see that you have cauterized around the circle that we have said concerning the dislocation of the hip; but do it partly cautiously that the circle contains the whole hip, and all the thickness of the thigh is taut.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	And this is the way it is done in sciatica, when the pain is in the hip, and does not reach the thigh or the leg
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if it comes down to the thigh and leg, if the patient says that the pain persists, and three cauteries below the ankle are to be made, one to the left, and two to the right; or let the cautery be blunt or round as you like; and if the patient feels that the pain has spread as far as two fingers or almost as much, if the burn is made where the pain is felt three times or four at the cautery which is called "points.
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	If the shoulder joint is stiff, make it more flexible; if the pain persists from the elbow to the hip, make an incision with the cautery knife, either straight or circular, and take good care in all your cauteries that you do not leave the cautery too long, nor burn the nerves and large arteries, and do not cause the patient any greater pain or contraction.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	And I myself have seen many who have burned on the ankle over the foot, and left them until the leg was entirely limp, and the bone was fractured, which was pierced and corrupted throughout the bone.</start_of_turn>
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	After such a solution of the belly, death follows.</start_of_turn>
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	And if the pain is in two parts together, make cautery in both, according to this manner.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	And if the pain is in two parts together, make cautery in both, as it is said in the cautery of the groin. Make one like a nail of a doctor, or less, and between nails or from one nail to the other at the space of a barley; and let the nails be over two parts, and as nails, and put one hand of the iron well made; this is the form.
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois .i. cautere reont et lou laisse .iij. jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And let the hair grow until it is all red and thick, and then put it on the patient’s thigh; and let the burn slowly over the skin; and burn once. Repeat the burn and leave it for two days. Then make an ointment of butter, and leave the wound open long and tight; after the cure of the wound while it is healed.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Albucasim says that our physicians often use this cautery because of its bad reputation, and that we often see those who use it; and all these are scorched bones, which can suffer from it, and where he takes care of himself.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi; et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	The burning cautery of medicine, if you make an instrument with nails between the hairs that descend from the edge of the door, and it is of linen or iron with a long handle, and at the height there are two nails, and between each there is the quantity of the thickness of two almonds; and let them be openly firm and soft, and join together as above mentioned.
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche; aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	After placing the box of the hip upon the patient lying on the side, and pressing your hand lightly on the box of the hip; afterwards pour between the two circles of the groin which are heated over the fire, and leave it for an hour with tension, and offer the patient the heat and the burn of it.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu; et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit; et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait; et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	For indeed there is biting pain just like fire; and when the biting pain has passed, take hold of the instrument with your hand and elevate the hip bone slightly, and leave it for three days, and put on ointment until that which is black of the eschar becomes ossified; and leave it for three days until it is healed; and this would be the last aid after the treatment of wounds as long as it is healthy
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument; et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	And if the pain has extended up to the thigh or up to the leg, make an instrument that will keep the limb still as you have done in the hip immediately; and this is the method of the warm limb, and I have written or treated of its rectification in medicine.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir; et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main; et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	Take alkali and live broth, equal parts of each, grind them together, and put them in a new pot.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	And if there is little loss of blood and it is administered with medicines for external use and in cauteries of other parts, because it makes parts decay like fire, and if there are other medicines which we cauterize well the hair close to the root as beeswax and honey and salt with soap, all these things mixed together.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	And Galiens tells us of a cure which some men were cured of their pain of the groin and sciatic vein, and he says that we did no other cure, and that they were healed at one time when we performed this cure, and he bathed as he is taught afterwards.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie; et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	And he further says that you take two fresh and dry mustard seeds and grind them with a little fat, and put them on the groin and thigh and leg where the pain is, and bind them; and leave them for three hours and by that time the patient does not feel the burning sensation anymore.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	Then make him enter or bathe until the flesh is somewhat stiff, and then make him enter or lie down, and the pain will go away entirely and be healed
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	And as for wounds that no one must use the fire cautery on until after the evacuation of pus.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout; et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	And thus Dioscorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with vinegar, if it helps with moisture; and it must be done cautiously in parts.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	Take lint and soak it in oil, and put it on the pit that is between the thumb and the great toe and the other which is called the fossicle
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains; et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee; et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	After taking vinegar of chivers dry, and wet it with fire until it is charred, and put it on the lint, and leave it until it is stained; and do this again and do not stop doing this until you think by sense that it has gone down to the hip, and that the pain has ceased; and this manner of cautery is called "chiver cautery".
de la dolor dou dos	of back pain.
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes from the back, or from sitting or percussion or from too great an evacuation, or from similar things of cold expanding matter, none of these symptoms is worth cautery, save for that which comes from the infusion of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne .v. cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	When the patient is free from foul pills or other similar things, that we make on his back, there or where the pain is, three lines signed with a needle, and in a fourth line five cauteries or more according to the virtue and the quantity that the patient can suffer; and let the cautery be made according to the cautery called "poins"; and if you see, make two or three cauteries at the middle cautery according to this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	Many times this disease comes as a small swelling, and its signs are that when it swells it hurts the loin and causes fear; and you find it behind the lower spine on the back and its appearance comes after the others.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this and you see it healed, if you cauterize at the cautery of this circle according to this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	If the fire cautery touches some part of the spine excessively.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	And if you see that the cautery has gone too deep into the spine, two or three lines from the point where it pricked, keep the points close to one another.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	After treating the wound as described above, keep the limb steady until it is healed, and take care that you do not cause any damage to the nerves in haste
de la dolor des jointes	of the pain of the joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When joint pain arises from moisture that has spread throughout the limb, and when pain comes from a piece that is called "podagre" properly, and when the cause is cold and treated by medicines, it cannot be cured; if it is cured by cautery in part: make the mouth of the cautery enter the joint at the point of pain, and let the cautery be of the olive kind according to this fashion:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	And if there is need to prick on the face of the bone, if you are using the whole cautery, call it "point".
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if there are pains that come up to the knees and other joints, and this often occurs, if you are doing cautery on each knee three times or four on each part, with the olive oil cautery; and if you must do more, do more, but do not hold your hand too tight until the piece of meat is cooked through
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	And if the pains descend down to the groin and the back, administer the cautery as we have said in this chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	And if the pains are as high as the hands, if you prick twice at the base of the thumb; and if there is no more pain at the two ends, if you prick at the wrist and at the nail of the hand; and if the pains come down to the buttocks or down to the heels, if you cauterize some part, and make the patient drink a potion and prescribe medicine.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	For if you make him drink a potion and purge phlegm, he will be healed with the help of God.
de la routure dou syfac	If the oes does not lose its nourishment from the incision of the vessels, and if they dry and do not swell, they will not aid.
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When a fracture approaches the shoulder, and the ball comes loose as new, if you wish to cure it, do not break off the limb; and do use things that leave the belly open, so that the pain may go down from the belly; afterwards let him sit on his buttocks between your hands, and command him to hold his arm tight until the bone is healed, and keep it firm at your sides, and mark on the skin above the collarbone the extent of the fracture, and do all that is like half a circle below the bone. Then withdraw the cautery in this form:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	As long as he is limp and sweats, he feels sensations.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	Then loosen the bowels at their place; and hold his hand so that they do not return backwards; and keep the patient warm, and put a cushion under his chest and another under his hand; then place the cautery on the sign at the top of the hand, and keep it straight and hold it until you have reached the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, do it again until you reach the bone; and beware prudently that the bowel does not slip while you are doing the cautery; that you do not burn it; and that by this the patient does not die, or any other harm.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	And nails that until you reach the bone with the cautery, your work is in vain.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And it must be known that the cautery of small vessels must be subtle in measure and of great men also great in measure; after three days cure the limb from the burn until the scab is bony; after cure other ointments until they are healed; and keep the patient forty days on his back until the wound is well healed; and it must be known that its bruises must be long-lasting, so that the swelling does not appear when he moves to the bedroom.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	After forty days, when he wishes to rise, he must have a well-made support and carry it for forty days; and have good rest, that he works little and takes care to avoid too great indulgence in drink and eating, and too great haste; and when he has done this teaching, he will be entirely healed
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And I shall speak of the treatment of the fistula in its chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	of the treatment of the belly.
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	When they come out in other bellies and are known, and you see that they do not grow any more, if you make the burn of the cautery return to its quantity, and be three parts of the fourth; treat it as we have said; neither of the old ones have said that it should be burned with the cautery at three angles according to this form.
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	but first mark the limb with a line above the fistula and one below, and hold your hand firmly with all your might over the cautery clamp
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But the first cauteries are lighter and milder.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	...there is no greater pain in any limb.
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	When pain comes in any limb, or in the hip or the flank, and this pain lasts a long time, and the medical treatment is not of avail, then it is necessary to cauterize with the cautery which is called “points,” and cauterize according to the length of the limb and its smallness and frailty and virtue and location of torsions and pain
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	If he is sane after the first cautery, it is well; if not, repeat the cautery on that one, for it is customary that it must burn the part that is nearest, in order that you may make the cauteries as long as the patient is sane.
de meselerie	When pain arises in any limb, whether from injury or ailment, and the pain persists for a long time, medical treatment is of no avail; therefore, it is recommended that it be cauterized with the cautery known as the "poins," or with a cautery according to the length of the limb, its smallness and weakness, its toughness and its tortures, and its pain. If successful in the first cautery, well and good; if not, repeat the procedure once more for it is customary to effect the cauteries as close to the diseased part as possible, so that the pain is relieved while the disease is still present.
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	The disease never helps itself by cautery, and indeed the same illness that comes from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief: I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	Can you see it being cauterized? Take warning if the disease is at its beginning, and if it is cured according to what we have said in the division, do not linger, and do not doubt that corruption does not spread throughout the whole illness; then make five cauteries on the head: one on the new head, and one towards the front at the end of the beard; and two on the two horns, and one behind on the cheek; and leave the hand as long as the cauteries come up to the bone, and as long as the scabs are forced out so that the vapors of the thick humors can escape; and cauterize the mouse according to what is before you.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et .i. cautere en som lou neis, et .ij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et .vj. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et .i. grant sus la crupie et .i. autre delez, et .ij. sus les .ij. espaules; et .ij. sus les coutes, et .ij. sus les tendrons dou pis, et .i. sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et .i. autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et .i. autre sus lou foie.	If the mess is scattered everywhere; and it appears manifestly, if you must indeed cauterize with these cauteries which we have spoken of or chief, namely the cautery in some places you desire not to, and two cauteries on the armpits, and three on the spine of the neck, and one great on the hip and one other from below, and two on the two scapulae, and two on the flanks, and two on the tendons of the wrist and elbow, and one on almost every joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands; take heed of the nerves that are behind the calcaneus, that you do not burn them; and in no way perform cautery on the bone of the heel or on the bone of the stomach, or on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	And so it is that the more he makes the cautery, the more he renders help, and it benefits him; and so it is that the patient does not feel pain from the cautery as he would from the pain of an abscess, because the flesh is already corrupted.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	And it must be known that the cautery must be great and small according to the members and joints, according to what you see in the handling of the instruments.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	After treating the wound with flour of wheat sometimes with honey and other cures until it is healed
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	When swelling comes to any limb and is cured with medicines and oils and patches, and it is not healed, then you must make cauteries on the limb according to the greatness and smallness of the limb; and that the cauteries are thrust into the thickness of the flesh; then cure with ointments until it is healed
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	And never is the fire cautery done with hand and foot and back, at the issue of nerves that move the limb, and thus if the bone is fractured it swells; and in no way should anything intervene between them unless they are skilled in the members and the issues of the moving nerves around the bone.
de albaras	When swelling comes to any limb and is cured with medicines, oils, and plasters, and is not entirely healed, then you must make cauteries on the limb according to the size and degree of the swelling; and either make the cauteries a little deeper than the depth of the nerve that moves the limb; then cure with ointments until it is healed. And never make a cautery on the hand, foot, or back, at the exit of a nerve that moves the limb, and so if it is bony the swelling will remain. And in no way should anything be interposed that does not know the limbs and the exits of the moving nerves from the bones.
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the disease called "albaras" is present, and medicine is of no avail, then you must make a cautery with a needle a little deep, according to the depth of the tissue, until the swelling is bony and has changed color; then cure with flour of times, lentils with rose oil and plantain leaves, with colon and alum, a part of each; mix them all together, and bind with a bandage, and keep it in place until healed.
li cure de chancre par cautere	The cure for chancre by cautery
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	When a boil comes at the beginning, and you see it stop, if you burn it with the cautery that seems like a circle, all around the boil.</start_of_turn>
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	And all these people say that it is done with the middle of the boil; and all these things do not seem good to me, because I fear that it will be ulcerated and corrupted, and I have already seen several times that it does not happen; and the right thing is to burn around the boil, with the cautery which is called the circle, as we have said before.</start_of_turn>
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	of the swelling that cannot be measured
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi.	When someone has an ailment called "adubelati" and it is late in healing or due to excessive swelling or excessive blood in the wound when it is decrepit (that is, too much time has passed) and there is little blood, or due to tension; and you see it hastening to heal: then cauterize around the mouth of small cauteries by pricking; after that, leave it be.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	For it will haste to heal.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see it turning pale with all the cautery, if it is hot, take away the cautery for a moment: thus is the shape
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	And put your hand in the middle of this ailment which is called "adubelati" until the cautery has perceived the heat, and be such cauteries that the patient feels the fire diminishing in part as the wound progresses.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	After that, cure as long as it remains perfectly healthy
li cure dou feu par fer	The fire cautery. Instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even. And if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	Another disease that is called "corrodens" exists, and is nothing other than a weakening of the limb, for it causes the limbs to become soft as dry bones.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	If you see this disease in the limb which can suffer from fire cautery, then burn the nails of the little and great toes cautiously, according to what the limb or the disease demands; after cauterizing all parts until you have eradicated all the corruption, and nothing remains except the bone itself.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	Then leave it for three days, and put on the cauterized parts a cloth soaked in oil until the eschar becomes dry like burnt leather, and all the corruption
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	Then the treatment of these wounds that leave scars.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	If after three days the hairs do not grow back, it is well; and if this does not happen, repeat the cautery on that which remains corrupted.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	This disease is never cured by medical treatment alone; but indeed, the fire cautery is of greater help, as I have already said in the preceding section. Take as much as you need of it.</start_of_turn>
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	the wounds that come from the heel to the toe.
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	Many times we have seen that when the feet swell up due to a wound, a disease called "clos" occurs, which is a large and painful swelling.</start_of_turn
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	The cautery for this disease is done in two ways.</start_of_turn
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	That is to say, fire cautery, and warm water cautery.</start_of_turn
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	If thou art to cauter with fire, I command thee to cauter as with a needle of wool, and make it of strong iron of the measure that it may penetrate the root of all parts, and that there be subtle margins; then put all about the root, and press thy hand round about the root until it comes to the front of the root; and leave it there for three days until it begins to fester; then make an embalmment of wild mallow bruised with oil, and leave the embalmment upon all night, and close the wound firmly and it shall be drawn out of its root.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	If they are converted by boils of foul matter, and often happen in hands and feet, if you must bring them near, apply a hot cautery; for it is in part a remedy. Take a splinter of elder or iron, or a quill of gutta-percha, and place over the boil and its surrounding area; and place the splinter over so that it grasps all around, then put a little of warm water, and hold your hand firmly, pressing your hand towards the root so that the edge of the splinter reaches the root; and keep the water warm for an hour. Then leave it alone, and it will discharge all its roots.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	Do the same again, until you have removed all that is at the root, then heal the wounds which cause the boils.
li cure dou trembler	you cure the tremor.
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres ou .iv. sus l’espinee dou dos, .i. cautere entre chescune espinee; et .i. cautere ou pez, et .i. sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	When some shiver from cold, or from a quartan fever or from any other, if you make for them three or four cauteries on the spine of the back, one cautery between the shoulder blades, and one cautery or pinch on the stomach at the olive cautery, if you leave them to tremble, they will soon recover from the cold sickness.
des pustules puans	When some shiver from cold, or from a quartan fever or from any other, if you make for them three or four cauteries on the spine of the back, one cautery between the shoulder blades, and one cautery or pinch on the stomach at the olive cautery, if you leave them to tremble, they will soon recover from the cold sickness.
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	Never do ulcers appear by chance on the body, or boils filled with pus, which come from corrupted matters.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	If it is necessary, when they appear, to make cautery upon each head of the boils: a subtle cautery of mustard seed, from which the point is grasped by the fire, or from long chamomile root, or the lenticular cautery.</start_of_turn>
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	And never should the cautery be begun at the outset when they appear, according to this method, but the superfluous matter from which they come must be evacuated first, and they will be healed; but it is necessary that this be done after the evacuation of blood.</start_of_turn
quant li artere est copee	When the artery is cut.
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	When the artery is cut, there are often great discharges of blood from the artery that is cut at the wound that comes from the surgeon, or at the incision of the abscess, or at the cautery of the limb, and similar things; and it is a mournful thing to extend oneself.</start_of_turn>
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren .i., ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	And whenever this happens to anyone, if you are hasty to put your finger on the wound of the vein, and strain it out too much without calming it down, and blood does not stop flowing; then take away several small and large olive cauteries as soon as they are red, and touch them to the wound, that is, great or small as is appropriate for the wound and the limb in which the artery is cut, and put the cautery on that vein or hold your finger there, and hold the cautery as long as necessary.</start_of_turn
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement .i. autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if it spurts blood when you take your finger away from the vein, and the cautery is extinguished, take hold of another cautery quickly that is on the fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des .iiij. manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And do not cease to perform this one after the other until the limb is completely stretched out; and beware that you do not damage the nerve that is below, and that no other harm comes upon the patient; and stretch the limb until, without drawing blood from the artery, it can be satisfactorily restored to its normal position, except in three ways that we have mentioned: or by cautery, or by extraction when necessary, or by strong ligation with thread, or by medicines that are placed upon it and which have power to restore blood flow.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Whoever brings about a restoration of the limb by means of tight draping or of placing things burning upon it, or other similar things, will not profit thereby unless he does so in the right way.</start_of_turn>
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And if this happens to be the case and there is no remedy or medicine present, he must place his thumb on the wound of the vein as we have said, and keep it still until it is restored beneath the wound and beneath the vein; and do not move it, but moisten it with cold water often so that it is cold as much as the limb is frozen and engrosed and restored; and make incisions in front of those which must be cauterized and medicated.</start_of_turn>
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	This text is not included in the requested translation, as it is not provided in the input.
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	We have already said in the first chapter that in all diseases where it is necessary to cauterize with fire or apply burning medicine, we must inquire into the omens, causes, instruments, and shapes of the cauteries; and in this chapter we will speak of the chief matters that we have found to be lighter in this way than in others.</start_of_turn>
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And thus, although I begin this chapter, it is necessary, my son, to teach you that in this chapter there is more peril and fear than in the first cauteries, and for this reason more caution is required.</start_of_turn
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.</start_of_turn
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	I warn you that you should not be rash.</start_of_turn>
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	For in many ways people come to cures.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	For in many ways people come to cures if they come from those who suffer greatly from their ailments and move lightly because of the force of their disease; and of this we must have fear
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse.	And of these there are some who make sense of it, and say: "Wait, I am going to be cured"; but the disease is desperate.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	It is not enough for me that you allow these who come to you who have this manner, but put more great caution in your honor than in your covetousness, and do not fear me more foolishly than intelligently from what you are certain, and from which you have taken and lost; and use prognostication and indication in the treatment of your patients so that salvation may be obtained, whether it is converted; and this will help you to obtain good renown, glory, and memory forever
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Very dear son, our lords teach you to understand and fear, and if you are filled with the spirit of the Holy Inspiration of his hand, amen.</start_of_turn>
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Or I vos ai ordonné cet chapitre en divisant par Chapitre, selon ce qui est devant ou Chapitre des cauteres, que I vos ai devisé de la tête jusqu’à la pied, pour ce que vous trouvez plus facilement ce que vous avez à faire.
dou chief plein d’aigue	Or I have ordered this chapter by dividing into chapters, according to what is before or the chapter of cautery, that I have devised from the head to the foot, so that you can find more easily what you have to do.
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	The disease comes out of the belly of women in childbirth, and when the boy cries too much the head of the child is strained; and never comes from a known cause except that it is not treated.</start_of_turn>
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	The fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Et je vis .i. enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com .ij. nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	And I have never seen such a disease as this except in childhood, when the head of the shoulder was completely swollen with fluid, and the bone grew so much that it could not support itself; and I thought that the moisture was too great, and this moisture, if it is gathered on the bone above the scapula, between the shoulder blade and the bone; and the work is like this if the moisture is between the shoulder blade and the bone, and the incision is small, that you must make a wide incision; and it should be as long as.ij. we, until the moisture is gone. And when this is done, the shape of the scapula will be like that of a spindle.
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai .ij. fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is deeper and the incision is larger, if you make.ij. incisions in the manner of a cross, following this shape:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief .iij. fendures selonc ceste maniere:	If moisture is outside the bone and you see the edges of the fracture protruding beyond the skin, and it increases in pain when you press it with your hand from within; if this does not settle: if you suspect that there are two fractures, make two incisions according to this method:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	And after the incision, drain out the moisture with all your might.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	Drain the blood clots and pus from the wound, and apply wine and oil, and leave for five days; then remove the dressing, and treat the wound with stitches and ointment, and leave the head of the wound open, and give the patient dry meat until the limb is comfortable and healed.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	Another method of incision is to look or open the abscess, and gather the pus; for it is never before; never behind; never to the right; and never to the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides nirvana dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.
de reume	If the shoulder or the armpit is open, and the injection of liquid, and you do according to what you are able; and beware that you do not cover the artery; and let the vein flow blood, so that the patient may die without excessive bleeding and evacuation of moisture.
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les .ij. arteres.	When there is no other disease which is called "catarrh" that has its cause in the teeth or the gums, and the disease is ancient, and the treatment of medicine does not help, then the only cure is to cauterize with that which will cover the arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	It is necessary to prevent the patient from raising their head; after that, gently stretch the limb with a rough cloth until the veins open; then pull out the patient’s neck from under the dressing; then look to see if the vein is bleeding, and that the edges are below the ears; and if so, restore them; then close the wound, and insert a needle at a right angle from the two parts of the vein, until the blood vessel reaches the bone, which should be at least two finger-widths wide
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com .ij. dois au traver.	If you see, grasp the sponge with two fingers and hold the artery below, cutting as much as two fingers must pass through.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	When the vein is cut, if blood spurts continuously upwards, stop it immediately
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	If the artery does not open on examination, if it is suspected that there is a space of three fingers breadth, mark the spot and withdraw the needle until bone is reached; that which may be put out with blood if it is six cubits, or somewhat more or less, according to what the patient can suffer, and the filling of the artery; then look at the wound: if it remains on the bone point beyond the suture, if the edges of the wound do not meet, then strain the wound and ligate it, and cure it with oil until it is healed.
de emigrainne	If the artery does not open despite feeling, if you deem that two fingers’ breadth is sufficient, mark the spot and proceed until bone; and whatever is beyond that, do not attempt to remove it with the forceps. If it is more or less by chance, as the patient can tolerate, and the expansion of the artery; then look at the wound: if it remains on the bone point where the stitches were removed, if the edges of the incisions do not rejoin, then strain the wound and bind it, and cure it until it is healed.
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When ancient eye discharge comes, and acute catarrh, because of tears and the discharge in temples and the old socket are lost, and similar things, and it is treated by medical cures and all that does not help, if the arteries of the temples are extracted and cauterized, as we have said.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	And thus is the method of extracting them [arrows] that if the patient make retreat the hairs from his temples, and understand to the artery which opens in the temple, for it opens well by its beating, and is often returned full rather than in other men who are too rough; and if it is returned, the patient must stretch his neck with some folds, then wipe the limb of any rough scab, and rise the limb of warm water until the artery opens manifestly; then take the sponge which is like this shape:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	Then gently stretch the skin until the artery is visible; then grasp it high up with forceps, and remove the tissue that is below the nipple; and if the artery is small, if the nail has pierced the thumb, then grasp that part according to the quantity of two fingers
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	For if it is not held firmly, if you do not hold it tight without doubt in all things.
Et trai dou sanc des .vj. c/, jusc’a .iij.; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en .ij. leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les .ij. liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And thus is the method of extracting them that if the patient makes retreat the hairs from his temples, and understands to the artery which opens in the temple, for it opens well by its beating, and is often returned full rather than in other men who are too rough; and if it is returned, the patient must stretch his neck with some folds, then wipe the limb of any rough scab, and rise the limb of warm water until the artery opens manifestly; then take the sponge which is like this shape: then gently stretch the leather until you see the artery, then pull it up with tweezers, and remove it well from the cloths that are soaked with blood from the chest; and if the artery is fragile, if the head of the bone is fractured, then break the head of that part according to the quantity of blood spilled. For if it is not broken, it will not jump out without pain throughout.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	For the fire cautery is helpful for finishing off moisture: for this is why it is more useful for moisture.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de .ij. pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	For it is useful to extract the arteries when they are filled with much cotton and held in well-made bands; and when they are released, if they are cured with dry medicines that cause the hair to grow, and the bands, until they are healed; and if you do not have the artery held in place as you ought, if you are in a hurry to cover with cautery, or if you use vinegar in the hand that is holding it, it will stain; and if you do not have that, if you must remove the hand, you must do so while it is still warm, and wash the hand with cold water until it stops bleeding, and hold it steady as you should; and what is more gentle and easier in the extraction of the artery is to cauterize the vein of this cautery at the depth of a third, but the depth should be well spaced in order to prevent the heat from lasting too long.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the instrument is too tense, it holds less heat.
Et doit avoir entre les .ij. coutelz .i. doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les .ij. leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en .ij. leus; et soient esloigniet entre les .ij. chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	The fire must have between the joints a space of one inch. Then when you have marked the joints, leave the loop of the needle burning above until it comes up to the bone, and grasp the vein with the needle; and let the hair be plucked between the joints because it is not soldered by this cautery in any way. This is the form of the cautery:
des larmes	The fire must have between the joints a space of one inch. Then when you have marked the joints, leave the loop of the needle burning above until it comes up to the bone, and grasp the vein with the needle; and let the hair be plucked between the joints because it is not soldered by this cautery in any way. This is the form of the cautery.
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When the tears of the eyes descend from the veins that are above the test of the chief of force, and it does not profit from any medical cure in this way, and you see the face of the patient contort, and feel that the front of the body is limp as if from fear; and since they are tense and moist if the papers are held close, and are scraped by the heat of the tears, if there is any hope of this cure.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins; et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	For if it is not firmly held, if you do not hold it tightly without doubt in all things.
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les .ij. fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	from the incision which is over the temple until the second incision; and squeeze all the marrow which is between the two incisions to the very surface of the bone, then do the rest of the wound until the other second, and then remove this thumb and index finger.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	If in the first fissure the instrument which is called the "cultellaire", and is very well cut on one side, and on the other is smooth, do not cut deeply, and this is its form:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	And place the costae knife towards the areolar cartilage at the shoulder, and the costae knife towards the bone, and keep it there until it reaches the midpoint of the fracture.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And cut all the blood vessels that go down from the head as long as the incision is continuous until it reaches the shoulder, and then do the same in the middle of the fracture until the other side; then drain the blood equally, and express the limb for the blood taken; then put in the wound a patch of cotton wool, and cover with wet cloths soaked in wine and oil and wool, and keep that the edges of the wound do not move; and after three days remove the dressing, and mix a great quantity of cold water, then cure the wound with basilic ointment with rose oil, and other cures for wounds, until it is healed.
dou reume des eulz	because of repeated swelling
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	When no acute burning comes, and you see the eyes tense and small, and the pupil dilate, and the papers burn; and the hair cries out, and where previously there was no pain, now there is great pain, and the patient expels; then it is certain that from these symptoms and the burning which comes from many veins, there is no other remedy except to cure the root of the matter.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	And command the patient to reattach his face, then make a great fissure from ear to ear, and another one wide here.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	And commence from the incision of the left temple to the right temple, and make the incision down to the bone; and take away your hand from the nerves of the temples that move to the cheek; and when the bone is exposed, if there is blood, drain it all with a sponge, and then dress between the two layers of the incision and put in cotton wool, and try to pull it out; then lay on the above-mentioned cloths soaked in wine and oil, and keep it warm; when it is set, know that you must rub the bone until it starts to grow, and then cure it with drying things, which cause it to harden.
En teil maniere: pren .ij. parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine .iiij. parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In part: take three parts of wheat flour and three parts of colophony, and make a poultice; and administer it to these wounds to make it callous throughout.</start_of_turn>
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the swelling of the ears
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des .iiij. choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	Everything that causes swelling of the ears is among these things: grains, or pus, or stone or other foreign bodies like iron; or seeds, like peas, beans, or beans; or fluid-filled things like urine and saliva or other things.</start_of_turn>
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	When it hurts in the ear, bone or other thing that does not fit into the ear, do not put it in, but put the ear on the sole of the foot
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus.	If you see the stone, if no drops of violet oil or flaxseed oil remain, then order extraction; and let him spit out the concoction, and stamp his nose when he spits, and put around his ear pieces of cloth or wool; and hold the ear downwards.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	Many times blood comes out by this treatment; and if it does not come out, order extraction as fine needles, for this is the form:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If it comes out by itself, that is good; if not, extract it with a fine needle of double curvature; and if it does not come out even with that, make an injection of ointment and cut off the top of the injection or break the ear very much, and stamp what is around the injection of ointment if it comes out and cannot enter with the needle; then the pain will cease, for often it comes out by itself as we have said; and if it does not come out in part, take hold of the ear and put on no instrument that can cause injury, and put a little cloth over; then press the hold on the stone or whatever it is, and the pain will cease.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If these things fail, if you are in haste to make an incision at the ear root or at the base of the jaw, and spasm, do as follows: make the first incision at the front of the head, and drain blood in accordance with its quantity. Then seat the patient between your hands and turn the ear downwards, and make a small incision at the root of the ear, at the fatty or bony prominence. Make the incision as wide as a crescent, until you reach the bone, and remove the pus promptly from your mouth. Continue the treatment until the wound is healed.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre .i. spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	If it is a grain that is ensnared and swells, administer extraction; if it cannot be extruded, administer a sponge held tightly according to this form:
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	and order incision of that grain.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	But do not do this until you think the grain is moist due to the moisture of the ear, until you have made many incisions; then extract with fine needles and suction, as we have said, so that the extraction is aligned
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	When the ear aches, then the patient must use an eardrops solution first, and fill the ear with plenty of cotton wool.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	And if there is no pain in that ear, or if the pain is still there.</start_of_turn>
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	if it jumps for that, that is good.</start_of_turn
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	If not, if you take many stones according to the length of your finger, and hold them tight and gently, and remove the hair with fire; and put the patient one or two fingers into his ear, and take hold of it from the other side, and put another finger on the ear that is in the ear; and do not stop doing this until the pain is completely gone. And when you see that the pain is gone, take away one of the fingers from the ear, and put the other finger on fire as long as the pain is not completely gone; then do the rest of the fingers as we have said for the stone.</start_of_turn>
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	In the extraction of the tooth, if it is of small size, like a flea and other small things, cure it as we have said in the preceding division; but if it is of large size, you can feel it; in such a case, extract the tooth. It is the easiest thing to remove that which is in the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	In the extraction of worms from the ear, when you have cured as we have said in the preceding division or performed distillations, and the cure has not been of benefit, if you wish to be certain, look at the ear in the sunlight: if there are no worms visible, if there are only superficial scratches, and if there are none, take the tweezers which are of this shape:
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	And let the wound be wide and deep.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	And leave the wound more subtle in the ear according to the amount of suffering of the patient, then afterwards make it bleed profusely; do this often until you see blood coming out.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And if they do not obey, if I stamp on the cotton wool as I have said concerning the stone; and if they do not bleed strongly as we have said, if you administer distillations that the ancients have proved useful in the incision of worms, you will find them or treat with distillations; and if you distill your oils and medicines into the ear with all these instruments, as you see, this is the form
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a .i. petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a .i. estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren .i. raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations .i. poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And let the wound be of silver or gold, be it small losses, and above put on for distillation; and press from within the distillation with a well-made instrument of gold, as I have said, and if you see take a scraper and wrap around the point immediately cotton; then I pour out your oil or juice, and what you see of your medicines in the can, and the can be in the ear; then put back the scraper on all the cotton, and press your hand moderately until the oil is distilled or almost all the ear; and let the patient feel it within, and let the distillation be neither too hot nor too cold, for the medicine will not be so good.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the swelling of the ears
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient .i. poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born without some hole in their ear; and the same thing happens at home through wound bursting or earwax being blocked in the ear, for these bursts never happen without leaving a mark on the ear, if one does not see; and never happens without a certain degree of loss of hearing, which one sees very well.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	When these bursts happen without being seen, they are a sign of serious illness in many cases, and in this case one sees that you put the painful ear in the sun; and look inside: if you see the opilation apparent, if the swelling has completely disappeared, this is the form:
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	And be it greasy or slimy before and behind all around, if it does not bleed the ear; if the opilation is of pus or earwax, if you see little pinpricks, and the swelling is lighter, as long as the pus is entirely bony.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	And if the boils are inflamed in the ear, take a blunt knife and burn a little at the fire, then put out or bandage the ear
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	If you feel the swelling which the patient experiences at the ear, pierce slightly, and hold that you do not damage the nerves of the ear; then place in the ear a plug according to the size of the perforation, and the mucus in the Egyptian manner.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Do nothing more until the wound is healed; take a swab and mix it with rose-water and powdered vitriol; if you see the swelling flee the ear, it is likely that you have pulled out the swab. Put in another swab soaked in oil of roses and beeswax until the swelling is bony; then cure it until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	If there is discharge of blood, soak a sponge and wring it out in cold water, and put it on the ear, and use other treatments that will stop the bleeding such as applying distillations.</start_of_turn>
de la char des papieres	De la char des papiers.
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	From the heap of papers
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And if without decor, if the cautery of the lenticular scar is done without incision, and the cautery is done afterwards, it is worth moving; and many times it repairs itself, so that nothing remains of its root; and when they are cauterized by fire, if they are burned those roots and do not return again.
de la gresle	De la gresle.
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	Many times come out of paper things that seem greasy in their form and in their hardness, and for this reason this disease is called "granule", and is an assembly of large moisture in the substance of the wound; the work is like this: take care that if the granuloma swells up from one side and the other, it is a light matter to know; then make the opening wide, then slightly burn the surrounding part, then take hold of the wound, and close.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	If you do not perceive enough sense to perceive the wound, if it does not grieve the patient; and if the wound is great, if the contents have a bulge, and the treatment is as long as it takes until it is healed; and if it is small, do not make force, because the wound itself restores quickly and heals quickly.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	If the granulin descends downwards towards the ear towards the upper part, reverse the wound, and bring the granulin to a few pinches; grasp and press from one side to the other; and if the wound is stripped by the incision, it will grieve nothing; and when the wound is closed, leave the dirty oil, and cure the limb of that which leaves a scar as long as the patient is healed.
de la graisse des eulz	from the fat of the blood
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	The oily exudate is enclosed in papers of paper which are softened by heat; this happens more often in women than in men, and causes great swelling at their eyes, and they weep continuously; and because of this they keep their eyes shut and lie sleeping, and their papers are softened by their tears which swell up and appear covered in the oily exudate which emerges in the oil.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	And when you press the limb towards your chest and feel the exudate between the shoulder blades,
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren .i. drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	When the patient puts his head in order; then take one drape of linen, and make a loop in the manner of a circle according to the quantity of exinach from the chest part, and put it on; and press on the thumbs from one side and the other, so that the exinach is gathered into the circle; then make in the middle of the moisture at the tip of the knife a wound not larger than the wound made to the vein; and make the skin taut as long as you see the exinach; and in various situations comes exinach from the wound, according to the shape of a white piece of fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Pull out all the fatty tissue from the piece of cartilage between your thumbs at the back, and twist your hand to the right and to the left as much as possible; and keep that you do not bring together in the wound, that you do not reach the whole thickness just until the oil, that you do not stain it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	And if it escapes not at the beginning of the incision, if you expand a little the incision lightly until it opens; then draw it out as we have said, and moisten the edges with oil and water, and put on the limb, and strain it gently.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	if there are such people who break wind and put their thumbs up to corrupt the moisture which is softened.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it comes to the vein above the ankle, if the cure of closing blood vessels is too great while it is still sane.
des poilz des papieres	paper hair
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc .iiij. manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When paper-like tissues grow hair-like bristles other than their natural state, and are thickened, if they irritate the eyes, they cause various diseases such as tears, and softening of the paper-like tissues and mucus, as well as the destruction of the hairs; and the cure for this is in three ways: either by whole-body cautery with fire, or by means of water medicine as I have said, or by incision and stitching or by sutures, as I shall say.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai .i. fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai .i. fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	You must place the patient’s hand over your left hand; if the paper changes, that is good; if not, if there is an awl with a single thread at the root of the hair; whether you cut the edge of the paper or the hair sprouts from these hairs, take a single thread from the root of the hair to the tip of the paper, and stretch it out; then pull out the hair from the root, from the root of the bristles to the tip of the nail; then draw out the single thread, and put on the paper a small patch of cotton and bandage, and mark on the paper a sign like the mark of a thrush, and know that the sign must be in accordance with the quantity of the paper that you see being lifted that is required for all.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor; et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	And if it comes to the vein above the ankle, if the cure of closing blood vessels is too great while it is still sane.
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	Then hold together that which is above with small forces equally following the shape that is there.
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans; et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	And if you are unable to hold the teeth firmly, and the matter is not equal, take a needle or two and pass a thread through the figure; and pass another thread loosely around the great loop, and the second thread loosely around the little loop, and join the two threads together evenly; then hold your hand evenly, and hold all the skin around which you have signed, as we have recounted; and join the two layers of the wound together by stitching, and cure until it is healed; and if an abscess comes to your incision, if you apply cerate and similar soothing dressings. Never again shall the hair of the papillae be converted: if you use what we have said about the incision; but the stitching in one and the other is more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai .ij. caines par art, et .ij. liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as .ij. chiés de .ij. pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les .ij. cainnes des .ij. parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	The cure for boils is as follows: convert the beard and the hair inwards as I have said, then make four incisions by art, and four fine threads as long as the beard and the diameter of a hazelnut; and put in four hairs or hold the threads. Then assemble the one and the other firmly on that which rests on the oil of the beard; strain the four incisions from the four parts forming; and leave it so for several days, and the skin which has been strained will become pale and wrinkled and will swell, until it heals by itself.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	If it is late, if the boil has great force, then cure until it is healed; and when the wound is closed and the papillae are withdrawn, they will not prick again; and this is the form of two nails you shall make according to this figure and according to this quantity of length and width.
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute .i. fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse .i. autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	The work is such that you grasp a fine needle, and there is inside it a thread of silk fine and subtle; then assemble the hairs and do not knot one with the other subtly, and let the length of the thread be as long as a palm; then command in the chase another thread subtle of silk briefly, and do not knot the chief with the thread; then put the patient's chief in your hand; and let go of the sun if the work is clarified, for it is a subtle and light work, then withdraw the needle at all the chase in the root of the hair which grows naturally; then pull out the hair until it breaks at the root as much as you pull out naturally; then draw out the hand as much as the vein escapes at all the chase in the palm with the natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne .i. poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	If the chase is treated and the hair does not come out with it, if you draw out the chase to the end of the thread that you have commanded, until the chase vein comes out from under and you see it through the vision of the oil; then if you draw out the chase and the thread, close the oil and leave it closed for two or three days, until the hair comes back to its place and the burden is gone.
de la porriture de l’oil	of the corruption of the oil
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	When this disease which is called "aleacrati" or the putrefaction comes to the boil, if there are two ways: one natural, and the other unnatural.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	And there comes from the wound, or from the ulcer or the cautery, and from similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	And the way of working in this is that you close the wound, dry the flesh, put in lint, and leave it until it is healed; and do not do anything but use things that dry and restrain
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	For if you do this, if the disease comes back worse than before; but there are things that soften, such as fennel; and alum or salt and poppyseed be boiled in any oil, and it covers a bandage, and treats this.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the treasure of your cure is that you must take care that it does not heal differently from the form it had before; and this work that we have said is not fierce except for addressing this disease, that it does not return differently from the form it had before.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	Of the fire that comes from the oil.
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	This disease which is called saxacrati in reality is natural and accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	This disease which is called saxacrati in reality is natural and accidental. The cause comes from wounds and cuts and cautery and things similar; and the way of the disease is that if you take an awl, because it has two folds, and the handle in the flesh, and it pierces the left tear duct so that the vein bursts through two fingers of the flesh; then the flesh above is raised up to the awl, and the handle has one large spathe.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the mark of the awl comes back as it should, that is good; if not, take a saw and put it into the wound, and turn the bone, and make two incisions or break two bones within the bone; and if two fingers of the two incisions which you have made are cut, or if you make one angle so that when they are reunited, the mark should be as if it were the letter that has not "two knees"; then hold that bone according to the quantity of its cost and its weight, of that which sustains the bone, then join the two broken parts with a thread of silk; then cure with what we have said of the mollifying medicines and patches, until it is healed.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les .ij. leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	If the ailment comes from a fracture, sprain or cautery, if it is known that there is hair loss from papery substances, and as above; then separate between the two leaves of a tent, as I have said; and it must be carried out according to the form of the ailment, for it is diverse in form, and the wise masters appear to know everything better than I do concerning the return of the limb to its natural shape; and the patient himself, according to what is convenient for him and the instruments in more numerous positions.
dou soudement de la papiere	If the ailment comes from a fracture, sprain or cautery, if it is known that there is hair loss from papery substances, and as above; then separate between the two leaves of a tent, as I have said; and it must be carried out according to the form of the ailment, for it is diverse in form, and the wise masters appear to know everything better than I do concerning the return of the limb to its natural shape; and the patient himself, according to what is convenient for him and the instruments in more numerous positions.
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	When this stiffness arises at home in part as the limb above is soothed with white oil, and cannot move or perform its natural works, if it is known that the bone has been fractured, then it must be bled from the point of a scraper from below the bone, and held up high; and the edges must be bound as tightly as possible, without causing excessive pain, for the patient cannot endure too much pain or excessive bleeding; and the incision, which you have made, must be slight, so that the limb returns to its natural shape; and all that is assembled must be thoroughly cleansed, and no longer washed in salted water, but with fresh water, and oil; and between the bone and the oil put a bandage of lint, and cover the oil with coarse wool in abundance; and after that apply a support as much as is necessary until it is healed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	De l’ungle de l’oil.
Saiches que li ungle est selonc .ij. manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a .i. dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	The fennel oil has two kinds: one is nervous and somewhat dark like pitch, and the other is not nervous but is like pale moisture that solidifies when touched by iron and becomes black like soot; both of them begin to soften towards the great marrow, and grow so much that they cover the whole cavity and the brightness and movement of the oil.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met .i. poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et .i. fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	And as for the incision, if the patient places his head in its right place, then hold the eyes; then grasp the hair with your hand, then take a needle and make a small incision at the root of the hair; insert one hair of a horse, or of a sheep, or of a bull, and a strong thread; double the point of the needle once and pass the needle through the hair, and grasp the hair with the thread and pull it out, and with all the hair surrounding the root that surrounds the nail and the hair to the root, then cut away all the superfluous tissue until only a little bit of the natural oil remains; and if there is no other discharge from the incision, do not extend the incision alone, but with the thread as we have said; then stretch out the surrounding tissue as much as possible.
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	And keep that the spatula does not touch the fatty tissue and breaks it, and that the needle is not perceived; and after the incision pour oil a little bit of bruised salve, and apply a bandage, and leave it until the other side; then cure what is necessary until it is healed.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And if the nail is not nerveous, and you cannot push out the needle, and the thread does not go in, many times this semblance of a nail of medicine is cured; and as I have said in the division, if you see it covered, if you pour oil on the patient, and take the spatula lightly according to this form:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	And remove the nail gradually, and if you see that it has diminished point and the wound is pressing, if you distill from your mouth into the oil bandage make of alum and red salve, and bruise the salve, and squeeze out the oil until the other side; then repeat the other operation according to this same operation, until it is completely healed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing opposes you in the oil, as with an abscess, then milk first and cure the abscess thoroughly while it is sound, then repeat the work as before, while it is sound.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	If there appears in the oil at night a piece of soft tissue that causes great swelling, if you suspend it on an onion and cut off a part and not all, that blood does not arise; then distill in the red oil of colera which is made from litharge.</start_of_turn>
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	of the flesh that arises on the plumule.
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre; et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	The fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	But always know that you should temper the treatment with a weak oil of natural origin; and by chance, in the work of iron; and do not move your hand in any of these works until you see that this limb is suffering from that work.
des voines des eulz	Des voines des eulz.
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	The veins are red which are covered with oil, and endure the gaze of the fire and burn the oil entirely every day.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	The physician must first observe that the oil is indeed on the veins, for if it is not, the pain is fierce, and there is no other disease more fierce than this; therefore the physician must do this in parts: instruct the patient to place his head in his health, then suspend the veins all around as he deems fit, and let the incisions be as subtle as possible in this fashion.
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en .i. cors selonc ceste forme:	Red veins covered with oil, tolerate the gaze of the eye and expel the oil throughout the days. The surgeon must therefore be the first to notice if the oil is strong; for there is no other disease more violent than a wound; therefore the surgeon should act immediately: instruct the patient to put his head in a normal position, then suspend those veins to the utmost extent of his skill, and do so discreetly in the following manner:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	Red veins covered with oil, tolerate the gaze of the eye and expel the oil throughout the days. The surgeon must therefore be the first to notice if the oil is strong; for there is no other disease more violent than a wound; therefore the surgeon should act immediately: instruct the patient to put his head in a normal position, then suspend those veins to the utmost extent of his skill, and do so discreetly in the following manner: discreetly suspend those veins without causing any pain, and let the blood drain out afterwards; do this work at midday when the sun is shining, and be wary of any spasms.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	And if you cannot bear all this in that hour, make an ointment from oil and soothing things to soothe the pain of the eyes, and leave it on for some days until the pain is appeased and the swelling has subsided; then repeat according to this manner until you are well; this is the way of strength.
de la fistule de l’oil	And if you cannot bear all this in that hour, make an ointment from oil and soothing things to soothe the pain of the eyes, and leave it on for some days until the pain is appeased and the swelling has subsided; then repeat according to this manner until you are well; this is the way of strength.
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	The mire is called "arissati": when you cure it with cautery and medicine with burning water, as I have said before, and it is not completely healed, if there is still something remaining on the incision, leave it in place and drain all the moisture from it, until the bone is exposed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a .i. chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bone breaks, and you see the corruption and blackness, if the limb has all the elements to be whole; it is called an "aspre chief," and be made of burnt ivory, that is, a broken bone, and be pointed out as with a lime as when it is in this form.
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And put on the limb the broken bone, then twist it between your two hands, and press your hand until you feel that the corruption is reset; do this never, then restore the limb of exiccative medicines.</start_of_turn>
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	If the limb is dislocated, and the char is not born, and the flesh of the limb is dislocated, and remains so for XL days, and does not heal and is not closed, and the patient does not recover, even if he be well; if this is not the case, if there is no other remedy except to open the fistula again by force, and by sharp medicines, and when it has been opened as much as is necessary, take hold of the limb at three angles, and the fistula should be reduced to its natural position as you see here:
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	Then place your thumb on the bone below the lump, and wipe your hand with oil; then pull the thread all the way through until it breaks the bone and the patient feels it through the skin where the thumb has been resting; and when the thread has gone in, restore the dry medicine, as I have taught you, and when the thread comes out and becomes firm, if there is matter in the thumb; if it is less serious for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	Then place your thumb on the bone below the elbow, and move your hand away from the oil immediately, then pull the limb back until it pierces the bone and the patient feels it through what comes from under his arm if he keeps his hand on his elbow.  Then restore the dry medicine, as I have taught you, and when the wound heals and the limb endures, if there is still matter in the elbow; if it is a lighter matter for the patient.
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil .i. liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en .iiij., et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the limb opens all at once, and there is no displacement of the navel, no swelling, if you must bind the patient; then loosen it, and put on a bandage or dressing in a circular fashion to suck out the wound, then put on oil.i. with acaice and aloe and incense and beeswax, and then strain the oil, and replace it with lint and cloth; and keep the cloth in place if you take cloth enough soft, and double bandage in three layers, and then put one on top of the other according to the quantity that the wound has in it; then strain it by pressing down with a stiff bandage, and reapply the dressing to suck out the wound in a circular fashion; then tie the dressing and leave the oil strained for a night, and if the wound has softened, if you must strain it out; then tie the limb up after the night and the morning, and if you see the oil returning, that is good; if not; continue the dressing and the cloth and the limb and the dressing until it is healed.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	Dou derrompement de toile uvee.
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com .i. grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait .i. fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, then open the joint, and if there are papers within like grains of resin, leave them; for it is expected to see them. If you see them covered, the work is like biting an awl at the root of the lower part until below the middle, then insert another awl or there is a double thread of the lower part; and make it pierce, and leave the first awl as it lies. Then grasp the double thread and bind the upper part of the limb firmly, then pull out the awl and put on lint soaked in oil in abundance; and leave it until the thread is severed with the limb, then cure the oil of comforting things until the wound is healed; and never is the wound restricted by the limb that is under tension by a circle of silk, until it is healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound has great appearance, if you pierce at the soft cartilage which comes from the middle of the oil, and correct the moist vapor and bring down the wound, and put them together; then pull out the awl until it is healed.
de la bowe de l’oil	De la bowe de l’oil.
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	The disease called "alcunnati" is not fierce but dull, which is put together in oil, resembling descending ice, and it is not actually ice; and the way this disease appears is that you make the patient sit on a comfortable and upright chair, and take hold of the chief between your hands two parts, and move it until you see the dullness coming down to your eyes; then either bind it tightly and do not remove the light, or break the light and see the patient do the same; and if it does not descend, it is like ice, and if it descends gradually as we have said.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If thou seest the patient sitting between thy hands, then take the sponge and place it upon the corn of the eye I by the course of the conjunctiva with the corn of the eye and the brow, until the eye is released; and when it is out, distill into the hot oil mixed with honey, or into vinegar or fenugreek boiled with honey, then let it be cured of some other remedy until it is healed.
des aigues de l’oil	of the belly of the oil.
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit.	We have seen the signs of worms in the division, and what it is proper to do; if in their work they please the health.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	You must make the patient sit between your hands crossed, and take away the light from the sun, and put on the oily unguent and tighten the mouth very firmly; then take the thumb of your left hand if the eye is left, or your right hand if the eye is right; then take in your right hand, if the eye is left, the instrument which is called the “almagda,” or in your left hand, if the eye is right; then put the point of the instrument below the brow by the thickness of a nail at the part where the lesser tear meets the greater tear, and pull out the instrument which is called the “almagda” usefully, and restore your hand until it pierces in the tear, and feel that the “almagda” comes to the empty thing; and it is the measure of the almagda that is at the height of the measure of the space from the plum of the nail to the end of the black. And that is the brow of the oil; if you see the bone in that paper by the clarity of the corn of the eye, then put the instrument until it is almost level or the water is, and then press the thumb away from the way after the other.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	If he feels pain now, if he sees the patient in front of him and the instrument in his oil.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	After a little rest, if he feels pain again, if he sees the patient in front of him and the instrument in his oil, grasp the instrument with force and when it is firmly fixed and does not rise, grasp the thumb and index finger lightly around the hand towards the thumb and index finger; and then reintroduce the thumb into the oil.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	Then put by force the oil soaked with wool or cloth soaked in rose oil and in abundance of eggs, and bind with the pure oil.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	Yes, and those who are of our age, put on wool broth with abundance of eggs.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if the almagda does not enter the oil because there are too many hairs in the way, since this is the shape of the instrument:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	And pierce only the conjunctiva slightly, and do not go too deeply, but make the limb limp, then put the thumb back in place; as we have said. And at the end of the work appears to the patient the bearer of the wound, who sleeps on his back in the dark; and be careful of all movements, and take gentle food, and do not move his head forward or backward, and bind according to his disposition until the seventh day; then take him out of this house to the same dark place, and ask him to look at something, and do not let him see anything, and then put his hand back in the same place as before. Do not do this at the beginning of the treatment or after the incision now, but do make sure that you feed him, for he has become very hungry
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	Leave the hairs long and even, and if you prick them at their root, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow. For in this work, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die. When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury. Leave the hairs long and even, and if you prick them at their root, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow. For in this work, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	And then go from the house to the field, and in such cases convert; and towels that no disciple must interfere with in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And one came to us from the Yrach region who told us that in their peace they used to do an ointment with honey that when it was applied to the wound, the pain would subside; however, we have never seen or heard of such a thing in our land or in the books of the ancients; and it is a new thing for us.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And these are the signs of the forms of an almond, for he who does not know them will not recognize them; and be of barley properly:
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en .iij. angles ague.	And their tops are of this same subtlety, and their backs in two angles like a goosefoot.</start_of_turn>
de la char sor le neis	From the shoulder joint downwards to the wrist.
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	Never are born or fall diverse hairs, that which seem like scorpions in their mouths; and if there are such or if there is hair entangled with blood-red color, or hair of sulfur color.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	When these hairs are of sulfur and not entangled, it is sufficient that you make the patient sit between your hands facing the sun; cover their nose, and throw the urine on those hairs, and drive them away; for thus you will support the subtle gut from the sharp part until you are certain that the hair is entirely dry.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout .i. des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	If nothing remains to hold it, if the opening has all its instruments lightly held, if nothing is left; and if without you snoring, or incision close to the eye, if the escape is like it should be; and if it is malignant incisions, hasten and cauterize as much as you can until it is stained and the hair is burned over, then spit or do not spit easily, but with pain or wine.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	If it does not happen that the urine comes, and moisture comes up to the palate, be sure that it is healthy; and if moisture does not cease if it should, be sure that there is new hair in the bone below, for the flesh does not come out whole: therefore you must drink a large thread of linen, and grasp it with your hands, and give it between each nipple an inch or less; and put the patient’s head on the thread at the bottom, and treat it until it comes out through the nipple; and many times do the children do this, and it is a light matter for him who has seen it done; then hold the chief which comes out through the nipple to one hand, and the other chief which comes out through the mouth to the other hand, and grasp one after the other while sitting as we are or as we have.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait .i. mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	And be it of silver or of gold, like a large lamp, if like a sponge; and guide it thus; and if you see, make a close bundle, and make the instruments flat to purge the chief; and have one hand on the chief to hold it when we burn oil or no liquid.
de la char sor le neis	From the shoulder joint downwards to the wrist.
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	Many times there arises at the root of the arm a disease which is called “telul,” and it grows and becomes great at once, so that it appears like a thing to behold; and because of this it is expedient that you should commence to apply the cautery or burning medicine at the outset, and break the bone afterwards; and if you delay in covering it when it is great, if you take warning when it is hard, of foul discharge, of bad sense: if you do not touch it with iron, for it is a swollen abscess, for when you touch it once, there results great harm to the patient; and if the abscess is of soft touch, not of foul discharge, you can see that you can cover it all, if you drain the patient and cover it with oil, and cure the limb of dry and restraining things.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	when the arm is cut and bound
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	Do as such while you know that they [the boils] have not corrupted the hair, then draw the thread, wipe the blood, and moisten the thread with Egyptian balsam, and put it back in place as before; do this for three days or more, until the abscess has corroded all that remains of the hair; and then put on or remove a cautery sponge for a few days until it is healed, and if there is need for sedatives, use them. This is the form of the instrument for purging the head, from which we distill the oils and medicines or not.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it does not happen in any way, if you observe that the wound is fresh throughout its entirety; then join the two layers to a rib, and cure until it is healed. If the layers are already separated from one side and the other, if you can, hold all the parts together until they bleed, then reassemble the two layers to a rib, and strain, and sprinkle over it powdered dragon’s blood, and incense. Place upon the powders a piece of packing of great or other solid dressing, and leave it until it bleeds by itself, then cure until it is healed.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The way to stitch is that you reassemble the solution: or with needles, as we have said in the costure of the belly; or with thread, as I have told you.
des apostemes des levres	abscesses of the edges of the wound
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	At home on the hands there are dense layers of skin, sometimes like grains of wheat, smaller and larger; therefore it is likely that you will tear the skin and make incisions on each little hair, and grasp them with tweezers and pull them out at the root; then employ the paste after the incision of the little carbuncle, until it is no longer stained; and then remove the paste easily, and cure the limb of dry things until it is healed.
de la char des gencives	Of the teeth of the jaw.
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Many times comes upon the gums the white teeth which are called 'albuly'; if you support them, grasp the root and pull out the socket or the blood; then take out the little carbuncle with the vitriole burn or other astringent and drying powders; and if the tooth comes out after the incision, and this happens often, if you grasp it a second time and burn it; if it does not come out after the burn; this is the form of the instruments to cover it
des sordens	Des sordens.
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	Once are gathered at the root of the tooth, within the mouth between the gums, teeth that are white and rough; and never are the teeth black and yellow and soft, as long as corruption comes to the gum, and are the teeth biting; if it is that you make the patient sit between your hands, and his shoulder be in your chest, and open the teeth or the gums open, until there remains nothing; and thus make black and green, and yellow and other spots, as long as they are whole; and if one has what is at the first reason, it is good; if not, if he must repeat the second and third time, until you have done everything; and the teeth that have mixed with various forms of instruments to repair, according to what the work shows, for the raisers of the teeth that you must drive out have other forms than those with which you must drive between the teeth; and these forms and others are with you visible.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	It is necessary when you cure the tooth of its pain that you do not leave it too long to treat it as much as you wish, for this must not be done carelessly; for it is a high-quality material so therefore we have no excuse for omitting to drive it out
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	Therefore, when the patient is constrained to suffer, if you are certain that it is necessary, you must be certain that he will endure it.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	Many times the patient feels pain, and it is cured either because it is already absent or because it has become accustomed; and every time the pain does not depart despite this, as long as the patient remains alive, for we have already wished to make them suffer; and when you are well certain that he will endure it, if you can, hold his hand firmly to all sides; then pull the limb strongly from the root and hold firmly in place at the first and second joints, until they are well dislocated; then confirm them well. Be sure that the patient’s limb is completely still between your thighs, and hold it firmly if it does not move
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	After that, stretch the tooth outwards towards the cheek, and if it does not yield, take none of these instruments and hold it loosely within the cheek, and move it as you did before.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	And if it is grasped and softened, if you can, cover it with bandages, or if you have pierced it; and if you strain it cautiously, do not break it while straining; and must keep your mouth moist over the gum to soften the tooth.</start_of_turn>
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	Take care that you do not break it, and leave some of it, and return to the patient with the greater pain of the first time.</start_of_turn
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	Beware that you do not do like the ignorant layman, who break their bones at every opportunity without any reason, and do not listen to what we have told them; but they bring about their own downfall through the root of great pain, or the fracture itself, as we have often seen. And when the tooth is extracted, wash the wound with wine or vinegar and oil; and if there is bleeding, which often happens, apply a piece of vitriol sponge; and if that does not suffice, cauterize it.</start_of_turn
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The forms of instruments, when they are mute at first, whether with long points and broad handles, that they do not double much when you draw the tooth; these are the forms:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And be of great limbs if they do not bend much when you draw, and be of iron well made, and be toothed so as to hold them in place.</start_of_turn>
de la racine des dens	from the root of the tooth.</start_of_turn>
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou ij.,	When the root remains fixed at the back, if you must take out the moist cotton swab that is in the ear, do it with forceps or your fingers.
tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	As long as the limb is softened, since the nails appear like barley corn, make them as thin as can be made with a file, and this is the form:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not suffice to withstand all these tensions, if you must uncover the flesh entirely around the root, and put in the instrument which is called “althali,” which is to say tweezers, for this is the shape:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	And be strong and firm, lest it break my skin, and if the root jumps by this, that is good; if not, aid it with all your instruments, for these shapes will come afterwards.
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait .ij. rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you use this instrument which has teeth, for this is the shape:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	And other instruments which are before the teeth, and this instrument which appears like a great clamp, whose form is as follows:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	And other instruments which are before the teeth, and this instrument which appears like a great clamp, whose form is as follows: let this instrument be strong enough not to break, and its handles like those of other instruments for teeth; and there are other instruments which are not mentioned here; and the master surgeon will discover by himself his instrument, according to what his works and his experience show, for there are various diseases for which the old methods do not teach any instrument because of their diversity; and if it breaks not from bone or other bones, or if it is crooked, if it seeks other instruments, as I have said, and helps with gestures, as is its form.
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And let them be large and firm to hold the bone, that it does not slip, but can hold and restrain; and then restore the limb of medicine suitable for this, and if there is decay in the bone, and it is slight, if the grasp has all of these instruments:
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a .i. petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When the tooth appears does not match its natural form, and the shape is unsightly, and even in women of gentle birth, if one should think that it is hidden within the tooth, and is not in its rightful place, and one cannot soothe it or support it: then it must be extracted; and if it is foreign to the tooth, if one grasps this instrument which has this shape, which is like a small beak, and is made of iron without a groove at the top:
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And it must be grasped firmly and cautiously with the hands just as long as the tooth lasts, and because of that one must not move the others, and if it appears, it can be limed, if one uses a file like this which has the same shape.
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	And it is just like making nails; and while holding the tooth firmly and cautiously with the hands, if it moves even slightly, if it cries out, the tip should be filed off at the end when it is finished, for if it is too deep it bites the tongue, if one should file away the roughness as much as it is equal, so that it does not bite the tongue or corrupt the speech.
quant li dent lochent	When the teeth are loose.
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	When the tooth before the jaw is loose, by percussion or biting, and the patient cannot press against that which annoys him that it does not bleed, and you must treat him with restrictive medicines, which is of no use; if you must restrain it with a gold wire, because the silver wire turns green and swells, but the gum does not move; and let the wire be neither too thick nor too thin, according to the quantity of the space between the teeth; and if you see that the teeth are aligned, if you take hold of the wire and double it between the two front teeth, then place the teeth between the other teeth, if there are one or more of them, until you see clearly up to the sound tooth on the other side; then finish the covering up to the part where you began, and strain your hand steadily and cautiously, until it does not move; and let the bandage be fixed to the root of the tooth if it cannot escape.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	Then take the ends of the thread and gather them together, and put them between the sound teeth, and keep them close until they bleed no more; and then leave them close as much as they can stay in place, and if they slip or the thread breaks, if the strain of another thread; if it should remain and serve close at hand, and this is the form of a knot and the figure of the dressing of the two thumbs, as you see.
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And when the tooth bites, if you put it back in its place, fresh from fresh, as we have said; and do not let anything interfere that is not wise and soothing, and never make its form like that of a chipped tooth, and put it back in its place or the default is there, and strain it as we have said, and remain and serve steadily for a long time.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	De coper lou liien de la lengue.
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	Never is this thread that comes from the outside of the tongue or nature that is not born close at hand; or by chance of a deep wound; and the work is such that you must cover the mouth of the patient, and place your thumb in his mouth, and hold the tongue; then take hold of the large nerve as much as the tongue is displaced from its place, and if there is any delay or not, and this is the sign of a wound, if it has burst the vessel and taken hold of the large thread; and keep that the wound is not too deep, for the artery that is outside; and when you have done this, if you lift the limb of pink and easy, or of cold water, and put the tongue outside a little attempt of linen; and bind the patient tightly so that the limb cannot move.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	And if blood flows from the wound, take out the glass vial and break it; if it does not stop, cauterize with the lentiginous cautery, which is good for this; then treat with other remedies until it is healed.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see pus of a color or black or hard, if the patient does not feel it, do not touch it, for it is a cancer; and if it is declining to swell, and there is moisture, if it evacuates the clot, and you make a small incision, and deliver from one side and the other; and if it does not go away from your work, if you put on a clot and broil it until it is dry, then come back to your work until you have finished all your work; then lift the pale and thick blood, and cure it with other treatments until it is healed.
des apostemes de la gorge	Des apostemes de la gorge.
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	Sometimes comes from the throat bones which are called "godath", and the seeds are two almonds; and when you treat them, as we have said in the division, and they are not healed, take care: if it is abscesses of small size and of soft color, do not touch them with iron.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	And if it is red and the root is large, do not touch it with iron; but leave it until it is dead, and then you will remove it, or it will break by itself; and if it is pale in color and the root is thin, if you have brought the instrument to cover, but look first if the abscess has settled and is calm.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	When thus he sits the patient before the sun, and his shoulder joint is in its proper place, he should cover his mouth with his hands and grasp the testicles between them, and press the tongue downwards to the utmost of his ability; and let there be silver or barley as subtle as a needle.
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	...press the tongue downwards towards the instrument, as it is done; and let it be of silver or gold, just like a nail.
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have this instrument present, if you have only a pair of tongs, know that this is the form:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les .ij. amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les .ij. amandres igament.	And if you do not have this instrument present, if you have only a pair of tongs, know that this is the form: grasp the one of the nails with one tong, and the other with the other hand; and when you have grasped one nail, grasp the other in the same way, and then make an incision, gargle the patient with hot water, hot and easy, and when the blood has drained, if there are still clots of blood, either break them up with pomegranate seeds, or burn them with bay leaves, or similar things, until the wound is clean; then cure as it is healed; and never again shall there be any other incision in the throat except for the two nails, if you grasp them just as the two nails remain intact.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	And I medicated a woman with an abscess that was inside the throat, that is to say a small abscess; and she had it very close to the throat, so that the woman could not breathe through the passage that was blocked, and could not eat or drink, and died if she lingered in that state for a day or two.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	And the abscess was so high that it had forced out two stones through the two holes that were inside.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	I had drunk too much, and had lain in one place a long time, then I felt a fire burning, and in that fire a great portion of my bow was consumed; then I put the rest on the other side where I did not feel the pain, and I closed the mouth and pressed the tongue; afterwards I put the incision back into these abscesses, and I closed a part of it, and did not come out of it but a little blood; and in that place the lady who was accompanying me fainted, and when I began to drink water and wine, I could not stop vomiting from that place for a long time; and the abscesses were getting larger and filling up my belly as much as I could bear; so I bound them and cauterized them within the throat: after that I felt some sense of crossing; and I left those parts, and only God knows what happened to me after that.
de l’uve	De l’uve.
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	When the limb descends at the shoulder, and it flees and is long, it is called "perpendiculaire"; and if it is broad and round, it is called "uve".
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	When it is sutured as we have said in the division, and the cure does not help, and you see that the wound is appeased, and it is subtle, if you must, you must close it; and that which is round and complete and is not long; and that is bloody or of yellow or black colour, if you must avoid the incision of the wound.</start_of_turn>
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	For there is great peril upon the patient.</start_of_turn
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	Therefore, when you see it, as I have said, by its stench and its length, you must make the patient sit in the sunlight, and press the tongue with the instrument that we mentioned before; then remove the burr from the limb, and close with two instruments that I have mentioned in the incision of the two thumbs.</start_of_turn
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And must not cover more than the excess that is beyond the natural limit; for if you do more, you grieve the voice and the word. And after the incision, use what we have said concerning the incision of the two almonds, and cure it until it is healed.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	And if the patient has fear of covering, then must you use something to support the cauterization in the painful area
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	And the manner of the cautery if it is acute is severe.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	And that the patient puts his head in his sound, and then presses the tongue to the instrument that we have said or the master of cautery, and grasp with live hair, if it is not too thick or too clear; and use the handle of this instrument, as it is formed:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés .iiij. jors ou .v. Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the limb hangs downwards, and it is loosened and becomes long, if it is called a "perpendicular"; and if it is thick and round, if it is called an "uve". When it is cured as we have said in the division, and the cure does not help, and you see that the after-pain has disappeared, and it is subtle, if you must, when you see it, in its color and its length, that you make the patient sit in the sunlight, and press the tongue to the instrument which we mentioned earlier; then close the wound with the needle and thread that we mentioned before. And it must not be closed more than is necessary beyond the natural limit; for if you do, the voice and the tongue will grieve. And after the incision, use what we mentioned in the incision of the two thumbs, and cure until it is healed. And if the patient has fear of the closure, it must be used with the cautery from the side of the fear. And the manner of cautery is acute. And it is that the patient puts his head in his hand, and then presses the tongue to the instrument which we mentioned or the chapter of cautery, and grasp with live charcoal, if it is not too thick or too thin; and use the handle of this instrument, from which it is known.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en .i. pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait .i. estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This cure is safer than incision, for the cautery; if it is cured by fumigation as described in this manner, take charcoal and isops and origanum and rue and chamomile and avronne and similar herbs, and gather all of them together in one pot, and put them in, and boil; and the pot should be well glued with strong earth, and in the middle of the pot put one instrument with a handle as described in this manner:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	And let it be of silver or gold, or let one of the hands be beaten in the patient’s mouth until the vapor rises to the eye through the caning, until the eye is dead; after that, it must be repeated often, until the eye is dry, and keep that you do not do this at the commencement of the eruption of the diseased tooth, for many things happen; and do not do this except at the subsidence of the diseased tooth.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	And if this instrument is not present, take a caning and put a speck of egg inside the patient’s mouth, so that the mouth does not become too hot; for the speck of egg does not make the vapor rise in the mouth, and this is a good remedy in general health.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou .i. morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge .i. fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren .i. estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Many times it has happened to me at the throat bone or fish spine, or nothing; so therefore it is right that you should know what you see, and press the tongue to the sun with all the instrument, so that you see the thing; and what does not appear to you and is returned to the throat, do make the patient vomit the illness as soon as the meat is cooked in the stomach; in case it is expelled by vomiting; or the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of navel, or a lettuce root, or some piece of dry bread; and tie the sponge to one thread, and then transfix it; and when it comes back, if it is expelled, and then draw it out; and if it does not come out of what we have said, take one instrument of sponge as described above:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	And let the instrument curve at the head if it can enter more easily through the neck, with the head raised up; and guard that you do not touch the epiglottis, for it will not go down, nor will you push the bone inwards; and must you value that the patient has come to take the instrument, for it is either stiff or something is wrong; if the epiglottis is swallowed, or if you force it down with all the instrument equally, as much as it is forced.
de la sansue de la gorge	And let the instrument curve at the head if it can enter more easily through the neck, with the head raised up; and guard that you do not touch the epiglottis, for it will not go down, nor will you push the bone inwards; and must you value that the patient has come to take the instrument, for it is either stiff or something is wrong; if the epiglottis is swallowed, or if you force it down with all the instrument equally, as much as it is forced.
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	Never is medicine without sense, as I have said in the division, by the treatment of medicines; and when this does not help, then look at the patient’s throat in the sunlight, and then press the tongue against the instrument that I have mentioned
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	And if you see the armpit, if the hair has grown too little in one place, or if there are subtle tensions that are worth as much.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	And if that is not sufficient, if you take a saw and hold it at the patient's throat, then push or pull the saw from the root of the hair, and do this often.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	And if the patient cries out with acute pain all around.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	Then take full view of the acute cold, cover the mouth, and make the patient swallow violently; and if the armpit feels the pain, cry out immediately
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	And if it does not cry out as we have said, if you smell the patient with vinegar, with the instrument that I have mentioned in the fumigation of the eye; do this many times, for it will soon be successful.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	And thus with fumigation, if you take a pot or there are charcoal pieces visible, cover the patient’s face with a gauze and hold the instrument’s handle; then pour the fumigation and the patient puts the tip of the cannula in his mouth, closes his mouth, so that the smoke does not go out, but comes out through the nose; and the nose will now bleed, and if it does not bleed, repeat the fumigation many times; and the patient will suffer thirst, eat dirty and foul things, and do not drink water; and thus he will be forced to vomit by this government.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	And the shape of the instrument is like that which we treat the boils with, if indeed when we see it, it is like a pair of tongs with teeth to enter the throat; and it has the shape of a beak of a heron, and it has a lime-like roughness, so that whatever it grasps, it cannot let go; and thus is the shape.
li chapistres des apostemes	The chapters on abscesses.
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	The signs of an abscess are, as one remembers from one place to another in this book, diverse in perforation and size; and there are two methods by which it is manifested, one of which is similar to itself, and the other which is due to moisture.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	And the second method if the limb is hanging loose or it is fixed in place.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	for the fracture of the upper part is different from that of the foundation, and the fracture of the bone of the arm is different from that which comes in joints, and the head of the humerus has its judgment in the work.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	and if the fracture is not to be seen, as long as the bone bends according to its completeness; but if there are such cases as it is necessary to pierce when it is raw, and does not die according to its completeness, like a fracture which is at a joint
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	for when a fracture comes from a joint, and it is left until it is fixed, by chance if it is corrupted the bone and the nerve of the joint, which is the cause of contraction in that limb.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	Or if an incision is made at the principal part of the limb, and if you delay the perforation until it is middle-sized, it will go to the principal part of the limb; or if it is made at the foundation, if you pierce it when it is not middle-sized, it will cause fistula; and it cannot be cured in great time.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	You must cauterize the wound of the abscess when it is painful according to its degree; when the pain is calmed, the swelling has gone down, the fever has gone down, the swelling and redness have gone down, there is no debate or tingling in the head of the abscess, and other signs; and you must make the perforation or more dependent on the abscess, and the place where the pus comes out; and let the perforation be long enough, if the abscess is full of hands or feet, or in joints and nerves and arteries, and in all parts that are equal or there is no pus.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	When these things happen, according to the nature of that limb.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	And when an incision is made in flesh, if the puncture is not confirmed during digestion, as we have said
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	For if you pierce it before that, if it runs along the skin of the venom, and there is plenty of mucus of ordure; and by chance the bones become hardened and the flesh is perforated by it.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	And if there is no wound that is perceived according to the great pain, according to what the limb has to do with it.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	And you must bring in little wounds, little holes; and in great wounds, great holes, and many cuts according to the size of the wound; and if there are such wounds or you must doubt their cure, and cover them; when they are like flags, and are softened, if you must do as with bubbles: and if there are such wounds that are cut at three angles, and such as require covering like mistletoe berries, like wounds of grapes; and if there are such wounds that require making a round cut, and other sizes and similar coverings.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	Whoever has no head, if there is a superficial wound, you must simply pierce it; and you must pierce when the wound is large, and it has grown great swelling, and you must pierce, if you do not remove all the swelling in that hour, but only a part; then stamp the wound until the other side is level, then do nothing further; do this many times until the swelling is gone; in the same way if the patient is of weak virtue, or a woman in childbirth, or a young child, or an old man decrepit
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Eschew this chapter with great caution. When you perceive your wound, if it is slight, leave it alone; and if it is of moderate size, mix linen or old cotton with it; and if it is a large wound, and there is much bleeding, bite in the middle of the wound so that they oppose each other. If you have cauterized a part of the skin and have bound it up, if you must, fill it with coarse cotton or flaxseed moistened, and leave it for a third of an hour. Then extract the bone and suture as long as it is necessary.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	And if blood flows from your work, if you must, apply cold ice and oil, and moisten with a cloth, and draw out the offending object many times.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If blood persists in the wound despite evacuation, if there is a need for governance and treatment, and the powders I have mentioned hold the hands steady in this book, and if tension is applied or the wound or incision is sensitive, if it is in this state and the hand or the apostemes is fleshy, if you put on tight bandages soaked in wine and oil; and if it is in this state, and the hand is raw, if you put on tight bandages soaked in water and oil, or in wine and oil rubbed, up to the third joint, as we have said; then remove the apostemes and dry and treat the wound, as it is appropriate, until it is healed.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	And this must be known throughout in the treatment of abscesses: when you say how one must alert before treating abscesses, and when the physician is aware of this chapter.
des soros	And this must be known throughout in the treatment of abscesses: when you say how one must alert before treating abscesses, and when the physician is aware of this chapter.
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	Or indeed small apostemes come from the chief, and their handling is like that of flax in toweling, as well as the joist of a spindle, and there is resemblance in them.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	There are fat ones and such like them, or there is moisture as with dogs; and if there are such ones that are hard and rough at the root, and there is no doubt if the artery does not do otherwise.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	And as for the work of the size, if you expect with all the instruments that are called "instruments of entry", which come afterwards, what thing they contain.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	For if it contains moisture, if the fluid comes out in drops for a long time.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	And when the moisture is evacuated, if you leave the peel that contains that moisture, it returns in place when you leave it alone; then put cotton in Egyptian fashion, if it is present; if not, in water and vinegar, and apply the compress, and leave it until the other side is healed; and this will correct what is delayed that remained from before
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And thus, when the wound starts to heal, as before, the second day, and the third, until you are certain that it does not swell any more at night; then cure the wound appropriately, as it is sane.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	And if the abscess persists without fat, if you cut it according to this form, long; and you discharge your pus, and the eschar from all parts, and put all your cure to burn away the bone or where it is; and if the artery opposes you, do what I have said afterwards.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	And thus do with the pierced abscess, and if you cut and cure as I have said before
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	And the size of the pierced abscess and moisture, if it is lighter, because they are of little blood.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	And if among these abscesses or swellings or if there is no moisture, and if these are abscesses that I cauterize or swellings of an old woman; and I find the abscess as hard as a solid stone, rough and white, and cannot burst; and if no blood is drawn, one must make as good a wound as if it were a stone.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	In other abscesses that arise from the breastbone and the roots of the ears, if these arise from the head of the ribs and the root of the ears, it will open every day more and more due to moisture; and they must be treated as they should be.
des scrophules	And the size above the pierced vein and the moisture, if it is less severe, because they are of little blood. And if some of these veins or arteries or there is no moisture, and these are the veins that I cauterize or tie up with an old woman; and I find the vein just like a hardened stone, rough and pale, and cannot break it. And if no blood comes out, we would do just as well to make a wound like a stone. In other veins coming or arteries, because these come from the head of the children and have roots of the ears, they open if they are at all dependent on the limb, for the pulse is stiff; and they cure as they should.
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	Many times it happens that these abscesses happen at the collarbone, and the armpits, and the flanks, and never anywhere else or on the bones, and they are bloody, and are joined together.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	And if a scrophule is firmly lodged in its cavity, if it does not move and is at the root of the head, as we have said; and the signs of these scrophules are many.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	There are many diseases that contain moisture, and if there are maligns that do not obey the laws of health.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	In that case where you see a bone structure at the touch, and which is similar in color to flesh, and is soft from one side and not red as the marrow in the head or in the artery or the vein, and is not deep; if you must break it, you must break off a piece of the bone, and burn the soft part, and if you have to hold the two levers of the arm as we mentioned in the apostemes of the head; and the thumb and the little finger, and so you must take care not to damage the nerve or the vein, and not to cause swelling or bruising, only to grasp the hand, and do not speak too soon, that you do not break anything that you should not.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	And if you puncture the vein or the artery, and this does not allow you to work, if you put into the wound a piece of vitriol glass shard, or some powder that remains bloodless, hold the wound; and leave it until the bleeding has ceased, and soften the wound, and begin to work again.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	And when it is stained, if you return to your work until you have finished; then if you must indicate that there remain no small scabs, if you grasp and crush them.</start_of_turn>
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	And if there is in the root of the swelling a large vein, if you cannot do anything but grasp that swelling at its root, but bind it with a strong double thread, and leave it hanging loose; then apply pressure to the wound with a bundle of cotton soaked in Egyptian balsam, and then cure.</start_of_turn
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	If you cover the entire scrofula, if you gather up the two layers of the wound, and bind them now, then there will be no remaining superfluousness due to the size of the scrofula.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	if you understand to cover the root of the thing, and to pull forward, and to bind as we have said.</start_of_turn>
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Those scrofulas that hold superfluousness, pierce them either when they swell or when they die; and pierce them as we have said above, depending on that, then mix powders with oil and similar things, so that it corrupts what remains of the corruption; and when the wound is well cleansed, if the cure of the oil is applied thickly, as long as it is sound.</start_of_turn
de squinance	When the wound is well drained, if the dressing of oil covers the scar, while it is sound.
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	The old men spoke of the size of the throat; but I have never seen it done in our land, and this is the writing of their words.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en .ij. amandres.	As for those who have a squinance, it is necessary that the flap of the throat which is called the epiglottis be freed; and this will not help, for all the veins and the blood vessels of the patient are at those who have placed their trust in it in the mouth, or in the throat or in the tonsils.</start_of_turn>
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the disease is in the channel of the blood vessels, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to prevent the loss that comes from the strangulation.</start_of_turn
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige; et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	It is necessary therefore, when our voices tear the epiglottis, that we cut it from the outside of three circles or four, a small cut through two circles or in the quantity of the cut through the cartilage; and if it reaches the epiglottis, if it is consistent with the section of the epiglottis, there will be no swelling, and the veins will be long.</start_of_turn
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit; et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix; et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	If the master is fearful, if you can, extend the skin of the throat over the entire circumference; then open the vein as far as it goes to the nail; and avoid the blood vessels, if you see nothing; and then close the vein as before; and demonstrate by the section of the nail that the spurting blood comes from the broken vessel, and by the lack of voice; and leave the wound open for a piece.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the hour has passed and there is still doubt about the strangulation, assemble the four limbs of the wound together, and bind them all firmly with the cartilage; then administer medicines that promote healing, until they are healed.</start_of_turn>
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	The abscess does not cease until the throat is completely swollen, and the patient is judged dead, and the flaw is left behind.</start_of_turn
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort; et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee; et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	Then close the epiglottis in order that the patient does not vomit; and let him breathe through the wound; and this is kept as a safeguard against death; and in order to command the old man to leave the wound open until the malice of the disease has passed, and it has passed in three days or four. And then it is commanded to suture the wound and cure it, until it is cured; and I will tell you what I have seen.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon; et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	I saw a woman who had swallowed a needle, and she choked on it, and a piece of her throat was torn away; and I went to call for help, and I found her as dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I discovered the wound, and found the blood that was coming from it, and saw that it did not reach any vein or artery except for the throat, and that it was coming from the wound itself.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee; et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition; por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	I hastened, and saw to the wound, and cured it until it was healed; and the woman did not suffer further except that she lost her voice, and returned home well; for in the making of the epiglottis there was no fear
de la grosse gorge	of the great throat.
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes; et est selonc II manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	These abscesses are called "throat hernia," and are great abscesses the color of butter, and are very common in women; and there are two kinds: natural and accidental; or naturally there is no cause
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere; et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire: se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point; et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And the accidental kind is in two ways: one is like fat, as we have seen; and the other way is like an abscess which comes from an artery; and there is danger, and one must not attempt to do anything fierce except in a small area, and must probe and explore thoroughly: if you find it like pure fat and not in any vein, if you touch it, if like us, and take away the surrounding tissue if there is none; and encircle well around, and cure as it should be until it is completely healed
des nous	And encircle all around, and cure it as it should be, until it is perfectly healed.
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances; et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	Many are the ways we are deceived, of which I will speak; and know that I will tell you the difference between a false and a true statement.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that the cause of dislocation is heat and fever that lasts as long as the inflammation persists, and is accompanied by swelling; therefore let the fever and heat rest.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros; et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	With regard to the newly born, there is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and it contains its own sac, which is like the colour of mustard, and it begins like a pea, and becomes large; and they are like wax or fat or moisture, and the colour is such as I said in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	It is necessary, when you come to the cure of the knot, to ask and inquire first about all the instruments which are called "entromissaires," according to their form or chapter which follows.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme; puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	And the way to inquire about abscesses of the body is that you take more moisture than you find in the abscess, and press your thumbs and index fingers until you believe that the instruments have felt the knot; then that it be according to the greatness of the abscess; then withdraw the introducer, and take care that the surrounding area does not bleed
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes; et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout; et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	If moisture comes too close to the surface, that is to say when it appears, if the surrounding area does not receive moisture, the blood that is thick, if it appears in a cross, take hold of it with your thumb and forefinger, and press it lightly from the inside outwards, and hold the area where you are working with the other hand; and if you do not hold it firmly, take it out in pieces so that nothing remains.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois; et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	If nothing remains, if it comes back many times; if it bleeds again, if it does not grieve you, if you employ corrosive powders at the wound, hold the wound steady and put on soothing things above; and if it is great, if you cut out two fingers of the wound, and cure what is causing the pain.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	And if the vein is beating contrary to you or another if you are in a hurry and employ the juice of vitriol ground, and leave it for two or three days, until the wound has healed, and rest the swelling of blood; then return to cover what has remained delayed from before
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule; et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule; et sont de III manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	See here the forms of the entromittent instruments, and there are three kinds: great, medium, and small; and there are three squares which are called "albaret," and one which is called "breb," and there are three kinds: great, medium, and small, to embrace the fistulas; and they are like needles which we sew with wounds, and they are of saffron, or iron, or silver, and must be of gold which is yellow, and are more proven of black pitch to embrace the cortices of fistulas; and they are of three kinds: great, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the size of the perforation.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi; et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	The forms of the needles are of the same shape as seeds, as you see here: great, medium, and small; and if the needles have two cortices of three kinds each; and if the needles have three cortices, and are of three kinds; and if the needles have two cortices, and a single cortice only, and are of three kinds; all these are necessary in their place.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf; et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes; et sont de III manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois; et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus; et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	The head of the humerus is fractured, and some of them are cut only from one side, from which we protect the nerves, because of this we do not ligate the vein or the nerve; and these are the substances which are restored in sleeves, so that the patient does not lose them when the incisions are made; and they are of three kinds: great, small, and medium, as you see; and we do not use them for any other purpose than for bones such as the leg, arm, elbow, and shoulder, and similar things; and no other instrument is ever made so small, resembling the bristles of a brush, as in this form, because in this way we stop the bleeding.
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	And one must never put it back in the same place where it has already grasped the veins, and arteries, never again in such a great form.
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme; et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	Never swell the breasts of women when they begin to become corrupted, so that they seem like breasts of a woman; and endure the pain and flee, and who sees them cured, if you cover them according to this form from line b to line g.
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures; de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.; puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif; et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	Then scrape off the fat and use the medical poultice bandage. Then gather the two layers of the wound together with stitches, and cure until it is healed. And if the wound leaks, it is because of its greatness, as with women, if it is between two ribs, by two similar incisions; so that one is held to the other at the end of both, so that the larger line contains the smaller one as much as possible, from this line .b. up to the line .g. Then scrape off the skin between the two layers, and bone the fat, and bring together what has been said about stitches and powders, and what is necessary for the cure, until it is healed. And if it is not healed, or the incision is not completely done, because the patient does not want to rest, or for the discharge of blood, if it is necessary, fill the wound with moist cotton wool in corrosive order; and leave it until it has eaten up the remnant and the fat, then cure until it is healed.
des apostemes des asselles	As for the incisions of the armpits, abscesses, wounds, and extraction of arrows, and cutting into stones, there are often evacuations of blood in these operations; and where there is doubt and fear, many die.
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated from moisture, and is reset but does not stay in place, it dislocates repeatedly with the slightest movement, as we have seen; therefore one must first reset the dislocation.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	If there is moisture contained, it is to be cut according to this form, from line b to line g.
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When all the blood in the abscess has drained away, if you employ a wound closure of thick cotton wool, leave it in place until the other side has healed, then remove the cotton wool completely, and cure the wound that has resulted from this until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscess has the appearance of carbuncles, if it is like what we have said concerning incisions of carbuncles, and if the wound has bled, if necessary perform cautery as we have previously stated.</start_of_turn>
de la routure de l’artere	of the route of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme; et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont; et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans; et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	If the artery is congested, and the skin is stretched which is above, if there are many abscesses in consequence, and also there is bleeding from the vein and abscesses; and if you know that it is from the artery, if the abscesses are long and burst; and if you know that it is from the vein, if there is a rapid flow of blood apart. It is foolish to close this abscess, just as when it is swollen with pus and boils and carbuncles and other swellings.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc; puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte; puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples; puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme; puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient; puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit; puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil; et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus; puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez; puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	It is necessary to eschew the cautery cure, and he who is at the head must eschew as well; and in that which there is swelling of the artery is made known by these signs above the skin along its length; then measure the size as we have learned, and withdraw the artery from the cloth, until it is uncovered; then remove the clot with a needle, and pierce it until the other side, and constrain the artery with a double thread in two places as we have learned in the extraction of two arteries which are in the temples; then point the place which is between the two links of an intro-tubercle until there is no more of it; and cut away the abscess; then bring the cure close to the bow as much as it will bear; and cure that which follows this, until it is healed; and if the abscess is of the size of the vein, it is necessary to keep hold of your hand in that way that you can bring the abscess to all the skin; then remove the needle from the place which you held in your hand, and pierce it, and there shall be two double threads, so that you can handle it from the other side; then bind the abscess, as we have said, or join two of the four corners with two threads; and if you doubt that the threads will hold, if they rebound another needle at all the threads from the incision of the first needle, and constrain the threads in three places; then cut away the abscess as much as it will suffice in issue, then cut away the excess of the skin and leave that which is bound; then put on a moist drape of wine and oil, and administer cures of compresses and ointments until it is healed.
des apostemes des ners	Des apostemes des ners.
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	The fire cautery instructs the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor; et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur; et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction; et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	And thus it often happens with adjuvants and those who are two or more in their limbs or joints, that there are after-wounds, and their colour appears like that of old gold, and is in many situations accompanied by pain; and when it is strained, if the patient feels pain, it is not because of gold, but because of blood; and it swells well from all sides, neither going forward nor backward, neither up nor down, and that which is in the joints does not cover with iron: by chance there will be contraction; and if that which is on the shoulder or the elbow or the forehead is grasped too tightly, it makes the skin taut.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine; et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the after-wound is small, if the vein has one staple, and it is held at its root; and if it is large, if the clot is at the bone, and it is pulled out, then the bone is fractured and the wound is sutured at the suture, and the cure is made as long as it is healthy
des grosses boces pendans	From the armpits downwards.
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans; et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	Never has it happened in the belly and never elsewhere that there has been such a disease as this one which is called "funge" because of its likeness to a worm, and its root is subtle, and its head is great; and in it there are both small and great spots. I have seen two men who had two or three of these in their bellies which appeared more like fungi than anything else, and there was no difference, and they were white, and had white roots, and their heads were split open, and corrected with moisture.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine; si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	I saw two of these in the belly, one of XVIII ounces and the other of VI and three-quarters, and in the incision if you look to see if the patient is moist, the color of the blood is pale and moist with white roots; if the wound reaches the large spleen, and you are present, apply the fire cautery.</start_of_turn>
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer; et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors; et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	For at the hip comes often too great a discharge of blood, and if it does not go away, if you hasten, then indeed burn; and if you see the patient groaning and faint from the incision of the flesh, take a thread of silk well made, and bind the artery as we have said, and leave it for two days; and then the restraint, and do not cease draining the thread of silk until it has closed the artery, and do the work by it; and if the roots are tough, if there is fear in the belly, but you must indeed cover half, then burn that it does not return; then cure the wound, and keep that you only cover the hair which is of loose colour and of bad sense and of milk-yellow pus.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For indeed it is an inflamed abscess, and I will come to the treatment of the abscess later.</start_of_turn>
quant li boude ist fuer	When the boil is fierce.</start_of_turn
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit; et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	If the swelling appears from burn of wound or fracture of bone, and is on the belly and there are some bones there, as it happens in other ways, or blood which clots veins or arteries according to what is before, or windiness; and if it is by the route of the bone and by the issue of the bowel, if it is the colour of the abscess, it is a light thing with pain, and opens from various issues.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	If by the escape of the intestine, then it is more diverse; and when one presses it there, if it returns and then recurs, and by chance if it is closed, and brings about great swelling at the entrance of the bath and much work.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit; et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	If it is due to moisture, it is a light matter; press firmly with your hand and do not constrain me. If it is due to blood, if there are large and hard clots, they are fixed in quantity. If it is due to wind, if the pulse is strong, and the work is done when the source of the pain is identified as either a vein or an artery or the wind.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	If you leave the cure as it is.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	For there is doubt and fear, as I have already said or as the chapter on blood clots mentions, concerning the artery and the vein.</start_of_turn>
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude; puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine; puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz; puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine; se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre; et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit; et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier; puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi; ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit; et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	If the intestine or the belly is the source, command the patient to hold his breath, and keep his hand stretched out, then mark with a finger the most prominent part of the swelling; then grasp the swelling between your hands, and bring the thumb to cover half of the swelling; then join the thumb to the index finger and hold it firmly; then take half of the swelling and place your thumb on the line and mark the place where the index finger touches, and where the intestine is; if you find the intestine caught in the line, if you pull, release the intestine from the belly; if you find the belly, if you grasp the swelling, and cut off the excess; if the artery or the vein is injured, if it flows too much, go back to your work and take two needles, and insert two strong threads, and pass the two needles through what you have done in the form of a cross that you think will cause the pain to cease; then strain the swelling for three periods over the needles, and if you see the bone, break the needles, and leave the limb as long as it swells, and cut off the dead part by itself; or you can remove it when it has become discreet and soft, and cure the limb of what is necessary, and bandage the swelling as we have said; and drain the blood or moisture that you find, then cure the limb of what is necessary, and stitch the limb.</start_of_turn>
dou chancre	sore abscess
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	We have already spoken of the signs of an abscess, and how it should be treated with medicines, and how to shun the cautery. We say that an abscess swells in the marrow, and has great caution in its treatment. The old men say that when an abscess is in the flesh or can be scraped out like an abscess which is in marrow, and in the heel, and in other parts, it must be extirpated as soon as possible; and when it is large and old, if it cannot be brought about, do not approach it, for I know of no cure for it. None of them has ever cured it before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide .i. boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And in the work, when it is in the flesh or can be extirpated, as we have said, do not purge the black bile from the patient once. Then make the patient well again if there is any visible swelling. Then give the patient a purgative, such as wine, to make the work easier. Then take out the nails or abscesses, and the sinews of all parts, and the bone of all parts round about; and leave the wound to heal naturally. Expect the wound to bleed at the incision of the artery or vein if the cautery is done too much; then cure with another remedy until it is healed.
de ydropisie	of dropsy.
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer: lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	We have said above in the division of these signs of hydrophobia, and how the gathering of water is made, and the signs of congestion resemble, and the cure which is made by medicine, and that which is cured by iron: if only the lightning is alight; and one must not touch iron in these two signs: that is to say, tympanites and icterus, for it is a mortal thing; therefore when you are treating this sign of hydrophobia which is called "lightning" of medicine, and the cure does not profit, if you observe that the patient is weak, or if there is another disease besides hydrophobia, as with all solution of the belly and similar things; if you do not touch iron, for there is doubt; and if you see the patient with great fortitude, and he has only hydrophobia, and he is not too young nor too old, if you must work: take hold of the patient's right hand in your hands, and the minister presses the belly at the end of the water towards the lowest part down to the heel, then take the thumb and index finger according to this shape:
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	And be trenchant of two parts.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier; puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu; puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	And be trenchant of two parts, at a point, and in all other respects be not so much entrained that it can come down to the intestines when it is grasped, and cannot be staunched; then look if hydrosis is ingrained towards the intestines: if it is suspected that it is caused by bile, make an incision on the left side of the third ventricle; and if it is caused by the disease of the liver, make an incision on the right side; and if it is caused by moisture, make an incision on the left, and do not be afraid that the patient lies on the incision that the supernumeraries do not run to that feeble limb; then pierce the skin with the instrument, and grasp the gut, and keep your hand over the palm of your hand between the skin and the pericardium as though you were grasping the quantity of an nail or the like; then pierce the pericardium until the palm of your hand comes to the seventh part, and that is the measure of the water, then draw out the water, and there is left this instrument which is like this form.
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus; et II d’autre part, et I d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	And it is similar to a silver nail, and is of flaxseed or elderberry seed, and at the lower part there is a small hole; and where it costs one side, three holes; and two on the other side, and one on the other; and the head of the nail is cut off as with a knife, and this is the shape of the incision that the writer makes to cut off the head.
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort; mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit; fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	And at the top of all this is the bolster, so that when the instruments come to the acute, if you drain them now above the instrument; empty half or a third part, for if you drain more than that which can be contained in that hour, by chance the patient will die from the resolution of his spirit from the weapon, or he will vomit, or he will approach death; but drain according to the quantity of its virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the virtue of the patient signify, and his pulse; then take out the instrument and retain the acute, and it is retained now by the spur which stamps the hole which is above the facet, as I have said, that you pierce according to this manner; then return the instrument the other way, if you see the patient suffering this, and take out a small quantity of the acute; do this neither way, and keep using it until it no longer stays.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	If you doubt the patient, and you see him drink water, if the physician applies a poultice or sand cautery, and by drinking sweat or bath and sun, and if you keep him from drinking; and the physician gives him drying medicines until he is cured, and cauterize on the stomach and the liver and the spleen after the extraction of the water, as I have said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	Do nothing foolish, and keep following until there remains only a little water left. And if you doubt the patient, and you let him drink too much water, if the recruit of the sepulture or the warm sand, and by sweating or bathing and in the sun, and take care to drink; and the recruit of drying medicines until he is well, and cauterize on the stomach and on the liver and on the spleen after the extraction of the water, as I have said before.
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	Never are children born without having a hole in the belly, or the hole is small, or it is not completely in its place.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	If the physician wills it, so that he cannot see the spittle very much according to this shape:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	Then put or pierce the hole quite deeply with a large needle, and tie and keep it closed for three days or four, and when he wants to urinate, if you leave it closed, he will urinate, and then you can remove it; and by chance, it will not be necessary, for the urine that comes out will not leave the hole closed
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	If the opening is small, if it is treated with lead weights, as we have said, if it dilates.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	Those who have no hair at the root of the hair are bald, for none are born with hair at the root of the beard, since they cannot urinate until they lift their beard up; and they cannot urinate because of that which matters does not reach the marrow, and this is a bad disease.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the method of this work is that if the patient lies supine on his back, and the head of the thigh and the hip are as wide as a thumb, if the opening is in the middle, as it should be; and you must take care of the evacuation of blood which comes many times, and if it comes, if the stain of this which stains blood, and cure the wound until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
des pustules de la verge	of the thigh
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a .i. oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many times this white spot appears on the verge, and is a sign of a harmful disease; and in it there are both malignant and benign things. If you take them at their face value [literally "with oil of oncion"], grasp and crush them all, then put on moist cotton in Egyptian fashion; then treat with diafinicon until it is healed.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	And if the bath is malignant, with a dark color and discharge, it is necessary to apply cautery to it
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	When you have grasped it, and if the bath is below the shoulder and has some in the belly and some outside, it is necessary to reduce the bath which is inside first; and when it is reduced, if the cure is outside.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	For when you treat the whole limb, if it is not firmly secured, the head of the shoulder will be pierced; and comes black bile and corruption to its root and marrow; if you do not remove all that is black and corrupted, then apply honey and flour made from the bark of pomegranate trees and sometimes, then treat with other cures until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	And if blood clots come, if you mix the lunar cautery according to this form:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars; et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	The cautery is of two kinds: for blood clots, and for corruption. If the head of the shoulder is corrupted and drawn back, if you bite or draw out the hair a span of plum, and the patient urinates; and when the hair has fallen out around the head of the shoulder which has not been circumcised, or if there is wound or incision, if you do not then immediately singe the instrument that chews, until the limb is freed, and deliver the hair from all parts; and if this be impossible, if you do not immediately singe at the spur of the moment, put on a strip of linen soaked in cold water, that it should not be disturbed.
de la circoncision	If it is an urgent matter to separate this, if you can, grasp it immediately without causing any harm to the head of the thigh or the heel; then slowly separate between the thumbs, and put a wet linen bandage on it with cold water, so that it does not slip out of place.
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Circumcision is not merely an act of continuing care like other wounds; however, when we perform this work of our own will, and properly as possible, if it is necessary that we make it as mild as possible for the patient.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancients did not teach me circumcision of the children, for they did not use it in their law, and we have learned only what we have learned through experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor .i. dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a .ij. toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	For I have seen that the greatest part of masters and doctors who practiced circumcision did so without knowledge, with force, and with a new instrument; if it happened that the testicles escaped because of two layers of skin, and by chance if one cut through these and left the other behind
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	Or it returns covered, and the pain is doubled, and there is the mutilation which is more than doubtful concerning the tip of the limb; and the mutilation of the bone by chance escapes the wound, and repairs the work, and many times happens that they must undergo mutilation without having had to do so, and I have seen it.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	From the modification which is made with force throughout the thread I have found the benefit of the experiment, for the forces tear just as well downwards as upwards.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien; et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge; puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	When you press your hand, if it is equal in all directions, but the thread is well stretched around the skin; and if the movement is gentle from the outset, as if you were thinking of a child, if he understands, do not force him to bind the thread around the limb only slightly, but do so thoroughly in all ways; then draw it straight between your hands or remove your fingers so that the boy does not see them, neither any instruments; then hold your hand at the root and breathe or cough, and pull up as much of the thread as is necessary; then tie it firmly with two knots at the pouch and the must index, and clip between the two threads, then keep the thumb relaxed and pull out the chief of the limb; then let the blood flow back naturally as much as it can, for that is the treatment; and sprinkle powder on and over the powder a bandage glued with egg white from rose hips, confirmed with rose oil and balsam, and leave it on until the other side is healed.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	When the limb is deformed in this way: the two bones are tense and bent, and the limb is as thick as a sleeve,
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	The error of deformation is when the marrow is fractured during the incision; therefore it is necessary to stretch your nail so that the wound is open; and cut equally, and if you cannot hold your nail firmly, even if you grasp it tightly, and then cut.</start_of_turn>
Et s’il trespassent .iij. jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	If they trespass for two days, and that which is from the root is swollen, if you leave it as long as the spasms subside, and the swelling is slight; if you press it as you can, and hold on to the root, it will avail you nothing.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If you press too much over and above measure, and it goes away, it will avail you nothing; cure it as we have said, while it is still sound.</start_of_turn>
dou retenement de l’urine	because of the retention of urine.</start_of_turn>
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division; et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e; et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	The retention of urine if it is from the obstruction of a stone, or of blood congealed, or of a bowel, or of chaff, or of similar things, which we have mentioned in the preceding; and if the urine is not dripped away, and you see that the retention is caused by the stone which is in the loin or the neck of the bladder, if it is possible that the patient is bent over his knees; and let him put his feet on the back, and extend his belly from the part under his back, and restrain the patient so that he cannot move as much as he can; and then constrain the neck of the bladder to the expression of the stone above, so that the urine is dripped away; and if it does not come, as we have mentioned, and the patient feels great pain, if it is possible that you administer extraction with all the instruments which are called “syringes”, of which this is the form: either of silver with a legiger chick pea, like the head of a bird; or of the caine of a long and half palm, or of silver at the chief.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede; puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine; et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	And thus it is done with a double thread, and at the head of it a thumb of wool or cotton, and bind the thumb to the thread in the syringe; and cut away the excess of the wool and bind up to the head of the syringe; then join the syringe with oil or butter and egg yolk, and make the patient sit on the chair; and raise the bladder and the belly with oil moist and oily with olive oil and urine; then put the syringe lightly into the belly, as far as it reaches the root of the belly; then double the belly downwards towards the buttocks; then pull back the syringe until it reaches the bladder, and let the patient feel that it has gone until it is empty; and this is not done except in this order because of what it brings or what it goes out with is twisted; then cut the thread at the top and at the bottom, and the urine follows the thread, and it is pulled out forcefully, and correct the urine; and start the syringe again until the bladder is empty, and the patient is aligned.
des maladies de la vessie	Des maladies de la vessie.
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When there are urine stones or blood in the bladder, or if it is filled with pus, and you see urine and medicines boiling, if you do everything that is called a «clepsedre», which is its shape:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus: II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est; et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	She is closed, and if there are three punctures: two from one side, and one from the other, as you see; and the head of the shoulder is grasped so that the medicine can be pressed down firmly along the limb, if we can manage to expel the moisture, and push outwards when necessary; and when you see the medicines oozing from the bladder, put the head of the stretcher in the moisture, and push outwards from there; if you push the moisture outwards, and then push inwards strongly from there; if the moisture enters there, and comes to the bladder now, if the patient feels it; and this is the form of the subtle cluster from which the bladder is clustered.
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie; et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	It is of silver or gold, and the head is higher; and from one side or the other it is split; then take a bladder of mutton and put the moisture into it which you see clustering the bladder, then tie it between the two breasts forming a double bow, and burn one half of that moisture over the fire; then withdraw the head of the cluster from the limb, then strain your hand over the bladder until all the moisture has drained out, as long as the patient feels that the moisture has reached the bladder; and if you do not have a bladder, if you take a piece of parchment and make a circle, and pierce it round the edge; then draw the string firmly through these punctures, and assemble the circle as if you were assembling a doll, and put inside what you see of oil, moisture, and water, and tie it up with the instrument; and do as you would with a bladder, pressing your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
de la piere	From the stone.
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have already mentioned above the methods of handling stones, and their extraction with medicines; and we have spoken of the difference between a stone that is embedded as rain and all the signs, and in what case a stone must be opened according to its size; and in the bladder, and the kidney; and I shall tell you openly and briefly about them.</start_of_turn>
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont .iiij. ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I say that the stone which is embedded in the bladder is oftener loose, and this is a sign that it has burst from the bladder as much as from its subtlety; and it opens gravel, and grinds the patient’s flank, and causes them to urinate frequently, and then becomes hardened; and from these bursts there is always some sediment; and the foundation is easily loosened for about three years, and is more grievous in the old, and is as common in youths as in old people; and the cure is easier for those who have a large stone than for those who have a small one.</start_of_turn
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	And when we come to the treatment, if it is necessary, first cleanse the patient with vinegar, to remove all the poison that is in the intestines.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	For it never fails to ask for the stone.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche dedens; se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	Then take the patient by the limbs, loosen and move down, so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder; and it does not rise again; then make him sit between your hands and his hands are at his thighs, so that the bladder is fully emptied downwards; then ask and touch within; if you feel the stone in the space, then hasten to cut above the stone immediately
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	And if it does not move on touching with the whole hand, if more oil from the left hand, if the patient is fat, or if more from the middle finger, if the patient is young and robust; then push it down to its foundation and ask for the stone, and when you feel it with your middle finger, if the bladder is tight at the neck; then press above your middle finger, and push down the stone until it comes out or you see it cut through
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	And instruct the minister to press the bladder with his hand, and command him to extend with his right hand the hairs above, and with his left hand grasp the skin that is below the hairs in the part where the size is taken; then insert the sponge with a clap, for thus is its form.
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans; par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	And between what is between the ribs and the navel, do not go into the middle but at the cost of the left side; and be two above the navel, and your two below either together or on the navel, and be the size that will traverse if it be wide by fault, and within narrow, according to the quantity of the navel, do not go too great; by chance the pressure if it must be on the navel or on the foundation, that it leap forward in its work; and the nails that are in the part of the navel or that are angled, and margins: if it is grasped to sit; and if there is part that is soured, it is like a gland, round, from which issue is light.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole; et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	And if there is an angle and margins, make the size greater; and if it does not leap, it is certain that you must strain on the tendons which are like a file at the head, for the muscle must strain the navel if it does not escape; or you can use a blunt instrument curved at the head; and if you do not succeed in engaging it, if it is too wide, or if the flesh hangs loose, if it is a straining of vitriol; and if there are several nails, strain out the greatest at the belly of the bladder first, then stretch upwards, then stretch outwards, and the smaller afterwards if there are several.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	If it is large, if you cover it with wool, and make it more painful.
Car II choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces; et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	If it is large, if you cover it with wool, and make it more painful. For in this case two things happen to the patient: either he dies, or his urine comes to him again because his testicles cannot withstand it; but whatever you do, if you tear it out by pieces, while you are tearing it out, as long as you finish your work, if you apply incense and aloe and dragon's blood to the wound, and hold it, and put upon it a wet bandage soaked in oil and wine, or in oil and rose water and cold water, to calm the burning; then raise the patient up on his collar and do not loosen the thread until the third joint.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have pulled it [the dislocated shoulder], if there is much pain in the limb from oil and water, then cure it with dynafinicon oil and balsamic oil until it is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit; puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	If pus comes out of the wound and corruptions, and blood clots in the bladder, and either because of that the urine is retained, which is known in part as without jumping with the urine: if so then drain your urine from the wound, and remove that blood, for if it remains, it will corrupt the bladder and carry it away; then raise the wound with water and ease and silk, and help him in every way you can, as long as he is sane; and know that all the times you cure him, that you must tie the two stitches and gather the medicines on the limb.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	If the stone is small, and it is in the bladder or the tube of the kidney, and is fixed, and the urine cannot issue; if the doctor knows what I say, that you must urinate many times, we shall hear of the size for this treatment.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	I have already proved this to be true.</start_of_turn>
Pren .i. foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a .iij. angles fichiees en .i. tison:	Take hold of the instrument according to this shape and make it so that there are two angles fixed at the tip: in one hand
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	Then take a thread and tie it around the kidney stone so that it does not go back into the bladder; then pull the thread gently until it reaches the stone; and turn the thread toward your hand over the stone until you can see the stone from the other side; as soon as the urine comes, then press your hand on what remains of the stone that is in the kidney.</start_of_turn
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides; et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is broken, and spurts out with the urine, and is seen by the patient; and if you cannot do this by any means, then take a thread from the stone and another from above, and pass the kidney through the second line; then extract the stone, loosen the thread, and cool the blood in the wound; and the doctor must treat until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
de la piere des femmes	If you cannot do this for any reason, take hold of the limb with one hand and with the other grasp the bone above and below, then place your thumb between the two joints, and pull forcefully, loosening the ligament, and move the blood clot which is in the wound; and cure as long as it is healed.
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por .iij. choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	When the bone is dislocated in women, and this happens only once, it is a serious ailment which is defended by two things: the first is that the woman is a virgin; and the second is that no woman knows who has seen her uncover herself as much as she does, even though she is chaste.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere; et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	If by chance one cannot find a woman who knows this art of hands, then the fourth method is that if the woman’s thumb is thicker than the man’s, because it can make a deeper cut, and there is great fear of that. If necessary be aware of this, if you take a woman who knows, and mark the thumb on her, and if you do not mark it, know that I cast aside the subtle art; and present her with a woman who knows a part of this art, and command that she do what you command of her by the inquiry of the thumb; and look well whether the woman is a virgin. For if she is, she will push out her thumb or foundation and question the thumb; and if she finds it, restrain her thumb with her left hand.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite; puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	If it is true, as soon as it moves from the belly to the knee, as far as it reaches the hip bone; then close the incision at the hip bone where it appears, and feel the bone in that part; do not move the thigh above the bone or below, and keep the incision small at first. Then gradually widen the incision, until you feel the bone is no longer painful. Many kinds of stones are like this: small and large, sharp and smooth, long and round, and those that have rains.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	if the stones resemble each other, it is known that they are pus.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre; et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	If it does not go away, if you put at the limb vitriol broken, and hold it for an hour until it is stained; then return to your work, until the bone is healed, and have the instruments that I told you about in the extraction of the stone at your home to help you in your work; and if it does not go away, and it is the artery that is cut, if you put powder on the limb and strain with thread and bandage, and do not start again, and leave the bone alone, except by chance the patient dies; then cure the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	When the heat of blood is calmed and the limb is relaxed, if you return to this work while the wound is still open.
de hernie carnouse	De hernie carnouse.
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit .i. autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	Ramice aquouse is nothing else but an assembly of moisture or white wax, which is as soft as the seeds of coriander, that contains the egg; and it is called "wax," and never is it properly in the yolk of the egg, if we take care that it is not otherwise. And it is the skin of the seed between the white wax that we have said. That does not happen by chance.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the formation of this ramus is weak and comes from the seeds, and that matter is spread out
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus; et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	And never if percussion comes from the joints, and this moisture if it has many colors: or it is pale yellow, or it is without red, or black, or pale blue, and this is more; and these are the signs of corruption in this assembly, for if it is white as snow or as we have said, if the abscess is round like an egg, and it does not split open, because there is moisture all around.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef; et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	And if there is moisture in the very flesh, if the abscess is round with a part of the yolk, and because of this some people think that it is one egg; and if the moisture is between the skin of the joints and the white substance, if one feels well; then when you see the color of the moisture, if it is like all the intestines that are put together, as we have said.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to this, which follows the introduction, judge what is within.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz; puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions; puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir; puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue; et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When our burnings are done by iron, if it be known that the patient be well according to the measure of his power and the filling of his body; then we apply it upon his back, upon something somewhat high, and put pieces of cloth under his shoulders; then we sit on his left side, and command the minister to sit on his right side, and extend the limb to one of the two costles below the ribs; then we take the sponge dipped in oil, and burn the skin of the ribs among those which are long until we reach the navel; and let the burn be made straight by dividing the skin of the ribs up to the white spot, and burn it thoroughly according to the measure of his power; then we pierce the belly with a needle at a large opening, and drain all the fluid, and then we put on our sponges, and draw up the belly; and do not touch the ribs, but only the belly; burn all or in pieces immediately the cost of it, if you do not burn it thoroughly, the fluid will return; and if the urine spurts forward from your work, let it remain in its place when you have completed the work of the belly. Then assemble the two leaves of the ribs at a costure, and cure it like the other wounds, until it is healed.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	And if you find the urine corrupted by another disease, if you must tie up the veins that are suspended, doubting the discharge of blood; then cut off the limb at the whole suspension, drain the urine, and cure it like we have said.</start_of_turn>
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset; et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	And if it is acute and gathered into two parts together, the threads which are two branches; if you join the other part as you did the first equally, then wipe the blood away and put in the wound a layer of fine linen soaked in oil of roses; and put another layer of fine linen soaked in wine and oil on top, and put on the two bones, and put under doubled cloths, and bind it up according to this fashion:
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier; et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers; si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	Then take two cloths and use coarse wool yarn according to this likeness and be assembled with needlework at the neck of the braies; and one of the bones grasps on the foundation up to the back, and the other at the tender part; and the other two teeth on the two angles, and be all assembled the restriction in the loop of the brazier; and in no way is medicine this thread of cautery in place of the size of iron, and only take one surgical cautery needle, and join the skin of the bones, and if done as we have said, if the white substance which contains the blood is discovered; if you take the cautery according to this form, and pierce that membrane as we have mentioned, and burn it with this subtle cautery.
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille; et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	And so do all the physicians in every way that you can, until you have scraped away all of it; and keep the fire away from the yolk; and scrape that this work is more salve; and guard diligently from falling out of place of blood, and more than the works of size; and if anything else hinders you, or incisions or falling out of place of blood or anything else, if it hinders you, do that which hinders you, according to what is said above.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit; pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer; puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee; et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	And if the patient is pale and does not wish to wait for this work because of its horror, if you anticipate perforation, as I have said, and you are certain by the meanings that we have said that the moist blood is limpid, if you make the patient sit on a low seat; then pierce the abscess at the lower part with a wide span, and make the perforation long from the bone; and if the hole is large, let the blood flow out completely; then put a cotton pad over the wound, and bind it, and leave to drain the remaining blood, and cure until the wound is healed; and if the white blood does not drain from the wound, as you must drink a spoonful or the instrument used for treating the hydropic swelling, as it is formed above; and enlarge the wound, and scrape that the blood comes back, and assemble after six months or when the pain has ceased, and when it is assembled as before, and then the patient will be able to resume his days.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the incision of the hip bones
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse; et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	The hairs that are in this root area are few in number; it seems to me that they are worth leaving alone; and I will tell you about the work and the signs of the abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	Therefore, I say that main and forearm come or swell, and sometimes there are coions; and this is by chance.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion; et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief; et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	It is known by excessive heat and moisture, which is spread as coions or percussion; and is the color of an abscess according to the color of the flesh; and does not cause pain, and is an abscess of grief; and by chance is a bloody abscess full of pus and blood, with a foul color, and never comes from a vein or swelling of a vein.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois; et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	When it is not from a vein, if it is known by the disposition of the heat of the abscess, when you press it with your hand; and I do not advise you to touch it
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars; et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	He who is made to swell a vein is known by his attitude at the expression of pain in the thighs; and may well do the same size as this semblance, and on the other thighs; and it is that you grasp tightly like nails, then the egg is high, and the thread is of white silk, and release the suspension from all parts of the egg.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope; et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	If the egg is already swollen with these thighs, if you must then treat the egg and grasp it; and if it is towards the silk or in the vessels, if you must deliver all that is tense, and grasp roundly.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	If the cartilage comes loose from the bone or remains behind, if you must grasp it all, and pull out the root, as we have said
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	When your work is finished, if you apply a dressing of coarse wool soaked in rose oil and wine, then bandage the wound until it is healed.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the incision of the hip bones
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait; et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	This is an abscess covered with a covering similar to an eyelid, with the softening of the nails, and the patient groans loudly when it moves; and the cure for this ailment is well known as well as this one mentioned before, and all that we have said concerning it is sufficient
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment; puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples; puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief; puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues; puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions; car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz; si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	You must make the patient sit on the edge of the bed, then hold the suspenders of the clothes around his waist at his thighs, to all the vessels that are close to the hip, and grasp the master, and extend them forth; then cut with a sharp knife wide enough to pierce through the vessels, until they are uncovered, and then drain from the buttocks, as we have said in the extraction of arteries in the temples; then insert a needle or double thread, and tie it to the first root or where the vein has come from, and tie it firmly at the other root; then cut around the middle directly, following the length of the bone, and remove the corrupted moisture; then cure the wound as usual or apply a bandage, so that no vessel has been damaged that does not need to bleed; for if all the vessels come loose, if you pull out the stitches, it will be enough to draw out the wound from all the vessels; so that it does not lose its nourishment from the incision of the vessels, and that it dries and does not suffer further.
de la routure dou syfac	If the oes does not lose its nourishment from the incision of the vessels, and if they dry and do not swell, they will not aid.
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions; et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses; et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement; et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	The event of this branch is by section that comes or by swelling above the belly in the part of the intestines; for the intestine descends from that passage to one of the buttocks; and that passage is either by swelling or by extension of the limb, and these two methods cause it: by percussion, or by jumping, or by pressure, or by the elevation of grief faith, and by similar things; and the sign when it is by swelling of the swelling, is that there is swelling both above and below, in long tension, and does not come immediately; and the abscess is equal until towards the navel, for that is what the swelling of the swelling presses on the intestine.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the sign is when the scapula is sectioned, that it immediately causes pain at the shoulder, and the scapulae are different in position, from the edge to the skin, because of the displacement of the intestines and the hardness of the scapula.</start_of_turn>
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And never does the bone move with the intestine, and is retained when it is held, and causes great pain to the patient, even when it is pressed.</start_of_turn
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these iron cures with fear, for fear of them, it is known to escape.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir; puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes; puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc; puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir; puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars; puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille; et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement; et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz; puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz; puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars; puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne; et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi; et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant; puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	If you command or the patient urges that the intestine be returned to its place in the wound if it can enter; then either hold your thumb on its collar between your hands, and keep the buttocks; then extend the knee upwards, and grasp all the skin of the buttocks long; then open the wound from the navel to the thighs; and leave out the intestines as large as the thumb according to what you must do to open the wound, and as much as it can be; then press the swelling that is under the skin of the buttocks until the thick swelling is discovered from all parts; then place your index finger where the buttocks are joined, between the white swelling which is under the skin of the heel and between the second swelling, and withdraw that which is behind the heel, and between the second swelling; and then move your thumb inwards of the buttocks, and place the white swelling at the top of your left hand, and keep the heel against all the swelling; and command the minister to extend the heel upwards, and loosen that which is behind the band; and ask at your sides if there is any intestine or thick swelling that has not been discovered, and if you find nothing, if the wound is in front; then take a needle or make a large stitch of X threads, and pass it in the back part of the swelling which is after the skin of the buttocks; after the size, then grasp the threads that appear from the needle, until there are three threads; then assemble them in the form of a cross and tie the swelling, of which we have said is under the skin of the buttocks, with a strong thread of two parts; then cover the threads with the skin, and tie them in two parts, so that no vessels that nourish them can enter inside, except for the wound itself; and put back the thread according to the first thread along two fingers; and after these two threads leave the swelling that is under the buttocks the greatest of a finger; and after all the rest according to the roundness of the heel; then grasp in the part which is under the skin of the buttocks, as much as without injury, and bow it, as we have said before; then apply coarse wool soaked in oil, and put in the wound, and apply the thread that we have said.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And never burn the fat surrounding the wound as we have said, after the incision, out of fear of blood loss.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece; puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	For in this work, it often happens that blood flows out due to an open vein; and if it is delayed at the root, whether from a sudden swelling or from a hot liquid, put on what we have said above until it flows; then close the wound with another remedy, until it is completely healed.
de hernie carnouse	De hernie carnouse.
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this limb I never saw anyone who could cure it with iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz; puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And some old folks say that it is made like a twig which is bound to the nut, in part like tying up blood vessels, after the size above lightly downwards; then close the wound, and cure the abscess of that which caused it, until the blood vessels flow; and close the wound as we have said, until it is completely healed.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres; et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent; et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert; et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere: et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois; et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac; et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre; puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines; puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	Never comes out whole from anger, as we have said, and open the eyes; and do not touch any intestines as they are connected, and if you touch them, that is enough, and repair them at all times; and if it remains too long in this place, if you believe the wound or the spleen, because the intestines are departing; and this comes from the extension of the spleen which is in anger, as we have said, because it is stretched, then softened and relaxed the eyes and open; and close the wound as we have said before; and never closed with iron in this manner: let the patient lie still on his back between your hands, then grasp the limb of the fracture inflated with a large measure of three fingers; then withdraw the spleen which is from the leather that covers it, then take the needle and push it out the limb that appears from the spleen; and press at the bottom of the belly, then close the two wounds that appear from the spleen on the top of the needle; and close one and the other. Then withdraw the needle and do not cover the spleen or extend the thread or anything else, as I have told you in the cure of the intestinal twig; and cure it with the wound remedy.</start_of_turn>
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when you are done with the stitching, if the wound is closed and cured, as long as it is healed.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The scab is constrained, and has no appearance in the course of treatment, and the burn is mute in this limb, and more proximate to health.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	of the softening of the skin of the joints
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a .iij. costures ou .iiij. fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Many times the skin of the joints is softened in households, because the bones that are inside are softened, and it is seen; and it is necessary, when one sees it being cured, to make the patient lie down on his back, and to scrape off the softened skin from the natural skin; then assemble the layers of skin with a bandage, and if you see it, close the first excess of softened skin with two or three stitches firmly; then scrape between the stitches, and cure as the other wounds, until it is healed, and cut the thread.
dou chastrement	Dou chastrement.
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	The wounds which are customary in our laws, and for this reason I do not wish to speak of them in this book; and it is not necessary to do so except in two cases: the first is that the guardian of the wound responds when asked, and gives an account of the cure; and the second, because we often mix up the branding of some beasts with our assistants, as with oxen and sheep and cats and other beasts.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	I say therefore that branding is done in two ways: by traction or by incision.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	In that way in which we do it by traction, we make the beast sit in warm water, until the hair becomes soft and limp; then we grab it by the hand, until it is set and you no longer feel it
Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	From the armpit: command that you hold the arm firmly, and press the skin of the armpits towards your left hand, then bind the sling, and grasp each exercise at its root, when you have well secured them; and leave no trace of blood or any clot that is on the vessels; and this method of cautery is more effective than that which is done by traction, for in traction remains by chance no hair, because it desires luxury; then cure the wound until it is healed.
des hermofrodites	des hermofrodites.
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	Hermaphroditism is in two ways like this: one if between the two testicles there appears as much as the figure of the nature of a woman, or if there is hair, and sometimes in court he urinates.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	And the other kind if in women, and has on the navel as much as a penis and two testicles
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	And as for the cure for baldness and famine, if you see that the hairs are falling out completely, cure them like other wounds; in the second method, of those whose urine spurts through the pores of the skin, if there is no other cure.
de la tentigene	Hermaphrodism is in accordance with two methods: one if between the two testes opens just like the nature of a woman, or if there is hair, and sometimes in their urine. And the other method if it is in women, and has on the navel just like a boy and two testes. And the cure of the tumor and envy if it is that you remove all the testicles, and the cure is like other wounds; in the second method, of men whose urine spurts through the skin of the testes, if there is no cure.
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	The hair of the head is too dense on the natural part, so that it hinders vision; and many women have it as much as a hand, and this is the cure.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	It is necessary to keep the superabundance of hair at hand or on the armpits, and to grasp it lightly; do not prick too deeply, for blood will flow, and it is better to leave the wound open than to close it when it is still bleeding; and another hair that comes out at the root of the beard, and the sweat, and by chance spurts out, and this is called the ancient "baldness".
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If you suspect that it is displaced, if as we have said the tension is there, and the cure must be continued until it is healed.
de erratique	De erratique.
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	If the cause of the displacement is not clearly perceived, or if the wound is small; and if it is due to birth or an accident, or by a fracture caused by a foreign body, such as a nail, or by a bite of a dog, or by infection, or by any other cause; and if the wound is fresh, or if the fetus is still in the womb, or if there is suspicion of fracture, or if there is suspicion of disease, or if the child is feverish; then you must have a thorough examination of the wound and the surrounding area.</start_of_turn>
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	If the patient is conscious and the wound is nearby, if there is swelling at the shoulder or elbow.</start_of_turn
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	If he has a swollen swelling and it is close to two fingers, do not be hasty; take hold of your two thumbs and place one hand on his back, spreading out his legs; then stretch out the two fingers as long as the swelling is round and firm; then take hold of the swelling, and pour oil over it, and put it on the swelling, and keep the woman still at ease.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	If the swelling is hard and thick, it is to be suspected that there is a swelling resembling a piece of holly leaves.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	If swelling has become soft, if you hang it up and press; and have medicines that abate blood, such as acacia, dragon’s blood, incense, together with many eggs; then administer a broad mustard plaster, so that the wound cannot stick together; and let it be long, and add a compress of dried lint; then let it heal naturally.</start_of_turn>
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	When the armpit comes to bear, if it is covered according to this method, except for incisions made with hooks.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	For the armpit swelling which is in the armpit, one must not touch it with fire.
des emorroides	of hemorrhoids.
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	Hemorrhoids are the opening of veins which, without custom, always accompany swelling; and when the hemorrhoids are old they become painful; and we have already mentioned in the division the signs and symptoms, and I will say those which follow the cure.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	I say that hemorrhoids and the armpit, when they are inflamed in the armpit, and they do not appear on feeling, except for the cure by fire.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	Those who are at the mouth of the armpit, which we can feel, are those which we can cure
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	If the woman is put in a cold house, and the alternum is tightly held at its roots, and the head is placed in its sockets, then sprinkle over medicines that restrain blood, such as chamomile and dragon’s blood and incense, and the like; then close her eyes for an hour, then put her in cold water; and when she recovers, let her sit in a decoction of sumac and pomegranate seeds and elderberry and the like, and then take oatmeal, and mix it with honey and beeswax, and apply it to her back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	And if she vomits, that is good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	If this does not help, if she blows wind from her belly and has chills with fever; then take linen, wet it in juice of plantain or in vinegar with old wine, and blow air into her body.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the abscess rests, if the cure lies in draining it while it is sound; and that which is called "albathir" is red, and is like a dark hair, if you cover it as I have said before; and then the cure while it is sound.
des apostemes de la marris	Emoroids are open veins which without support are usually not accustomed; and when old become tough. And we have said previously concerning the signs and symptoms, and I shall say those which remain to cure. I say that emoroids and tough skin, when pressed into the marrow, are not felt, except with the cure by iron. Those which are at the edge of the marrow, we can feel, are those which we can cure. It is therefore necessary that you put the woman in a cold house, then hold the needle steady, grasp its root, then sprinkle on restraining medicines such as acacia and dragon’s blood and incense, and similar things; then withdraw the pieces an hour later, then put them into cold water; and if it bleeds, if she sits in a decoction of sumac and pomegranate seeds and elderberry and similar things, and then take barley flour, and mix it with honey and yeast, and make one application upon her back. And if it clots, that is good. If not, if it is bleeding profusely, put on a bandage at the back and has large wounds; then take lint, and moisten it with the juice of plantain or with the juice of elderberry with wine old, and make it bleed. And when the incision is healed, if the wound is oily until it is healed; and that which is called “albathir” is red, and is similar to a rough beard, if you cover it as I have said the tough skin; and then it is healed until it is healed. And the after-effects of the marrow.
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	Many kinds of abscess come about in the belly, as with boils and pimple abscesses and herpes and worms and swellings and fistulas and haemorrhoids and burned abscesses, and many other diseases that I have mentioned in the division.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	It is therefore necessary that I say that I mean the burned abscess which comes about in the belly, which is not like other abscesses which collect pus; and if you know the work of fire, look if the abscess is still in its infancy, and full of heat and fever, and if it becomes red when you see it
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	When thou seest the shoulder dislocated by moisture, and it is reset but will not hold, do not hasten to pierce; but make the patient sit upright while the pain subsides; then make the patient sit on two cushions or a chair, and support his back and join his limbs so that his knees are spread out, and put his arms down by his knees, and bind them firmly with a cord. Then push the shoulder backwards towards the costal margin, and insert the instrument from which we remove the cause of the pain at the root of the malady; and know that when you see the instrument being inserted, that you must first assess the depth of the wound so that what enters does not go deeper than it should, and does not harm the patient; and if the instrument is too large, know that you must cover the depth of the wound with a cloth so that the instrument does not cause pain; and know that you must put the cap of the instrument at the base and hold the instrument.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.	When the swelling bursts open, and we grasp the hand low, if it covers the head, at the elbow; and when the wound is emptied, if you wish to cleanse the wound, put in some soft cotton wool soaked in rose oil or in dry green oil; place the cotton firmly at the bottom of the wound, and put above the wound and above the wrist a layer of fine linen wool soaked in water or mallow, which must be cooked; then cauterize after two days following this, until it is healed; and never remove the dressing and the wound by flushing with water and honey, and then with water or leech and alum, which must be cooked.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	If the wound has been closed in the cavity, if you wish to avoid burning, but cure it as we have said in the division.
de l’enfantement	De l’enfantement.
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	Mestier is first at play when she knows the figure of natural childbirth, and the signs are when you see the woman press down upon her belly, and desire to smell the armpit: then the child hastens to be born; then she delivers the head, and supports it with her hand; and when you see these signs, if you press lightly on her belly, so that the child is thrust out; for when he descends upon his head, if he is supported by her hand, and the mare is quieted by her excess, this is not naturally born.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	For it never comes from her feet, or comes from her horn or arm, or from her belly, or from behind, and is converted by chance from her collar, and by other wicked figures; if she is mistress of the play, that she is wise and discreet in these things, and beware of error and deception, and I will show you all the figures that will help her.</start_of_turn>
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	When the child is born naturally through the birth canal, and the woman gives birth, and her strength is weak, if you make her sit on a stool, or the women hold her; and as soon as she has relaxed her oil or vernix caseosa, then put her in the water between her two thighs where it is formed:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.	And cut the navel cord, and hold it to its nail as long as the moisture that is within comes out; and seize the woman’s belly until the child descends, and if it does not descend, if you must, clench the woman with muscle of fennel with oil of alum; then make her gulp and vomit violently, and keep her mouth and nose closed for an hour: if it is now out.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	And if the two hands come out violently, if you must, gently hold them down somewhat and somewhat; and if they will not enter, put the woman on her seat, and support her feet high; then pull the seat away from the earth, and hold the woman, that she does not cough; and if the hands will not enter, and the child is dead, if you grasp the hands at the shoulder which was put before, and pull out the child, and make it even.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	From the issue of the child on his feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut; et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz; puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	When the child comes on his feet, if you can push him up high; then bend his leg back and forward until they are even; then grasp his leg and extend it back and forth.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi; si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	If he jumps up to his buttocks, if the command is to grasp him, and make him spit out the discomfort; if he jumps further, God will help him
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	If not otherwise forced, as we have said, if the limb is twisted and pulled, as long as it is in its natural position.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For in such a case, it is easily loosened.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier; et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz; et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre; puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	And if he does not jump further as we have said, give him muscle powder of alum, oil of sesame, gum masticated, and broth; and put on the woman's nature in the belly and drive out this vomiting, then make her sit in hot water until the ribs are dry; and when she is wet from the ribs, give her a decoction of rue, and leave her for an hour; then make her sit on the seat, then make her vomit and strain her mouth and chin, and take hold of her belly slightly, for the child jumps now
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	because of the issue of the child on his genitals.
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc; puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit; et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval; et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains; et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	When the child comes in this form, if he puts his arms out to the sides and upwards; then either lean his head back on his collar and suspend his tongue, or stretch out his tongue; and bend his head downwards. Fold his arms out to the sides and upwards, and then grasp his hands over his belly, and stretch his buttocks outwards until his tongue is visible. If the child does not vomit, grasp his tongue and move it forward, then move his tongue downwards, and he will vomit. Command the woman to stay until the child is better.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	of the issue of the child who comes out with a large hand during
I covient engignier a ramener la main: s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler; s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment; puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit; et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main; et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	I can teach you to regain your hand: if it cannot be regained, if you raise the woman and call for help; if she cannot help, make her sit beside you and lift your legs up. Then administer the poultice that I have mentioned. If it does not vomit, make her sit on the edge of the bed, and study to restore the hand; and when the child regains consciousness, he will naturally recover, and make her vomit, and command her to stay until the child is well again.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	From the issue of the child on his neck, and he spread out his hands, and his face twisted towards his mother’s back.
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement; et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc; et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	I command that you stretch out your hand, then bend it back and forward, and lower it lightly; and when it is even, apply the emollient substance of alum and oil, as we have said; then command it to move back and forth; and when you have done this, have her sit on the edge of the bed and command her to grasp; and she will vomit.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	From this manner to the very second,
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie; et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes; puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois: adonques si istra legierement.	When it comes to this method at the second degree, if the second degree grasps your nail, as long as the moisture is evacuated; and if it hangs on her face and neck, if you grasp the hair, that it is not retained, and the child dies; then extract the child from the wound, as you have put it, and command the woman not to touch her: then she will be slightly lame.</start_of_turn>
de l’issue des gemelz	it must be immediately corrected.
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent .iij. ou .iiij.; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom; je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude; et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	Why are strange things happening, and why do they not live peacefully, if their name is known; I know well that they are multiplied, and are scattered by the scythe that beheads them, which is joined to the head; and they never go out so naturally as all of us, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait; et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	And if they go out groaning, if the cure is as we have said, and if there is the subtle dance, and makes toast and light what it does; and do thus as it is worth doing for health's sake.
de plusors enfans	Moreover.
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient; si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	Never are they formed in the marshalling I or II or III or IV or V or VI or VII, or more than fifteen, and are all formed in the shape of a child by the measure of the glorious sage, and it must be that the sage dance all that, because by chance similar things happen; do as it is fitting
de l’enfant mort	From childhood death.
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains; si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort; si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees; et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant; puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges; puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief; si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes; et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide; et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	When you treat a woman with a dead child or a miscarriage, if she does not go into labor, and you are compelled to work with your hands; if you suspect that the woman is of sound health, and has no accident or fear of death; if you suspect that the woman is lying on her back, and her shoulders are slumped forward, and her legs are lifted; then take hold of her wrist with two fingers, or bind her to the bed if she is not receiving treatment in the delivery of the child; then wipe her mouth with a cloth dampened with oil, mixed with alum and fennel seeds and flaxseed; then anoint her hands with these oils and these substances; then put them back into the womb lightly; then watch her closely or let her watch the attendants who are competent for this, and take care that the child does not appear to descend from her head; if she stretches out her fingers in her eyes or in her neck or in her mouth or on her face or her beard or her mustache or her teeth, and if she descends from her navel, if she grasps or writhes and has loose bowels; and take hold of the navel with your right hand, and put your elbow between her two left fingers, and hold her tightly with your whole left hand, and insert the navel into none of the places that we have mentioned, until it comes out naturally; and this is the form of the navel.
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz; et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	Then the heel finds itself another bone, or the third if you are dealing with it, so that the extraction is even; and then extend them evenly by moving from one side to the other, for the most part, or hold the nails with the teeth for the most part.
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie; et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	And if some remains stuck, if one sees a little of its fat coming out, and holds it in that place, and treats the other part; and if there is no fat remaining, if you put this bone or the higher one in its place, and do this until it comes out whole.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote; puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	And if one hand comes in front of the other, and it cannot be retracted due to the stretching, then you must cover the drape with your thumb, until it comes out whole; then pull in the limb at the ankle or the knee, and then you must do the same with the other hand, and have two nails
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue; ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui; et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment; et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer; et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues; et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	And if the head of the shoulder is great and is strained at the issue, or if there is much pain in the joint, if you can, put the spinous process between your thumbs and hold the pain and strain it out; or you can rotate it with the instrument called "almidach," with which the bone comes out with the bones or the chapter that follows this one; and do the same for the fetus; then break the ribs as tenacious as they are, and the head of the shoulder will leap out by force, as long as the moisture is either coming out or has come out; and if it cannot be expelled, if it breaks into pieces at the breastbone, if you must; and if it is swollen in the belly or along the ribs, if you can, let the moisture escape as much as possible.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if the swelling is on its side, if the limb is attracted downwards, and the approach to the mouth of the wound is easier.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main; et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre; et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris; puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer; et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses; et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	If it is strained in the belly or the arm, if you can, draw it out with the drape that surrounds the hand; and strain the belly or the arm, as long as the moisture that is there escapes; and if other members are stiff and the limb remains immobile, if you see its hand mark the marrow, and treat it until the marrow comes out whole; then put in oil or two, and force it out; and if the mouth of the marrow is narrowed by a thick scab that has come, if you cannot pass it, you must bring moisture and fat things; and you must give it butter and moist things.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif; et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	And if the infant's head is on his chest, and you put it even, if you remember what we said about the living child; and if you do not heed this, if his head should break apart piece by piece, do not leave anything of the second kind.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris; et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	And when you have done this, if you remember what we said above about the matters that arise in the marshes; and if blood comes from the wound, if it be put in water that restricts, and you remember other cures.</start_of_turn>
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut .i. autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman in whom a fetus had died, then consulted another concerning it, and refuted the other.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time, there came an abscess in the belly, and it grew so large that it burst, and began to cause great pain.</start_of_turn>
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I went to seek help, and I thought for a long time, and could not soothe the wound.</start_of_turn
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I put on strong dressing, and out came a bone, and after that some days another.</start_of_turn
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I marvel at you, for your belly has no bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	I thought it was the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point; et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu; et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	I wish the wound, and with hands of bone, as long as the woman was in a better state; and saw the woman long tense to the limit; and that was a little bow of blood in the leu; and I have never remembered this chapter except for this that when the master found a strange thing, that he should seek help.</start_of_turn
dou ramener la marris a son leu	to reset the dislocation to its place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a .ij. tornans as .ij. chiés des .ij. liiens.	Then comes the form of pressure, which we call books; and at this time there are two tears of blood from two veins.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux; et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi; et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus; et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	Whatever the horn is more subtle than restrictive, or made of ebony or boxwood; or the mouth is of a large size and the edge of the teeth is long, and long one thumb and a half; and between these two thumbs there are two joints of this same fist, which are closed in one and the other, half a thumb long or more; and these two joints are supported in the mouth of the marrow to open when the two thumbs are turned.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles; et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large; et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes; puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	Another form, more subtle and lighter in appearance, is made of ebony or boxwood, as in the nails; and has two joints of this kind, as you see, of a palm’s length, and two of a large size; and when you see the marrow opening with all the instruments, if you see the woman sitting, the pieces above and the legs below, then rejoin the two joints together in the marrow, and hold the chief of the instruments between her thighs; then close your hand over all the instruments, as if you had made the nails even, according to the quantity that you see opening the mouth of the marrow, until the dance makes what it wants.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	These instruments are all very burdensome, and their resemblance is multiplied; and when one sees them appear, the work hastens, and the houses are more numerous than before.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	If one does not despair of the instrument that has not appeared, for its need is not to be excused.</start_of_turn>
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis; et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	When the second toe is retained during infancy, if you command the patient to retain her heel, and then make her cough up the condyle, and hold your hands to her mouth and nose; and if she jumps for that, well done.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire; toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	If that does not happen, if I take a pot and make a perforation or cut, and put herbs in that can open the mouth of the disease, such as rue, chamomile, camomile, cassia and centaury; all these herbs, or some of them, should be boiled or put into boiling water over the fire; then put a sponge or perforation in the pot, and the other end in the mouth of the disease, and hold it until vapor comes out of the disease; then make her cough up, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If the second limb is affected by the disease.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction; mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	And if it remains after this treatment, and is not forced, as it is commanded at the dance, she should moisten her left hand with olive oil or with massage of elevation, and then put it back in its place, and desire the second; and when she has found it, if she grasps and extends it back and forth, so that the mark does not bleed; but she must move it slightly to the side and to the left, and then treat. If it comes and disappears.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes; et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire; mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon; si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	And if the mark of the wound is seen, as we have said in the previous treatment, and fumigation of herbs; and if it is not of all that we have said, so keep that you do not use for treatment; but it is necessary that what is at the mouth of the wound, that you bind it to the woman's hip, and then cauterize with oil of thyme; if she will hold it and return, and will come out forced; however, whenever she bears it, if there comes a bad smell from the stomach and the head, and the patient bleaches.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	If it is necessary, indeed, to perform fumigations, take heed: neither of the ancients has ever experienced fumigation with rue herbs and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The form of the instrument with which we fumigate the woman at the time of her menses and of the second stage is thus: ...
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu; et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	And it is seen like a dog, and one sets the head in the middle, and the arms wide over the fire; and let the fumigations rise over the charcoal, and the smoke until it is consumed, and do it again.
de percier lou fondement	To pierce the foundation
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac: si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche; puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	No child is born without having perceived the foundation, for it is stamped upon them secretly: if you wish to restore it, do not prick the sensitive part at its root, and do not prick too deeply, and keep the dressing so that it does not touch; then put on soft linen soaked in wine and oil, and then treat the wound until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	If you doubt that it will stay in place, if you put or pull out a splinter of lead, leave the hands still for a while, and keep the limb still as long as the patient sees the fever rise in bed.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	Never comes this time from the stamping of wounds or incisions; if you must cover that stamping: if it be cured, as we have said of the splinter of lead.</start_of_turn>
de la fistule dou fondement	of the fistula from its foundation
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	Fistulas that come from below the foundation are nodulations, and those that come from above the foundation are protrusions, or in between these two parts, if there is a fistula or several; and when the nodulation is old, if it is delayed, and is accompanied by moisture or white or soft pus, and never are these fistulas harmless; they are known by the patient's vomiting or diarrhea when the patient makes an egestion, and by chance when one jumps up.</start_of_turn
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	And if there are fistulas that penetrate as far as the bladder, and halfway up the thigh; and reach as far as the joint of the hip, and even to the coccyx bone.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant: et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	And thus one knows of the fistula that persists at the base, and does not go away; and it is only when you bite down your thumb or the base, that a fine needle of spider or iron enters the fistula when there is no swelling.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit; et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit: saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	And if there is swelling, if you attempt to pull out a fine sponge or hair as long as you feel the attempt or the hair at your thumb; and if you do not feel it, and there is no sign of pus discharge or vomiting, as we have said: evacuate the wound that it does not burst; if you are hasty to cure.</start_of_turn>
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	When the fistula is made through to the bladder or the urine tube, if in a leap the urine escapes, and cannot be stopped by medicines.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu; s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement; et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	If it is pierced up to the hip joint, if the attempt of the vein goes down to the limb; if there is no swelling and the pain is not intense, if it has already subsided, and there is no other medicine or support with oil; and in these persistent fistulas there is no remedy except toil, and the folly of the fools who are involved.</start_of_turn>
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre; puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	In that where neither youth nor age is present, hope for health by means of fire, as I have seen; and that the patient lies between your hands upon his back; and let the legs rest as far as up to the thighs, and have the thighs inclined towards the belly; then stretch out the arm, or draw in the loin if there is pain, until you feel the pain cease or the stretching comes.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans; si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	If the patient feels pain at the root of the limb, if you must bite your thumb index, if you feel that the stretching has been perceived; and either uncover the bone or feel between the thumb and the index finger, if there is pain, stop when it is certain; for otherwise you will not be able to heal it.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc; et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit; et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil; et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	One can cure many things without difficulty, but this is not the case; and what helps is to apply the cautery skillfully according to the size of the fistula, as it is said before; and to leave the surrounding tissue around the fistula until the root is reached; and do this two or three times until you feel that these threads that need to be cauterized are burned, which are similar to a bundle of hair; and then close with soft stitches, until the thread is strong, and then close with oil and bandage.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If he is sound, that is good.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez; et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur; si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente; et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	If he is sound, that is good; for if he attempts between and does not pierce until he reaches what is deep, and between your thumb and the attempt a thick covering of hair or fat, and you see the fistula at that which sustains the covering like a wound; if you grasp the start of the fistula and hold it steady before the attempt, and after the burn, as long as it comes up to the head of the attempt; and the attempt will be delivered, and he will recover; then remove those hairs that seem like a bundle of hair, and there will remain nothing.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	If he will not move, and if there is a wound between you and the work, if the fire cautery or medical potion is rough.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor; puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe; puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	For the fire cautery brings together two things: namely, the blistering of these hairs that grow, the extraction of blood and the drying of moisture; then the cure of soft swellings that are burned or broiled, until they leak pus, and is the dry medicine.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it is restored, if it is healed and does not return.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if the fistula comes up to the root of the bone, and is loosened from the flesh, if the thumb or root of the bone is grasped or pulled out, inquire about that.</start_of_turn>
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres: ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit; puis le cure, si com nos avons dit; par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé; puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues; puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	If you feel the attempt, and between two is the thread or the flesh or bone, or it is close to piercing, if there is no other escape but the passage of a betrothed woman and hope, by the administration of one of the three methods: either you cauterize it as we have said, or you apply pressure until it is healed, or if you wish, you do so as soon as you sense the attempt and cure as before; and do not go too far into the wound, that you do not cover the tenant who holds the foundation, and bring out the discharge in the natural order; then cure it as we have said; by chance if it is healed, or you remove the covering and the mud then when it is peeled off from the foundation, or by attempt or by another pointed instrument; then bind up the wound that is in the wound, as you wish; and study to restore the wound, and to stop the fistula in the posterior part of the foundation: if it is less severe for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	And never are fistulas in this manner: when you bite the attempt in the fistula, and it is either cost or deeply embedded below the skin, take an attempt pierced at the head according to this form:
Et i boute .i. fil tort en .ij., et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And if you see that the thread is torn in two, and the attempt is at the root of the fistula until it is at the head
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement; et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II; et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent; puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	And never are fistulas in this manner: when you bite the attempt in the fistula, and it is either cost or deeply embedded below the skin, take an attempt pierced at the head according to this form: if it is pierced in the margin of the foundation downwards, then draw out the thread of that which is pierced, so that you bite your root or foundation; and pull out the head of the thread, and join the two ends together, and strain one against the other, and leave it one or two; and do not restrain at any time, until the thread holds these hairs that are between the two, and cease to bleed; then cure the wound until it is healed and healthy.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not burst, if you force it to burst in every way you can, it will not be too deeply seated.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it does not suffice to make the opening wide by force, and then cure it, as we have said, until it is sound
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans; et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	The form of the spiny thumb which we make the fistula is if it is moist and of one part and trenchant; and on the other hand not, for it is not to be held too tightly, as you see here:
des emorroydes	Des emorroydes.
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors; et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz; si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines; et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot; et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere; ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement; cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere; et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	Emorrydes sont selonc deux manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors; et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz; si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racine; et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot; et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere; ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement; cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere; et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc; puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose; et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If you command that I bind according to this manner: take one thread and pierce it through a needle, then pass the thread through the hole and pierce the needle through again, and twist two threads of the thread around the needle, and if it is thick; restrain the thread firmly, then knot the thread, and remove the needle, and secure everything else, and leave one to correct the excess blood; then put on the foundation a bandage soaked in rose oil or cerate, and put on the foundation, and command the patient to rest; and then leave it until it stops bleeding, and when it stops bleeding, if there are other treatments for the wound, until it is healed.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	when it is completely dry or firm
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	There is often dryness of the bowels in this disease, and by constriction of nature, and when the disease is old and medicine is of no avail.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient; et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If you command that you stick to the point of a spatula or your nail the scale under, which does not allow it to moisten; then treat it until it is healed if it is possible; and if it cannot be healed, if you renew the scraping stronger than before, until it breaks through, and is scraped away; then treat it until it is healed.
dou fremit	indeed
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont; et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	Formice is a small mark that appears before the limb, and goes out from under the skin; and never does it cause pain, and it is felt as if dead weight, and comes throughout the limb, and more so than in any other part.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor; puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	And the cure is that you take a bundle of rue (or the gut of a vulture) of the size of a thumb, or the size of a barleycorn, and put that bundle on the wound, until the circle of the wound has turned blue; then draw your hand back with all your might until you have pulled out the wound entirely, and put it out from under the skin, and scrape the wound out from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see that he does this with a spider or a nail according to this form, and be discreet and restrain him from below:
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	And if you see that he does this with a spider or a nail according to this form, and be discreet and restrain him from below, do not notice, for must hold still, and must press. And if you see that he does this, if he bites forward or during the cautery.
de la forme dou clistere	of this form.
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	Never make a cautery of silver or gold, or of a melted spider or flea; and never make of these small and great instruments except as they are brought.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Those who are feeble and painful in the cure of children are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	They are small both in chest and belly, or the belly is bound according to this manner:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I; et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre; et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	And if there is a swelling or the belly is tied up, if you see, and the shoulder is dislocated either forward or backward; and there are two holes in one side, and one in the other; or if the belly or the abdomen has medicines in a bladder or parchment, or if there are several holes throughout, put between each hole one finger’s breadth; then put in this hole one strong thread of gut twisted in an X or hooked around like this; and assemble the belly as if it were a needle. And when the medicine is in, if the loop has the instrument in front of a strong thread, then clip it; and that is the shape of a circle.
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement; puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	And let neither the medicine be too hot nor too cold; anoint the head of the blister with oil or balm of egg, or something similar; then bind it lightly; then grasp the minister with both hands together, until it is all white, then draw out the blister, and leave the patient his legs uncovered, and if the medicine sees that it is sufficient, if it has lasted as long as it can; and if he sleeps through the night, it is a greater aid.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you clip the vein in the case of a wound of the belly, and the physician hastens to go out, if it starts again as long as it is harmless.</start_of_turn
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	And if there is swelling or inflammation at the base of the blister, or an abscess, if the blister is as soft as for one child; this is the form of a soft blister that sits on the skin, which is strained:
des plaies	and thus is the shape of a subtle blister that appears when the skin is stretched:
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	and thus is the shape of a subtle blister that appears when the skin is stretched: when the skin is stretched, a subtle blister will form. We have already mentioned the cure for wounds; or you may say the cure for hands and medicine, according to the completion.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse depending on what causes them and depending on the place or the wounds are made, and how they are made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses; ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres; et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	Things that cause wounds are bites of stone, and the size of spear and nail, or lance or fist or knife, or similar things; or that are done according to the laws of custom, as for example a wound that bites on the cheek, or on the head, or the ear, or the belly, or the liver, and similar limbs; and I will tell you the cure for a simple wound, and we will begin with the wounds of the head alone, for the memory will come back to us in this chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree; et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	I say that when a simple wound comes or a fracture occurs, and the bone is not broken, take care if it is from a wound or from something else, and the skin is entirely torn and the wound is large, and you doubt about the wound itself: if you do this, the patient will recover more quickly from the head downwards even if there is blood from the wound; or let the blood flow in the opposite direction to the diseased part; and listen to the patient’s appetite for wine and solid food.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char; et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice; et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés; et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if he does not recover, if he is without appetite for meat, and does not drink wine, does not eat cheese; and remove the wound, if there is post-traumatic swelling, apply moist lint soaked in rose oil only, or in styptic wine; and if there is no post-traumatic swelling, if put on the wound when it is fresh with all its blood, and it is not moved by wind, dust, or anything else, I will tell you about that later; and if it has been moved, put on some ointments until it is healed
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is great like a nail and some, and the limbs do not stick together by themselves, if you join them together by stitching, as I will tell you about wounds of the belly, of stitching.</start_of_turn>
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	If the wound is exposed to the bone, and is painful, and cannot be held together by anything, then cure the wound with medicine, and restore flesh in place of skin, and command the patient to eat coarse food, such as meat and bread, as well as poultry, and similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure; et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil; et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	And if you find or split skin due to decay, and it does not touch the bone, if you can hold it together, and bleed profusely, then cure it; and if there is an artery in the wound or vein, which cannot be stopped by medicines, if you can stop the artery, and if you find it dislocated, if you can bind it with a thread; and if this does not help, then cauterize it.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if these wounds are small and simple, if it is a minor cure: put on this powder which makes them adhere as well as when they were moved.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon II parties; chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc; et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And the method of the powder is: take incense one part; dragon’s blood two parts; live chalk three parts, and grind them together finely, and apply it to the wound, and bind it firmly, until it heals well and joins together all its blood; and then bind it well and leave it to drain, if it does not swell; for we do not set the medicine until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And never do we perform this treatment alone, when we do not have the incense or blood of a dragon, but only when the wound has not moved.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre; mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe; puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the wound has moved, even if it is still fresh, do not put on this powder; but put on some unguents that digest, or poultices of ground barley made with water and honey, until it has bled enough; then cure it with other treatments until it is healed.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz; et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	If a fracture accompanies the wound, and it is small, if you grasp it with fine tweezers; I will tell you later about greater fractures.</start_of_turn>
de la plaie dou col	of the wound of the neck.
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	The wound comes from the neck and it is simple, if there is no difference between it and that of the skull, but if the nerve of the neck or the artery is severed.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire; et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres; mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	If the nerve is exposed, if there is no other injury except to leave the wound open, and do not put on any restraining dressing, because it hinders the nerve and makes it retract; do not put anything rough on the wound, because the substance of the nerve is cold, and the continuation of the pain is with the marrow, which is the most painful limb; but if the medicine is soft, like boiled chalk in sweet water, mixed with rose oil, and poppy seeds boiled in sweet water, and other similar things, and moist unguents.</start_of_turn>
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the wound is large, if the bone and surrounding tissue are split, then treat it until it is healed.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu; et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est; et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel; et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier; et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue; et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	If wounds are deep and swollen, and there is swelling from the base; if an artery is severed, blood flows freely; if the bone is fractured, and marrow and cautery mingle; if the cartilage of the jaw is fractured, or the nails of the fingers and toes are fractured, the hand must be held still, for the meat hangs loose if the nail is broken above the jaw; do not touch the jaw but restore it to its natural position; then stretch the limb slowly and leave it for a while; then treat the wound with ointment until it is healed; if the wound has made an imprint in the bone, if there are pieces of bone, if the fragments must be pulled out, do not attempt to extract anything that you cannot grasp; leave as much as possible of the wound exposed and aligned.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there is bone in the wound and there is a fistula, if the cure is as I have said in the chapter.</start_of_turn
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	of a wound from a lance or a knife.</start_of_turn>
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz; et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide; mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor; et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors; si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne; et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	If it is a wound from a lance or a knife, and the wound is deep, if you see that the wound is open to the wind, do not allow the patient to move: the wound is mortal; if it is not deep and is fresh throughout, if you do not put in the first hour the powder, do not bind it up with the wound that it does not cause him further pain or depth; return to the body and comfort the patient; but put in an astringent, and bind it twice; if there is no astringent, put into the wound some fine cotton to absorb the moisture, and make the patient rest on the wound for three days, or four or more; if there is no spasm, do not move the body or strain the wound. When you see the bones in their place, do not pull out the wound.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	Cure the tension of the tendons and other cures, as long as it is sane; and if it cannot be cured, and if it is necessary, perform an incision to remove the abscess; if the cure is to be made thus.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant; s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez; et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions; et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	And if the wound is an incision of a spear or knife, and it is simple, or worse at the front or back, if the treatment of what is before is necessary; if it is large, with stitches; and if it is small, with powder, and if it is embedded in the bone, and has broken pieces, if you desire the wound, and the blood vessels if they are severed; and if they are not severed, if you leave the wound open, if it aligns the extractions; and for other wounds, as for other members, the judge shall decide as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	thus other wounds will also judge him as we have said.
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis; de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus; et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut; por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres: les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies; et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	The belly is greatly and meanly swollen and slightly so; a great wound never comes upon the intestines, or the nerves of the intestines, by which the intestines are drawn inwards; and the ribs are more painful, and never worth more than a small wound than a great one, forasmuch as one must return the intestines more often than once; forasmuch as the intestines swell up so much that they feel the fruit, if they return more often, it is better for the lesser wound; thus it is better to leave the intestines in their place than to draw them out. The intestines are usually evacuated in three ways: two common ribs arise in the belly rib, and the ribs of the other wounds from the ribs and two other ribs are common to other wounds; and all of them are more common with the belly rib, and I will speak of it and declare it.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres: ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	I say that when the wound is small and nothing of the intestines is pressing, and only a little thing is protruding, this can be remedied in two ways: either by the small size of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestine is swollen from the fruit.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere: moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee; et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	And when it is cold, soak the area somewhat: moisten a sponge or I put a wet drape over it simply, or you can burn in vinegar scraping and pinching and spiking, and raise the intestine until it is firm; and do not at any time make this movement restrictive, and be quiet that you do not cause it to swell further.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose; et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes; et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait; et c’est li estrumens por le fendre: si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	And when you see swelling depart, if the intestine is wet or elevated and bad, because by this is the entry to something; and if it cannot enter, if there is a wound in the place, with the instrument we can compress the swellings; and the first treatment is quiet that the size, that we must not cut excessively without need, for it is the instrument for cutting: if we cut too deeply in the curve and it slips not, and once cut like this:
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	And when the wound is swollen, and the intestines protrude, if you stop the bleeding according to its natural form in its own place, if you have been negligent, for this is worth as much as a mistake.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief; et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre; et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	And when the wound is large, and it is at the lower part of the belly, if you must manage the patient lying on his back, and raise his legs higher than his head; and if it is at the lower part of the belly, put the head and the heel higher than the lower parts, and in the same way if the belly is split into two parts, put the hand on the side that is higher than the other; and thus you must manage what I say in great and small wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres; et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort; et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble; puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille; puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte; et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer: por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes; et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure; et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee; et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien; et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras; et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi; ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	In small wounds, put on what has appeared between the hands, and keep all the edges together; this is the common method of stitching and is to take a needle or more according to the quantity of the wound, then leave the edges of the wound at a distance, and pierce the two holes in the skin with the two holes in the siphac, which is under the skin, as much as you make it pierce through that part, and reunite the two edges of the siphac together; then strain a double thread around the needle from two parts, then reunite the two edges of the wound in order, and then leave a distance, and put in another needle; then tie the thread as you did with the first needle, and do not stop doing this until the wound is completely restricted; and let the needles be neither too fine nor too thick, for the fine needles cover all the substance, and the thick ones do not penetrate well: for this reason it is necessary that they be neither too fine nor too thick; and do not force the needles too much against the substance and the skin, as they do not cover and open the wound before the suture; and then join the holes of the needles, that they do not bruise the patient at night, and put on bands or patches on the holes of the needles in order to hold, and leave them as long as the wound is sutured; and this method of stitching with needles is more convenient in small wounds, for there is only one or two stitches in the second stitching that is common, and that you reunite the two edges of the skin and the two edges of the siphac together with one needle or there is one strong thread in the middle. And when you have pierced these two holes together, reunite the needle at the part where you began, in the manner that we cut the threads. And leave a distance between each stitch equal to the thickness of a minor finger; this stitch is useful for a home, and I stitched a wound once upon a time on the side of the breast, which was caused by a knife, and the wound was more than half a palm in size, and there were intestines well two palms in size, and the wound was in the middle of the belly.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	I shall return the intestine when it has been out for XXIV hours, and the wound has healed for xv days; the treatment was successful and the patient is well.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle; et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines; et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	And the patient had lost hope that he would recover, and this was a miracle; and I did not treat him with medicine, for I was in the land of Israel where there is no doctor, no medicine; and I did nothing more for the wound except to change the dressing twice a day, and to apply honey until it healed.</start_of_turn>
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture: pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens; quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer; et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	Or you may say two ways to stitch: take the needle and pass it through from the underside until it reaches the midpoint; when it has grasped the right edge, if the needle slips or tears or you have passed the needle, and you must pierce again from the underside until you reach the underside; and you will understand this stitching as well as a leatherworker does when he sews pelts, and that you leave once the hair has passed over, and you take it back again, until the stitching is complete.</start_of_turn
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere: fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac; puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac; puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit; et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	The second method of dressing, which Galiens does most frequently, if it is so that no one else does it, which assembles the two parts naturally, and joins one of the heads to the other head, in part like this: pierce a needle or head of a pin near the adjacent head, and make the former one bleed only, and leave the two heads of the pin; then withdraw the needle, and make it bleed from the lower part until it reaches this far, with two heads of the pin; then make it bleed from one and the other from the lower part until it reaches this far, with two other pins that are on the other side; and this is the wisest method of dressing and the most common.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune; et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies; et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	Galiens says that no one testifies to this; we must sew up the belly with two needles, or there must be yarn in the navel; and we must push one needle from one side and the other from the other, in the manner of those who sew up wounds; and stitches that when the wound has returned to its former state, if the suture is stronger than the other wounds of the belly.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies: et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe; et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach; puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	The judge of the wound is like the judge of other wounds: when you find the wound fresh with all its blood, even if it has moved, if you reattach the intestines and gut, then put on the dusting powder; if it has moved, do not put on any dressing that is present until the wound has healed; then tighten the thread, and be careful of the edges, the corners, and the surrounding area; then cure the wound like the others, until it is healed; and if you have no medicines, put on nothing but vinegar and oil until it starts to ooze blood.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples; et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles; et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine; et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	You do not need any other medicine for many wounds except for those that are serious; and if you doubt whether the wound is making common progress as the principal members, you must cover it with coarse linen soaked in warm oil of poppies, or rose oil, and put it on the wound; and wash the surrounding area. If there is pain or gangrene in the bowels, and this happens many times, if the black vomit is dark brown, and even if the gangrene reaches the intestines; pierce through it, and drain out the contents when the large intestines are more easily healed than the small intestines.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	The intestines which are called "jeuns" cannot recover when they are swollen, because of the swelling of the veins, and because of the subtlety of the whole body, and the proximity of their nature to nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres; et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres; puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	If the pulse leaps from the wound, if it returns backward just as the intestine; while it is fresh; and if it is pale and becomes black or dark, if you must tie the black part, for there are veins and arteries there; then close what is between the bone, and hang the two heads down from the lower part of the wound until the pulse has disappeared, and the wound will be healed.
de la routure dou boueil	because of the pain of the burn
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance; et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez; je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	When the intestine is round and the wound is small, if you can restore it in small steps, because I have seen that one bone has been swollen or pierced by a lance; and the wound was at the side of the stomach, and became filled and formed a fistula, and in this there was vomiting and diarrhea; I treated it as I could, and I did not cease to subtilize until it was healed
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre; et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans; et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere: pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus; et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise; et cout la plaie.	And when I saw it soldered, I doubted that the patient had no harm in his belly; but there was no harm, but many provisions, and food and drink; and they say that whenever there is a small wound in the intestine, it must be ligatured in parts. Take tweezers of great size, then assemble the layers of the wound, and when the tweezers have passed over the opening, if you put two layers over it, if it strains its opening over; and then press the testicles, and this is held if it cannot be released, then put another suture afterwards in that manner that before, until the wound is whole.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere: pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure; et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance; et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	If the gut is perforated, and there is no other inconvenience to the patient, and it can be ligated with a fine thread that is cut from the gut itself, in parts. Take the head of this gut thread that is outside, and then tie the head of this gut thread to the head of this fine thread, and pass the thread through the needle, and sew up the gut, and hold it in place; and this method of stitching with tweezers is not fierce except according to the condition and the hope; and if the wound is great and wide, like that which is in one of the large intestines, if there is no other remedy, except for subtility.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	of fistula or that it be
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	Wounds and incisions, whenever they burst, if they are called universally 'fistula', and even when they are sewn and rent bow.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil; et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse; aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez; et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes: c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors; ou por sa malice; ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char; ou il i a trop de bowe; ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit; ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure; ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence; ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature; ou il i a voinnes ou os: et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	When a wound or incision bursts, if it is universally called 'fistula', and even when it is sewn and rent bow. And fistula is according to truth a nodulation that needs to be strong and white, or one does not feel pain; and it is as much sewn as the quill of a bird; and never in clear liquid, and sometimes thick; never too little, and sometimes enough; and I have already spoken of this in the division of wounds, that every wound that is not cured, and there is no pus, is only by one of the seven causes: that is to say, by the smallness of the wound or the hardness of the flesh; or by its malice; or because there is hardness deep down, and on the skin, that does not allow new pus to form; or there is too much liquid; or the bone is twisted, and the matter is of bad quality; or the medicine is not good in the cure; or because corruption is like pestilence; or because the property of the region is late in digestion and late in health, and flees by nature; or there is a vein or bone: and I have already mentioned all these causes, and the signs, and the cures of medicines in the division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	Or you should know that I will tell you about the cure for fistula, which is made by the work of the hands.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors; car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez; et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	Wounds that occur in all limbs with pain; for there are wounds which arise from great veins, and arteries, and nerves, or at the jaw, or intestines, or bladder, or some of the bones, or the shoulder blade, or in any joint of the hands or feet; and if any part comes to the property of the principal limb, and the rest.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance; et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier; et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit; et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie; puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent; et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens; et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons; et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	All wounds of this kind are of grievous healing, and there is nothing but toil and ignorance; and if there is any wound that does not come to light only as far as I have said, and you have faith in a cure, and you see it approach, if it is straight, if the pain; and if it is crooked, if you can make a slight attempt to pull, for it swells inward towards the crookedness; and if the wound is pierced and you do not well bind it, if it bursts by one of the perforations, for the moisture is short from one perforation to another, and it softens; then the pain suddenly departs from your hand, that you know if there is bone or nerve, and is crushed together, and ask the patient of the pain he feels at the pressing of your hand, and the place where he feels it; and when you know truly the place or whether it is far from a joint, or a nerve, or an artery or vein, or some of those I have told you, if the cure agrees with what I have said, and the bone is forced out of its place and the corrupt humors that are within; and then the cure until it is healed, and if the wound is deeply straight, if you can force it out, as much as you can; and then put soft dressings on the medicine bag, and leave it until the medicine consumes the superfluous that remains at the bottom; and then put on oily dressings that will adhere to the wound until it is healed; and if it is not healed by this, if you must cauterize as we have said, and if the bone is corrupted by the wound, if it bursts.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit; et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font: si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu; et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If the vein or main principal does not impede you, or if the bone is discovered to have corruption and blackness, if the latter is all bony, then cure it with things that are warming until it is healed; and if it is not healed, and you must go back as before, take out the bones that are not right until you reach the marrow; if you uncover and desire as much as you can until you reach the bottom, and restore the limb; and if it is then healed, it is well.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir; si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature; et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un; et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	If it is not thus, if the corruption is too great to bear, you will not be able to go on; if there is no other remedy except to let it run its course; and if there is but a small bone that is corrupted, and you attempt to remove it with pliers, if the bone is covered with something that will prevent its extraction, or if there is more than one bone, if you break them, do not leave one of them behind; and if moisture opposes you, and there is neither doubt nor fear, then embrace moisture and warmth and deliver the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os; et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie; et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os; si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez; et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	If thou dost not drive out the poison at an hour, put upon the wound some substance that doth hinder corruption, and leave it until the wound doth lie settled upon the bones; then it will be lighter concerning the bones. And if it be a great bone, as a limb or thigh, thou must only slightly restrain the corruption until the marrow be wholly ossified, and then restore the wound. And if there be much of the bone corrupted, come down to the marrow; if thou dost cover it and cover all until the corruption be gone, and then cure it until it be healed. And I tell thee of a fistula which I saw in a man’s limb, that thou mayest take example thereby and help in thy work.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir; mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors; et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors; et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	There was a young man of about thirty years of age who had a pain in his leg due to something within the bone, so that the matter came out of his leg; and he had a large abscess, but he did not know what caused it. But he was so foolish that he did more harm than good by opening the abscess too wide and corrupting a great deal of matter, and made a fistula, and there came out much pus that all the bones groaned and the matter was softened; and he remained lame for two years, and there was no skill in his hands, as far as I know, except that which I saw him use of his medicines, and that which cured him of the abscesses that occurred from the great bones; and his leg and medicines became red, and his bones had a yellow color.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	I bound one of these holes, then circled all the holes, and found that one followed the other from all parts of the limb.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens; je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai; et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder; et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu; mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	I bound one of these holes and found part of the bone broken, corrupt and putrefying, extending to the innermost part of the bone; I extracted what appeared to be a fragment of the fractured bone, and I considered that there was no further corruption except for that which I had already seen; and I began to restore the wound with soothing medicines for a long time, without being able to join [the bone fragments]; then I began again, and once more I found the corruption continuing in the bone, and I extracted it, and then I rejoined it, and I thought I would try to join the bone; but I could only do so as long as I could grasp a palm of the bone, and when I had grasped it for all its might, I restored it with medicines; and it healed soundly and without further fracture, except for the faintness of the patient, who could not bear the pain, and for the fear of death which I had avoided for him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	For often is there bloodletting in this work, but the patient remained whole; and from the bone there grew a hard scale, and it was in good condition and caused neither pain nor discomfort in any way, neither from the start nor afterwards.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere: pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut; et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char; et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue; et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	And if the bone is broken in no part of the limb, if you wish to bind it in this manner: take one thread and strain it at the head of the bone that is open, and command no one to extend it upwards; and put another thread of linen more coarse than the first, and bind it above the scale that is now departing from the bone, and extend the head, so that you tear the corrupt scale from the socket, and uncover the scale above the limb where you see it bound; and put in place a plug or a piece of lead to cover the corrupt scale; and bind as much as you can see and feel the corruption, and bind again.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute; puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit; et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part; et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper; et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert; et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire; et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce; et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument; et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies; si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	If the bone is corrupted and does not open by itself, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part, uncover the marrow all around; then put on a pair of gloves and with one hand stretch out the corruption from the other; and if the corruption is at the joint, join the corrupted joint and stretch out the bone or what is in it from the other side; and if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, there is no other vessel but the marrow; and if the corruption is in the wrist or in the elbow, if it is strong in that matter, but whatever it is, it must be enquired about that corrosion, how it opened; and the surrounding parts must be examined in all ways, except for the vein or nerve; and that the incision and the sutures should cover these bones many times, according to the position of the bones and the appearance of swelling, and their thickness and thinness, and their greatness and smallness, and their hardness. And for this reason it is necessary to make a similar imitation of the work of this instrument; and the work will show you the instrument that you must have, according to the knowledge of this art and the testimony of the methods of diseases; if you are in doubt about the instrument that you must have according to this, it must be doubted.
dou feu	If you think the instrument which you must use is appropriate according to this, then use it.
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer; et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre; et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	The head of the shoulder may be dislocated by injury, swelling, or fever. When you have treated the underlying cause with medicine, but it has not helped, if you cover the limb until the cause has passed, the patient may escape death by this means or by the greater malice of the default of the limb; and the sign of this is that the limb becomes black, as if burnt by fire, and afterward there follows a swelling of the limb, taking in all its substance; if you are hasty in covering it, and if it is by the percussion of some venomous creatures, as for example, scorpions of the sea and vipers, and the like, if the corrosion is at the root of the bone, if you do not give it space to come out until the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras; et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut; et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe; et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet; et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil; et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort; et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers; puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	If it comes to the hand, if the cope is at the joint so that the corrosion does not reach the arm; and if it comes to the arm, if the cope is at the elbow; and if it passes the elbow, that is death, and nothing but the quantity of its virtue is of any use; and do all that you can when the corrosion comes or leaves: if it comes in the first joint, if the cope afterwards comes in the second joint; and if it comes or leaves, if you cope all that is above; and if it goes up to the leg, if you cope at the knee; and if it comes below the knee, if there is nothing else to do but leave the patient to die; and you should bandage the limb if you tie it below and above, and stretch out one minister at the lower ligament and another minister at the upper ligament, and you should dissect the tissue between the two ligaments at one spatulate wide, until the bone is exposed; then cope or remove the drape, and put some lint in the part where the drape was, so that the silk does not touch the sound limb, and come to the patient another wound and incision.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet: il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet; et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez; et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions; et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere; et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez; et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	If blood comes out when working, if you cauterize the limb excessively, or put on restrictive powders; then return to your medicine until it is accompanied; then bind the limb securely with a suitable bandage, and treat until healed; and I will tell you of a case in which this happened: there was a blackness that seemed to burn the flesh, and that corruption began at the root of the limb, as far as it could; and when we saw the corruption, if we did not cover the limb, it healed; and when we later saw the corruption return at the root of the limb, we applied things that would impede the corruption, but it continued; and I had to cut off the limb, as I had no hope of saving it; and I feared that if I did not amputate, it would die, for the strength of the limb was weak; and he awoke, and returned to his home, and when he came back he covered his limb, and it healed; and I have never heard of anything like it except in this case, when we were forced to do it.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe; et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz; et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»; mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»; et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz; et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	Never comes an abscess in the flesh that does not linger for a long time, making great swelling; then it bursts and ruptures, and in leaping up it tears the flesh, and lingers there like a vessel; and the skin which is under it is just as thin as a silken cloth, and does not adhere to the bone or the nerve, and such an ailment is called “sain,” and is not called “fistula”; but if it is so prolonged that it reaches the bone embedded in the flesh, it is called “fistula”; and if the skin is split from that point, and even when it is thin like a silken cloth, it does not recover.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi: regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite: prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel; et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus; et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant; fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor; et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez; et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet; ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain; et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin; ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens; et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez; et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	If the skin is loosened and corruption does not lie deep within, and the skin is thick like flesh, if the surgeon grasps the testicles: look if the swelling is great and the swelling which is in it has a foul odor, then make a plaster of Egyptian medicine which is made like this: take alum, oil, and alum, equally, and mix the plaster with these ingredients until it is as thick as honey; then take some of this plaster according to your need, and make it hot and thick, and administer it to the affected area; strain the excess. Repeat this treatment until the swelling is reduced and the pain is gone; do not administer plaster of alum with vinegar, except when this medicine is not present. Take vinegar of pomegranate and vomit, then let it drain, and administer plaster until you feel that the swelling has gone down; if the patient cannot bear the pain, neither the Egyptian plaster nor the vinegar, if you give vinegar and honey plaster or if there is a little bit of alum in it; or make plaster of honey and wine, because honey has the power to soften and cleanse, and the wine will make the wound dry. When you have done this, and you are confident that the swelling has gone down, if there is any purulent discharge in the testicles, and you take bandage plaster, make it with oil of rose and wine; or make plaster from other medicines and unguents, of which I have spoken of their properties or treatment of unguents; and if the wound is too wide, if the thumb and index finger leave so much space that the plaster will not enter, if the thumb has been burned or if it is swollen, put in a pad of Egyptian unguent or balsam, until it is swollen; if the wound is too large, if the thumb and index finger leave so little space that the plaster will enter, and if there is purulent discharge coming from below the thumb, if the thumb has been grasped or is lower than it should be.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char; et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe; et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain; puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois; et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste; et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez; et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	When the arm hangs down, if you do not leave some hanging hair; if you do not cover the hair at the roots as you see, it will appear in such a way that the arm hangs lower than before. For when the arm hangs down, if you do not leave some hanging hair and you do not cover the hair at the roots as you see, it will appear in this way: the arm hangs loosely downward, and you must leave nothing of the arm hanging; then take consolidating medicines to bring back the blood, and cover with a linen cloth that covers the whole wound; then put force where the skin has been cut, which will be wider than before, because there are sutures upon the other cloth according to the quantity of the cut, and put the sutures on the wound in such a way as to align the arm, and do not remove the large cloth until after one time; and whoever has been cut from the skin will often remove the sutures to align the arm, and will wipe away what is hanging from the arm, if that is venom or blood or sufficient, or digested or indigested; take care if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is swelling or not, and when your medicine is in this way extended and you see the nature of the jump on the wound, if the blood has already clotted, and approach the health. Then untie the morning, or the third day, and when you untie the wound, if you see the other cloth, renew the sutures.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the limb suddenly feels sick after remaining still for a while, it is likely that the swelling has become excessive.</start_of_turn>
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	And if subtle poison comes after a long tension, if you do not rouse yourself from sleep, because the sickness approaches.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire; et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie; et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine; pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance; puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu; et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire; et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use; et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens; si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	And if subtle poison comes after a long tension, if you do not rouse yourself from sleep, because the sickness approaches. For there are some who delay their ailments in their wounds, and others do the opposite; and if you become unwell after prolonged fasting, your veins do not swell. If your veins are late in swelling, and are swollen, if there are any moist and dry medicines, as diaphel, for there is a great part of vitriol in it, which is the last medicine; take diaphel and mix it with rose oil and the juice of a hundred wines equal in quantity; then confect and use. This itself makes honey swell, when diaphel is not present, or take myrrh and aloes and incense, grind them up, and sprinkle them on honey when it is taken off the fire; then glue on a bandage and take it off the chest, and do not administer an aristologist for a long time, or celestial roots, which is as much like flour sometimes and sometimes like hundredweight; and use simple or compound. Grind them up, make powder, and sprinkle it on honey as I have said, and use. And if the cure is prolonged, and is not cured by this treatment, then it is because the corruption has spread throughout the body, and has made an imprint on the bone, or has hardened the limbs, or caused inflammation. If the cure for fistula is taken, as we have said before.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	from the abscess of the gland.
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois; et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute; et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	Panarice is an abscess that originates from the swelling of the pouch of the hand, or the pit, or by chance originates in other two places; and when it is inflamed, and no care is taken, if it comes to an abscess of the thumb, it swells and bursts as much as it can until it reaches the root of the thumb, and by chance it swells all the way; and there comes the corrosion up to the bone, until there is sharp pain, and the head of the thumb is large, and the colour is dark brown.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	When you have cured it as we have said in the division, and the cure has not profited, if you must do so, cut away all the superfluous tissue that remains from the thumb, and then cauterize the wound afterwards.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne; et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	The cautery is a great help when the bone is sound, and the thumb is flexible; and if the thumb presses on the wound, and starts to bleed, if you must do so, remove all but a little of the callous from the thumb itself, leaving the rest above, and remove the callous little by little, and put on medicines that are astringent and corrosive to remove everything; then keep the wound clean until it is healed
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner; et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier; puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor; et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	If the bone is corroded, if it cracks and breaks, for as much as the corrupted bone is, it cannot be healed; and if you see that the thumb is corrupted, if it cracks from the nail downwards as it is said above, then you must cure it until it is healed. And if it is inflamed, swollen, and causes great pain, it is best that you first heal it; then break the bone at the tip of the thumb by cutting across just below the nail, and keep the size from going further than the nail itself, for the patient would feel too great pain; and if that happens, put something over which will soothe.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	the pain of the hand must be great.
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	The two thumbs that are born in the hands of some people by chance are all fleshy, and by chance there is part where there is bone, and never nail, and none are born at the root of the joint, or their birth is in the flesh of the hand itself.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet; la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere: taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	He who is born in no new doubt does not move; he who is born at the joint of the elbow, by chance moves; the size of him who is fleshed is slight, in part like this: size as in the root of a broad spindle.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	That which is born at the root of the joint is grief to cure: if you hold it covered.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	He who is born or must later without doubt, if you must, first close the flesh completely around the bone until it is level, then close the bone to a convenient distance from this one, then cure it until it is sound
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The wounds that come about must be reassembled either by birth, or by healing of a wound, or by fire cautery, or by like things.</start_of_turn
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz; puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent; ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	If you must close the wound, if it must be repaired according to its natural form; then put between two stitches or cloths soaked in rose oil, that they do not adhere; or you put between two pieces of soft lead, until it is healed, as it must be.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	When they adhere to neither side with the palm, if they adhere too tightly.</start_of_turn
des vils	des vils
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors; et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	The veins are great vessels enclosed with black bile, which comes in greater quantity in members that are tormented by pain and that are in motion and labor, than in others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	It is therefore necessary that you do not administer any purgatives of col, and then the remainder of the balsam.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir; et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	The treatment of fire is in two ways: one is with sponges, and we force out the black bile; the other method is if you ligate the vein and force out all the blood.</start_of_turn>
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil; puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir; et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire; et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	The size is as follows: first raise the affected limb high and warm it until the great vessel does not appear slippery; then strain the limb of the patient from under the hip down to the heel; then cut the vein in one, two or three places, of a large size, and ligate and force out the black bile from your hand from the head to the heel, until as much blood has come out as the patient can tolerate; and then tie it off and command him to eat nourishing food; and repeat the evacuation and bleeding when the veins are full, and do not harm the patient.</start_of_turn
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes; et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville; puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent; et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche; puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers; puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope; et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse; et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide; et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The patient lies down. If there is hair, remove it. Then bathe or wash the limb with warm water until it turns red. Swelling will follow. If you have no bath, burn the limb with fire and then place the thumb over the long bone of the elbow or the lower part of the calf; then bind the skin around the joint, and gently stretch the limb until it feels taut; it will turn red and black. Then release the thumb when the limb is relaxed. Then bind again, and do so three times. Then bind the skin over the joint until it feels taut. Then release the thumb once more. Then bind again as before. Continue this process until the limb is completely healed. If you are unable to draw out the hair and it remains entangled, grasp it firmly with a strong needle and remove it. Then bandage the limb tightly on both sides.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	If the eye is contracted, torted, and surrounded together, and is not straight, as we have said, then you must make an opening in it, but do not cover it; and take it out as we have said before.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne; et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	If the eye is curved like a bow, and is not pierced, but is of great curvature, for if it were slight, it would close the vein, but make it large as we have said, and this is the form:
de la voinne civile	of a civil vein.
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor; et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	This vein is enclosed in the limb, in hot parts or where there are no herbs or trees, and in the earth or where there is no moisture; and by chance it appears elsewhere except in the limb, and this comes from the putrefaction that comes from the decay of the leather, as it comes from inside the serpent’s body and outwards, enclosing between skin and flesh
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	If there are signs of the beginning of this vein, that is, if there is a great swelling in the limb, then it is chained at the root, and the vein bursts forth like the root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe; et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue; car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie; por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors; et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	When the opening is made, if it is thought that the piece of sponge should be wrapped around for one and a half inches, and the knot, and that the sponge should be left in the limb, and every time that there is a point of pain, if the wrapping is around the sponge and the knot, and the swelling; and if it is too long, if one end is cut off, and the other is wrapped around, and is not covered in its root, until it is all gone; for if you cover it, if it returns into the flesh, it brings about positing and putrefaction or death, and makes the disease worse; therefore it is necessary that it be treated promptly and thoroughly until it is cured, and that nothing be left in or on it; and there has never been a case in which this vein has been treated with five palms of sponge, or ten, and one has not died from it, since it has been done with ten palms of sponge. When it is covered, if there is one or two veins or an opening, and the hole is made right through, if everything is gone; and the matter that is inside is to be evacuated, and medicines that promote healing should be administered without any delay, and the wound should be cured like the apostemes.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	And never has this vein hands rained, even when it bursts at the shoulder joint, or on the shoulder, and blood spurts out; cure it as we have said before.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	And never has this vein hands rained, even when it bursts at the shoulder joint, or on the shoulder, and blood spurts out; cure it as we have said before.
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer; et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre; et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	This disease is called in our land "buffalo disease," because it often causes swelling of the lymph nodes, and is a small vein that originates between skin and flesh, and runs throughout the body, ascending and descending, and the patient feels it well throughout the limbs, as far as the skin is taut or the veins burst, and spur; and it is accompanied by the discharge of various humors, such as bile, worms, and feces or the like. There is doubt of its severity, for when it runs through the body, and ascends to the head, and comes out on the surface, by chance it returns, and destroys the fat. This often happens.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait: si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire; et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit; et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer; et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	When you see it cured and treated, if it will not go away until it has gone, then you must bind the limb above and below with a strong tie, and then press above and pull down, and if it does not come out, if you cauterize with fire above, until it dies; and the greater harm that it makes is if it breaks the oil, as we have said; and if you see it coming or close to the oil, then strain from it the hair that grows under the nail, then press above and pull down; and you must use the patient of purgatives of solid medicines for the bad humors that are carried, and let him eat nourishing foods.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	When you see it cured and treated, if it will not go away until it has gone, then you must bind the limb above and below with a strong tie, and then press above and pull down, and if it does not come out, if you cauterize with fire above, until it dies; and the greater harm that it makes is if it breaks the oil, as we have said; and if you see it coming or close to the oil, then strain from it the hair that grows under the nail, then press above and pull down; and you must use the patient of purgatives of solid medicines for the bad humors that are carried, and let him eat nourishing foods.
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	This disease is called in our land 'vakirir', and is a pain that comes in successive parts of the body; and I saw that which I tell you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais; et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre; li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais; puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	I went to see a sick woman, and discovered swellings on her arms, and saw a small swelling in her groin; and afterwards, I saw it rise up like a worm on the shoulder, more stretched out than anything, as much as if there were gold in the limb when it was struck against another; the pain departed from that limb and settled in the shoulder, and then afterwards subsided throughout the limb, until it came to the other arm; and she told me that it often turned back into the limb.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I wondered what he meant by that, because I had never seen such a disease in this way before.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme; et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte; et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	However, I do not want to say that because of the pain in the limb there is no movement of limbs; but I do not believe it, for I saw it in the woman; and I thought that it was because the woman had dry bones and exposed veins, and because of that appeared that constraint; and I do not see it according to this reason those things which are delicious, and which have moist bones and veins restored
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer; et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	When you see this disease cured, and the patient feels the pain, if the joint above and below has become inflamed, then immediately support the limb as much as the constraint of the wound allows; and cauterize the limb. If you do not see movement at your eyes, if the cure has driven out the swelling, like foul pills, and serpin pills, and similar things.
des saiettes	When you see this disease cured, and the patient feels the pain, if the joint above and below has become inflamed, then immediately support the limb as much as the constraint of the wound allows; and cauterize the limb. If you do not see movement at your eyes, if the cure has driven out the swelling, like foul pills, and serpin pills, and similar things.
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	The towels are varied, according to their appearance and according to the nature of the wound or the pain they cause.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees; et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces; et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	The diversity of these boils is such that some have large points, some have small points, some have hairs, and some have pus; and some have two angles, and some have tongues, and some have pieces; and those that break in no limb break in two ways: either in the principal limb, like the brain, arm, liver, kidney, spleen, intestine, bladder, and similar limbs.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent: si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions; et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	When the limb is fractured in no part of its bones, and the sign of death is shown, which I will tell you later, you will learn: if you hesitate to extract this arrow, for many more will follow; and when this bad sign appears, do not learn me, for the arrow is not yet withdrawn, if you dare, and cure the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole; et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix; et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char; et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	And the sign of madness when the arrow pierces the bone and leaps the marrow that is above the brain, is when scooping and sode and vomiting and spitting and redness in the eyes, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasm and mixing of senses, and vomiting of bile; and by chance it is without noise of nose or ears; or by chance it loses speech and voice; and leaps from the wound a white moistor resembling pus, and in leaping like burnt hair; and if this sign teaches you, if you stay away from the cure, take out the arrow if it is not already gone.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide; et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope: saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	The signs of a fracture when it breaks or cracks are that it is close to the left breastbone and feels as though it were stuck in something hard, without any visible wound; and by chance the fracture moves like a chicken, and in dark blood without, and comes with chills and cold sweat, and fainting: it is certain that death is imminent.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of a wound that never heals is only without pus coming from the wound, and the swelling increases, and the patient’s complexion changes, and he sighs deeply and vomits profusely.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	If the arrow tip remains in the covering of the wound, if it is removed, there is great pain and swelling, and deep sighing; and the limb moves abnormally
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	If the arrow tip is broken or in the stomach, by chance no sign of indigestible meat from the wound.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	If the arrow tip is broken or in the stomach, and there is no sign of feces in the intestines, if there is no hope for recovery, do not attempt to extract the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	And if the bladder stone passes into the bladder, and the urine spurts out and comes out forcefully, and the patient feels great pain: the wound is mortal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other limb, if it is fractured and the collarbone and the jaw and the shoulder and the elbow and the wrist and the forearm and the leg, and the like, is only saved by numerous precautions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the bladder stone is in the nerve or the artery, and it is not venomous, as I have told you before, for in this case you must do something else.</start_of_turn>
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis: je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	There was in my house a splinter which had fallen or slipped into the root of the ear: I grasped it, and it slipped from the other side of the earlobe, and was cured without any damage.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	And it happened in a game that a splinter had fallen into the oil of the ear from the papilla of the ear, and the splinter was returned, and did not touch anything except the tip towards the back; and the splinter was as large as a Turkish arch, and at all that was heard was a slight sound in the ear; the game was cured, and there was no further mishap
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles: je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	And bring out an arrow from the throat to a cresting, and the Arab physicians said: I saw the tonsils, and I grasped them as long as I could, and it was healed the cresting.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit; et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition; je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	And I pulled out an arrow from the chest, which was in the belly, and I thought it would die; but after it had passed XXX days, if it did not mend its disposition; I cut on the arrow, and I bound it, and I pulled it out, and there was no bad consequence.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus; et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	And if a man has an arrow stuck in his chest or back, and the wound is deep; and when I pulled out the arrow from within, I did not bind its disposition, and I found no discomfort in any of its natural works
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie; et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	And as for another man, who had an arrow stuck in his face, and the wound was deep; and when I pulled out the arrow he suffered great pain; and there were many similar things.</start_of_turn>
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	And remove an arrow from the king's arm, which was stuck in the middle of the shoulder, and was declining to the outer side; and the arrow was completely extracted. I came to attend to the cure afterwards when it had been stuck for three days.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	If I find the wound very sore.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie; et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	I would try to treat it with all my skill, and I did not feel any pain; and there was no tingling or pain in the outer ear
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast; et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	I thought that it was the tip of the arrow. I put on an absorbent dressing around the wound, in order that it would not swell; and the arrow came out by itself
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	I kept the dressing on for several days, and I closed the wound; and when I saw the patient again I found that the arrow was still in his shoulder; and he told me about it
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu; puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement; et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir; adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	I placed above the wound the corrosive medicine of vinegar by hand for days, until it was softened; I then tried to remove it, and I felt the head of the splinter which was breaking at the root; then I applied the vinegar again to the opening of the wound until the head of the splinter appeared visibly; and it passed out well at the end of the second month, and then it grew so large that I could not remove the nails, and I had to cut it from one side and from the other; and I could not do anything about it. Therefore I continued to undermine and torment it in various ways, until I was able to remove the nails as they were well made, as it is said at the end of this chapter, until I had finished with it, and I restored the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer: je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	And the doctors say that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored: I restored it anyway, and the wound healed, and the patient was completely cured.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre; mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	Or tell me what is the quality of the extraction of these arrows, if you put your cure on that which I do not speak of, for the books cannot teach me that; but you know masters better than anyone that which is present and lacking, truly nine works, and nine new instruments, from the descent of the things that come into this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres: ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part; et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	I say that the arrows do not arise from members or that they are fictious because of two handling: either by the loop or that they enter, or by another; and that which leaps forth by weight or that enters, that is an arrow that has penetrated flesh, and it leaps never more now.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue; et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor; et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	And if it does not leap now, if you leave it until the flesh is thoroughly corrupted, and rejoice at its issue; and just as if it is fictious in bone, and it cannot be extracted, if you leave it there for some days, and it moves every day; and then it leaps, and if it does not leap, if it pierces through to the marrow of all its bones, until the bones are swollen, and then you pull out.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	If the splinter is fixed in the bone of the head, and goes as far as one of the ventricles of the brain, and there are no other accidents which I have mentioned to the patient: do not pull it out, but leave it until it is even again after some days, for if the splinter comes out whole, that is death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	If the splinter is fixed only in the bone and does not come out whole, but remains in the bone for some days without any other accident, if the patient experiences pain, do not attempt to pull it out.</start_of_turn>
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is fixed firmly and will not yield, if you administer tarres around it, as I have said; then cure the limb until it is healed.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente; et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble; et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans; et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire; et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	If the splinter is embedded in the bone and cannot be seen, if there is any doubt; and if you grasp it, if it is grasped without a suitable instrument; and if you do not wish to risk the wound, and for the depth of the splinter, and there is no bone, nerve or vein, if the wound is large; then remove the splinter as best you can, and if there is any ear attached to it, which is held by two parts of the muscle that you must grasp, and then break or crush the ear of the splinter as much as you can, until you can remove it; and take care that you do not break the splinter, that you remove it more firmly.</start_of_turn
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you do not do it once, if the limb remains bent inward, then grasp it firmly, for the extraction will bring relief.</start_of_turn>
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre; et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	If bleeding hinders the treatment, if the wound or abscess demands it, do not hesitate to make an incision of the nerve or vein; and take care that you extract the foreign body without danger, either forward or backward, or twisting or bending; and maintain the patient in the position he was in when the arrow fell into him, for that is the greatest aid of all, and if you cannot do this, follow the signs which he shows you.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment: taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	If the arrow comes from another place, or if there is no wound, or if the skin is swollen in the place where it is seen or felt: then make the opening as wide as the tweezers can hold it, and then extract it: if it breaks now.</start_of_turn>
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is held in the bone, if you round your hand around it until it enters the bone, and widen the bone, then draw it out.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer; et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust; et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	If it cannot be grasped, if you leave it in, and then resume the extraction until it breaks; if the arrow is full, if it has all its barbs: if it has tears, and you see it is necessary, give an antidote with a hook, so that the tip of the arrow is caught in the hook of the instrument; then pull out the arrow, and if the arrow is hooked, if the instrument has a pointed tip entering the wound, to make the extraction easier.</start_of_turn
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	If the bandage is stuck, if you must, grasp all the hair around the wound or the poison is there, if you wish; then cure the wound as it should be cured.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope; et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est; et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If the bandage is torn or broken at the belly or the bladder or the ribs, and is close by, and you must cover it up, if you grasp; and hold the vein and the nerve, and then extract it, and then suture the wound, if necessary; and cure as long as it is healed.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The shapes of the nails with which we treat the saiettes are similar to the beak of an oyster, and thus be the form:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	And there are many ways: great, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the splinter.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	The shape at the end of the shoulder is like the wing of a bird, to push back the head of the shoulder, as it is in this form:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	the fire never stops pulsating until it is new.
des voinnes dou cors communes	From common veins do blood often flow.
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir: II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»; et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans; et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»; et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis; et les II guindeges qui sont ou col; et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»; et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	The veins which we must consider are sixteen in number, that is to say: two veins which are behind the ears, which are covered by the two «herbaches»; and two arteries which are in the two temples which appear; and two veins which are in the two armpits, which are covered by «aspires*/; and the vein which is in the middle of the forehead; and the vein which is at the top of the nose; and the two veins which are at the collar; and the two veins which are under the chin, which are covered by «augeherich»; and two veins which are at the back of the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras: l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»; et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	The veins which we commonly handle are five in number in each arm: one is the cephalic, and is on the left side of the elbow, and is called the superficial vein; and the middle one is called the fast, and is composed of the cephalic and brachial veins, and is called the deep vein; and the brachial vein is either on the front or back of the elbow, and is called the radial vein, and is above the olecranon, which is the one we often see on the pouch.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains; et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei; et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	And the saving vein is the one between the ulnar and ring fingers, and if there are two of them; and in the leg and foot are three veins: one which is below the elbow of the left side of the forearm, and the second which is below the ankle of the right side; and the vein which is called the sural, which is in the ankle of the other leg; and in the other leg are three veins below these.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine; et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief: quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche; puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues; puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee; et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	The blood of the veins that are behind the ears helps as old purges, and to evacuate; and the quality of the blood, as I have said, is that you raise the head of the patient and wipe the hand or the veins are rough; then stretch the patient’s neck with a pin, as long as the two veins behind the ears depend from the head: when the thumb and index finger touch, and you feel the pulse of your thumb, if it signifies an embolism; then take the lancet and pierce through the vein until it reaches the bone, then keep your hand on the whole vein above, and squeeze and the skin and the vein well two must pass through, and make blood spurt until you see; then strain and bind, until it is healed; and I have already said the incision and the cautery or first book.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz; et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis: et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement; et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche; puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit; puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton; et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	The blood of the two arteries that are in the two temples, if it is like an ancient emigration, sode, and obtalmie accustomed, and at the root of the tears of agues as eyes; and the quality of the doctor is such as I have said: and that the patient has strained his neck, as the two veins open wide; and he feels the pulse down to his thumb, and then he signs his mark; then he places his thumb on the vein at the top of his thumb index, and grasps the lancet down, and grasps the vein at the top, and the cope, as he has done in two other veins, and makes correction of the blood according to his necessity; then he releases the patient, and places his thumb on the vein for an hour, then puts on cotton; and then the swelling forms, and he leaves it until it is healed; and we have spoken of this in relation to its coping and its extraction, or the beginning of the book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor; et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere; puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	The blood from the front vein is worth as much as the blood from the cephalic vein, for there are diseases of the face of old age, such as migraine and redness; and the like if the patient strains his neck by turning, as long as the vein bursts. Then take the instrument which is called the "burr," which is like this:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues; puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	The blood from the front vein is worth as much as the blood from the cephalic vein; for there are diseases of the face of old age, such as migraine and redness. And the like if the patient strains his neck by turning, as long as the vein bursts. Then take the instrument which is called the "burr," which is like this. Place the point on the vein, and hold with your hand or something else, and let the blood issue according to the quantity that you see. Then loosen the patient's neck, and bind the vein until it is whole and never more let the work be done with a wide flame.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	However, I advise that the flame be neither too great nor too small; and the latter is better, for the bone is close, and by chance breaks the flame when it is subtle.</start_of_turn
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice; et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant; puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	The blood of the two veins which are two cubits in length helps to strengthen the eyes, the tongue, the cheeks, the ears in wax, and diseases of the face; and the quality of their blood is that when the patient strains his throat by twisting from side to side, as before; then the same, and either the blood runs black, or a little black, for there is no marrow.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if the flame is subtle, by chance if it breaks; then make an opening of the blood, as much as you are able, and then bind it up, and bind it well.</start_of_turn
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree; et c’est li forme dou flaime:	The blood of the vein of the jaw is worth like water, and has sode forsene, and diseases of the face, such as migraine and redness that comes to the face, and the same when it is old; and the quality of the blood is that when the patient strains his throat, he strains his jaw to his left hand, and takes a moderate flame long, and holds it in the space between the two nostrils, because the vein does not open very well in this place, and he must begin to correct it now; and do not go too deep, and make the correction of the blood according to your need, and leave it for one night, because it is easily restored; and this is the form of the flame:
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit; et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est; puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	The blood of the second pair is useful for the extraction of the spleen, for the beginning of mixing, for the mouth of maladies, for spitting blood, for corrosions, for herpes, for tumors; and the quality of the blood is that the patient grasps his collar with both hands, as we have said; and either the master is standing above the patient’s head, and the patient sits on one seat, then open the vein widely, take out the blood slowly, as much as is necessary; then repeat the process in the other vein, then remove the ligature, and strain the blood moderately, that the patient does not suffocate; and leave it until morning, that the wound is healed.
de la sainie des leivres	The blood of the second pair is useful for the extraction of the spleen, for the beginning of mixing, for the mouth of maladies, for spitting blood, for corrosions, for herpes, for tumors; and the quality of the blood is that the patient grasps his collar with both hands, as we have said; and either the master is standing above the patient’s head, and the patient sits on one seat, then open the vein widely, take out the blood slowly, as much as is necessary; then repeat the process in the other vein, then remove the ligature, and strain the blood moderately, that the patient does not suffocate; and leave it until morning, that the wound is healed.
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The blood of the veins from the arms above helps to clot in the mouth, and to corruption of gums, and wounds of the limbs, and dullness and pain.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit; puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires: cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	And if the quality of the blood be to make the patient sit before thee, and restrain his neck as I have said; then turn the palm of the hand towards thee, and behold two veins, one on the right side of the hand and the other on the left, and know them by this that they are black, and that there are small veins running alongside them: therefore close both of them; and if thou canst not know them, and if thou art in doubt, if thou close the greatest of the two veins from the wrist downwards, and as much of the two veins as are below and above, for that is the right way.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	And if the quality of the blood be to make the patient sit before thee, and restrain his neck as I have said; then turn the palm of the hand towards thee, and behold two veins, one on the right side of the hand and the other on the left, and know them by this that they are black, and that there are small veins running alongside them: therefore close both of them; and if thou canst not know them, and if thou art in doubt, if thou close the greatest of the two veins from the wrist downwards, and as much of the two veins as are below and above, for that is the right way.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche; et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire: saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	The blood of the veins that are above the tongue helps after the blood of the cephalic vein; and this is at the stretching of the throat, and with eye diseases, and with mouth diseases; and the quality of the blood is such that if the patient stretches out his hands before the sun, and stretches his tongue, and looks under each rib, he will see a black vein: so both of them are the same, and do not be too quick to pierce, for these are the arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres: ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»; et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	The veins which we commonly cauterise are usually bled by two methods: either by pricking with a blunt lancet or with an olive-shaped needle as for cutting trenches, and this is called ‘anesil’; and they are large and olive-shaped according to the size and stretching of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The flame burning brightly if famous, and is wide as you see:
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble; et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	And it must be known for opening the large veins filled with thick blood, which contain much blood and trouble; and this is the form of the olive flame.
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	and is more pointed, and is for the healing of the small veins, or where there is little yellow blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre; et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	The blood of the basal vein, which is one of these veins, helps with ailments such as hoarseness, swelling in the throat, or pain in the feet or belly; and it is known that it should flow steadily, and that it should abstain from the artery which is beside it.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit; et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	And if it touches the artery, and blood spurts out, if it is known to be stopped; as I have said; and it must not be grasped too tightly, but cut as cleanly as possible.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre; ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement; et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	And if the basal vein does not open visibly, if you must extract it, and tie another one; or you want no further bloodshed, or you prefer to take in hand the vein which is in the arm: it will open visibly; and grasp it with the flame as we have said
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz; puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil; et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	If thou seest the head of the blood vessel known, if thou drawest out the arm, touch the head as long as thou knowest the pulse; then sigh the head, and then bind the arm, and close the vein softly; and beware that thou do not wound the artery when thou seest the head swell, for that is the artery: eschew it.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere: haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient; se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	If thou seest blood spurting out like the urine of a child, and it is pale and slimy, know that it is not from an artery: haste thee hence, put on thy thumb and linger, then stretch out thy thumb if it does not bleed; bind the arm and leave it still, and do not move the patient; and be wary, and do not move it until it is healed
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	If it is not stained and it pains, and the medicine is not present, if the artery bursts because the head is retracting, staunch it without delay.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor; se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc; et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	And take a handful of mustard seeds, make a poultice of it, and take half and bind it well up to the other side; if there is no bleeding, that is good; but if there is, if as we have said, from powders that stop blood; and the clotting does not suffice in many situations because of the small size of the wound, and the power of the blood.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit; et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner; et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	The blood of the vein in the middle helps to treat the disease of the head below, and of the ribs, because it is composed of the basilar and cephalic veins, as we have said; and it is useful for the patient to abstain from the nerve that is below, and if it is not too deep, and if he finds the nerve, and it swells, the wound will either be closed, or by chance will not heal; and this nerve is often opened many times, and if it does not open in some people because of its subtlety, it is likely that you must take the blood of the instrument that numbs; and withdraw the nerve from its place.
Et se il a voinne entre les .ij. ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if there is a vein between the two nerves, if it is long enough.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz; et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	The blood of the cephalic vein helps, for it attracts blood without pain, and helps the eyes; and it is best to cauterize with the olive flame or the mirtin flame, for these are the safest of all veins, for it has neither nerves nor arteries.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence; et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	However, it is better to ask a little less violently the first time, and do not grieve if it does not work the first time; and by chance it may happen that it swells up later, which one must not attempt the first time, but it does not grieve anything.</start_of_turn>
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of the blood is according to your thoughts.</start_of_turn>
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir; et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique; et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent; et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	The first thing you must know about cautery is that it must only be used to preserve health and avoid diseases to come; and it is best to cauterize on one of the three veins that are or should be: namely, the cephalic, facial, or basilar. It must be performed at the beginning of the prayer while fasting and after eating, when the sign of repletion appears; and it must be performed immediately or after two or three hours.</start_of_turn
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens; et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	The blood which is administered for maladies has no fixed dose, but when it is necessary for cure or nourishment, at all hours and in all conditions; and it is not permitted to give it to children under twelve years of age, nor to women who are nursing for more than four months up to seven.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez .lx. ans.	Blood should not be given to those who have passed 60 years of age
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz; ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques; et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors; puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir; puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit; et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses; et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans; et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on; puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	When anyone feels the need for medicine in any way, if it is permitted to administer wine, even if it has caused a slight diarrhea, if there is retained saliva, so that the veins do not draw out the intestines by the abundance of nourishing humors in the principal parts; do not give wine to anyone who is too fat with meat, or drunk, in whatever degree, or suffering from diarrhea; and if one drinks wine after eating, vomiting, and a swollen belly, and many times of vomiting at women, and of childbirth, and of guarding and of fasting, and whatever virtue, or by any weapon or poison; then subtilize the humors, if they are not too thick, by meat, drink, and medicines, if you can; then give warm or cold bath, if nothing else hinders, to subtilize the blood, and keep it from clotting in the veins, up to the navel; as we have said; and keep this work, this penance, and these pleasures, and similar things; and be bound and joyful, and let the physician be higher than you, and wipe his hand twice or thrice, then draw out the thread from the middle; for if it is too tight or loose, it will not be able to correct without; then wipe the area with the hands, until the veins swell and are felt; then moisten the physician with a spoonful of old oil, then put his left hand on that vein below the elbow for a moment or two, while he gives the wine; so that the vein does not swell and cause injury.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus; et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	For there are veins that flee like cords to the physician, and if some of them are full of windiness, so that when one puts the flame on, it withdraws from the flame, and cannot open the vein, and thus is this; and if one opens the vein, the wound is too wide, for this reason one must advise the physicians in these matters.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if the vein bursts the first time, that is good; but if not, one must repeat the process again until the swelling subsides.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras: par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait; et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement; et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	And if the limb is inflamed, and the patient groans, if one leaves it for a little while or two, and does not bind the arm: by chance there will be abscesses of hair; do not enter or bathe, then restart the bleeding if it is flowing; and if it is slight, or if there is little blood in proportion to what you see, if you are confident in that loss itself with all the flame upright; and do the work deliberately, even if the limb is inflamed; for this often happens when the wound is small.</start_of_turn>
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile; et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc; et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	If you see the limb inflamed, do not delay in applying pressure to the bleeding; put on a pad of lint soaked in oil, for it softens the course of blood; and with this administer the lint soaked in oil into the wound so that you close the veins, to stop the bleeding; and this will produce a slight tingling and swelling of the limb when it is applied. If you remove it too soon or leave it on too long, it will come apart.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre; et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie; et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	If there comes a large abscess that has happened many times, even when the wound is not severe, if you are hasty, and put on the limb a wet sponge and a warm pack, and hold it for an hour; and know that you must do this after the blood has drained from the vein, and if it remains in the limb after a few days, neither black nor green discoloration will result from this; and if you see this, do not put anything else on it, such as aloe or mastic gum dissolved in vinegar, mustard, or anything similar.</start_of_turn>
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And often there is swelling and appearance of blood in the armpit: put your hand there, and if you feel the limb soft under the compression of the hand, if that is the bad appearance.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai .i. emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Leave me alone; do not place anything further on that which we have already said, for by chance in court without an artery; but make it thus: apply pressure dry to endure the wound, then treat it with another remedy, until it is healed.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And take each wound according to the quantity of its virtue, and of the color of the wound.</start_of_turn>
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	For if it is dark without, if you leave it as long as it is red; and if you see it large, if you leave it as long as it is subtle; and if it is too thick, if you leave it cool.</start_of_turn
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges; et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant; et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	And it is fitting for the one who is calm and strong, and has the skill of extracting blood, to make the wound larger and the flame bigger; and for the one who is weak, do the opposite, and make it healthier sooner, and must make it healthier by cutting across, not by pricking. And this method of bleeding is useful for the preservation of blood and nerves, and is worth more than the bleeding that comes from a long wound that is not large.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	And for the one who has a cold complexion, it is fitting to give lukewarm bread soaked in pomegranate juice; if he is faint, give blood three or four times. And if he has a cold complexion, give him before the blood lukewarm bread soaked in honey or aromatic honey syrup with spices, such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cloves, and a fragrant syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	If he pricks with his finger at the blood vessel, after the issue of moisture of blood, then it is commanded that he cough up phlegm, a foul smelling smoke, and use other things as we have said in the section or chapter on fainting, for the evacuation of the vein.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if it sees the arm going pale again, and is well another time, if expedient, when it is full of great blood, that it recover itself and recover itself, according to the quantity of its continuous virtue.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine .vij. houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And whoever has seen his arm swollen after the first bleeding, and has stiffness, if he is well, should wait at least thirteen hours after the first bleeding, or after the ninth hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And whoever has seen himself well in other parts, if he must be well again, should wait at least two days or three days.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson; puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens; et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus; ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz; mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	For there is blood in the body which is already clotted, and causes fever; if you can remove a great quantity, and expand the opening as much as it bleeds; then that you may reward all the conditions of the blood, and put your hand over the pulse when it is well, that the blood does not come out instead of the flesh, and this often happens when the patient is negligent; and you must not do more than you see the limb slipping, and make the blood reappear the second time, and the opening is closed, that you press firmly; if it is crooked, that you extend the limb as much as possible, because that would be harmful; but leave it as it is until the second time; or you prick at the tip of the flame, until the blood which is congealed at the opening of the vein is forced out, and put some ointment over it and press lightly.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein has fled, if you leave it and do not restrain me, until the swelling is gone.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if necessary is to draw out blood a second time, if the same in this limb or in another vein, or in the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein in the arm is saved in place of the vein of the head for this reason that it is composed.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges; puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc; et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez; et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit; et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	And if the patient’s hand is plunged into hot water, while the blood vessel is red; then bind it moderately, so that the wound opens properly; then draw out the wound, neither too wide nor too long; or make a large perforation, and join it close to the wrist joint; if it is not possible to withdraw it, repeat the immersion in hot water, and allow the blood to clot naturally until enough has formed; and if this is done, do not reinsert the hand into the hot water, for more has been put into it than in the beginning; the blood of this vessel is more valuable than all the other veins, for there is neither artery nor nerve in it.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere: estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie; et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	The blood of the salivary vein of the right hand is worth for all the diseases of the liver; and this is the method: strain the hand and plunge it into hot water, until the vein bursts if seen; and if the wound opens, and if you grasp it all the way through, grieve nothing; and do not move too much, for the nerves are all loosened of flesh, and then withdraw the hand from the hot water, if it is not frozen in the wound, and do not withdraw it again.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have treated the blood as a skilled physician, if you put oil and lint on the wound to stop bleeding, and do this diligently.</start_of_turn
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The blood in the left hand is worth the disease of a mouse, and do everything as I have told you regarding the wound.</start_of_turn
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	The blood of the sophene is worth for all diseases which are sour of the body, such as diseases of the marrow, retention of flowers, disease of the reins, and of the knees and old legs, and similar diseases.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains; saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	And the quality of its blood is that when the patient is in acute pain, and froths over the belly as much as possible, and lies down at the joint of the limb; and if the belly is at the ankle, and by lying down on the limb, comes out a quantity of urine; so too with a large or small rain, or at the ankle, that much is worth doing.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you keep it healthy on the bone, if you ward off the nerves that are dry, and keep it moist like when you are grasping; and let the flame be gentle.</start_of_turn>
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if it cannot be moved without pain, if you reset the bone in the water, and let the vein drain well.</start_of_turn
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz; ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	And if the patient has to urinate the first time, if he begins the second time at a distance, because the urine is salty; do not doubt, as we have said, and do the same with the other limb equally
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The groin of the sciatic nerve is at the ankle of fire, and its blood is worth the pain of the hip, when it is for blood that has clotted.</start_of_turn>
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant; et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	And if the patient has a wound that opens or breaks open at the ankle, pull out three nails from the foot; for otherwise the vein will not open. And if it opens, do so in all possible ways, both forward and backward; and it is better that you cut it off, for the flesh is soft and the blood will clot at home.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners; et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	And if you do not find [something] that will open or drain it, or towards the little toe, and you keep it closed; keep pressure on the wound until you see blood flowing freely, and then remove the dressing and apply pressure; it is now healed.</start_of_turn>
des sainies de ventouse	of vacuum
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc .ij. manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc.ij. manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu; et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col; et II autres en II costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton; et li ventouse des II espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies; et les ventouses emmi les II bras; et les ventouses des II jambes; et les ventouses des II chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne; et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	And this suction that is done with a burn if it is done in two ways: either it is with great heat or with cold; and the suction that is done by burning and extracting blood if it is done in twelve wounds of the flesh, of which one is at the top of the head; and the other is at the nape of the neck; and two others on the two shoulders; and the suction from the mouth; and the suction from the two elbows; and the suction on the buttocks; and the suction on the two arms; and the suction on the two legs; and the suction on the two ankles; and the suction does not treat any wound, except for minor blood vessels that are scattered throughout the flesh, and for this reason it does not cause any harm, as we do when we make blood from a vein; and it is not recommended except when it is administered, neither with great heat nor with cold, in any disease that comes from repletion, as long as all the flesh is emptied.</start_of_turn>
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens; car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief; et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz; et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc; et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	And if necessity of illness compels it, or by custom, if the physician notes a sneeze during the commencement of the month, or at its end, and throughout; for there are some who, when they must sneeze, suffer a heavy head; and there are some who find swelling and redness in their face, and in their head and neck, and black eyes; and some who find a drop of blood in their mouth, and have lost the tongue, and spit blood; and some who dream, and see blood and wounds and death.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés .iij. houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, and indeed when it is wet and moist, we command the patient to abstain from food for two hours.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors; et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement; et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	The blood of the physician helps with the headache … which comes from the black eyes; and it shall not be used except after the evacuation of all hair; and this vomiting is useful in place of cephalic blood, and is not to be used by those who are of hot complexion or who have a bad temper, because this causes them great discomfort; and for this reason it is not to be used except by those who are suffering from cold diseases.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And if he who is well is made aware of the danger, he must promptly put the ventouse one place further down on account of the fear of danger.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion; et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	The wind blowing in the neck is in lieu of the blood of the head and of the basilisk, and for this reason it is worth to extend the thumb, to split the channel of the beard, and to scratch, and to swell; and it must be pressed gently, for if it is held too firmly, it can cause strangulation or stomachache or pain.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	The biting of the wind in the neck is worth the pain of the head, and swelling and vomiting, and strangulation, and toothache; and it is in lieu of the blood of the basilisk; and it must be commanded to the patient to express his hand to put it there, not to cut an artery, and not to vomit blood.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des .ij. levres.	The windsings cause such suffering in the chest as in mouth disease, and corruption of the gums, and similar diseases that are in the mouth; and it is in lieu of the ailments of the two upper teeth.</start_of_turn>
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	The winds of the spleen are a disease that comes from heat and fullness.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes; et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	The biting of the wind in the armpits is worth as much as three veins of the arm, because it draws blood from these three veins; and command the patient not to press too deeply, for the skin is sensitive, and knows nerves and arteries.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The wound on the buttocks is so severe that it causes swelling of the underlying tissue, and diseases of the bones; it is therefore necessary that the suction should be large and strong, and have a good grasp; and in case it should slip, it will cause great damage.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des .ij. sophenes, et des .ij. chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	The wounds of the thighs are so painful that they draw blood from all parts of the body, cause ancient pains of the groin, and swelling of the belly and testicles; and lead to the loosening of bones; and are in consequence of these three sophenes and two dislocations, and all these things loosen the body after a long time, and cause vomiting in various positions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	The way to apply the suction is to put it on empty first, and then gradually add tension, and put it on firmly, and move it equally, and do not stop doing this until you see the flesh red and swollen, and see the colour of the blood; then let go, and put the suction back on, and take care of the position of the body, for there are some who have a bad temper and are clumsy: if you should only wound once, you will cause great wounds and deep wounds; and do it cautiously.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir .ij. fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	If it is not large, it can be wounded three times: the first time to open the great vein.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	If it is not large, it can be wounded three times: the first time to open the great vein. And if its veins swell with blood, it is sufficient to do so once.</start_of_turn>
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif: se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite; et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	If our veins burst with blood, if we renew them often; if they are not expected, if they are fiercely inflamed, and if they are perceived as being perforated, it is fitting for those who have thick skin and hard veins, and who have wide pores, that you apply the leeches of oil aperitif and dissolving: if it is in summer, oil of violet, or sweet almond oil, or oil of pumpkin seeds; and if it is in winter, oil of cresson, or lilac, or chamomile, or other similar things.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the swelling is great and cold, if you take bitter almond oil, or balsamite oil, or oil of angelica, and the like.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	And if the patient has soft flesh and large pores, it is not fitting to apply oil, but it is fitting to wash afterwards with rose water, or cold water, or elderberry water, or watermelon juice, or pot liquor, or other similar things.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And whoever has moisture in his mouth, if he rises easily, or vinegar, and sumac, and similar things.</start_of_turn>
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans; et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	And those who have excessive discharges should rise from wine strong, or from aquavit of sage, or from decoction of dandelion or chamomile, or from other similar things; and do not cover themselves with a bandage before the bath, but after the bath an hour or two; and do not sleep after the ventosation, and must rise when they are expected to rise and when they are risen.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez; si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses; et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	And guard those who are feverish must keep cold, and if they are too hot and inflamed; if they must take cold things, such as pomegranate seeds and cucumber and lettuce easily, and similar things; and eat meat, barley broth, and moist food.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons; et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier; et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz; et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	And those who have a cold complexion, if they take syrup of honey, and fragrant wine middle between strong and new, and eat barley porridge, and eat meat and small oilseeds and herbs; and when they will be ventilated, they must drink more than eat; and must give to others no wine before or after, for to comfort the principal members; and be discreet about it, but it must not be that only those who are hot drink it
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre; et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu; et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	The wounds which are made to bleed are those which are made upon the liver, and upon the spleen, and the kidney, and upon the belly and the buttock and the arm and the thigh, for in these members there is no suffering from wounds except for that which is caused by drawing blood from one member to another; and we do this upon the nipples when they do not bleed spontaneously; to remove the viscosity which is in the member, as we do when we apply a bandage to the belly and the buttock to make the member more flexible; and to relieve the pain, when there is swelling or a stone, for by its attractive power it attracts the swelling or dislodges the stone; and thus it makes them rise when we apply it to the liver and the spleen when there is retained congestion. These compresses are administered empty without any liquid, and never together with water that is cold or tepid, except in cases of pleurisy, and in such a manner we fill the compress with hot water or with water or with herbs that are appropriate for this.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The form of the wound administered with fire is as follows:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre; et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent; car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	And there are two broad palms and a half of barley, or about a quarter of an inch, as much as to push out an awl; and it should be from flaxseed, so that it does not burn the patient when placed on the limb; and there should be in the middle a splinter of thorn or iron, to hold the bandage firmly, and there should be large and small ones according to the ailments and the severity of those who take them; for the blisters of the intestines are other than the intestines, and the magras are other than fats.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre: empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide; et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse; et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	And one must put this suction cup on the limb: grasp the bandage firmly or with a dressing, and put it through the splinter which is through the suction cup, so that it sticks neither to the front of the suction cup nor to the patient; and then put it on the limb, and two must be put on the perforation which we have said, so that when we see that it is going well, we can remove the suction cup; and grasp the dressing as before, and do it often, if you are able.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement; et c’est li forme:	In the suction which is administered in the disease of pleuresin, at all its sharpness, neither vein nor opening is to be made, except when it is plain that the disease is acute, and is placed upon the limb only as much as is necessary; and this is its form:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus; et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans; et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren; et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres; et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues; et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	Suctions are not to be made except in limbs where it is not possible to place a vacuum due to their small size, such as the liver and the gums, and similar things; and in their nakedness of hair, such as in the groin or navel, and other similar things; and the quality of the patient is such that when we find veins that are in soft, clear veins without any swelling, we must take them; and we put on a little water, until they are full, and do not have anything in their belly; and then either close the vein and the suction, or else wipe the limb until it is red, and put on the veins; and when they are full, and swell, if it is possible to put on the suction, we must do so, for this is worth more afterwards.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint; et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés; et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez; ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant; et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	If not, if you lift the limb easily, then immediately with a little water, swallow well, and then spit out; and if the limb remains too long after the juice has gone, if you wet a bandage of lint in cold water and put it on, until the swelling has subsided; and if the swelling is great, put on broken glass or splints, or similar things, until it is subsided; or you take out half of the nails from the limb, and leave them until they burn out, if you stop now; if you do more, take other nails.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent; et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	And if the nails do not take hold, if you rub the limb with fresh blood, or you insert a needle until the nails are out, and then put them back, as soon as they feel the blood, if they burn; and when you see that they are bleeding, if you sprinkle on a little aloes and gum arabic, or charcoal, they will stop now.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	This is the end of the text.
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This chapter is frequently necessary in the art of medicine, and is restoration of fracture and displacement.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent; et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin; et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie; et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	Hear now, dear son, that in this book there is something which no former writer has ever seen, no letter has ever read; and for this reason it is strange in our land, for I have never found anything like it. I know of no other way save by the learned books of the ancients, or by studying them and learning them by heart and by experience. And I have set forth in this book what is contained in them, abbreviating it at the end and making clear the forms of the instruments which are mentioned, as I have done in the two chapters preceding.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	It is therefore necessary that we say or prologue of this book contains the sum of the word and the chapters or the learned men put their understanding into it, and remain on the truth, so that those who are proved to know learn this noble art and learn from others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars; ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	I say that when there is a break or dislocation or twisting or swelling, if you must hasten the recovery of the patient from one side and from the other, if nothing else hinders you, if weakness of the limbs, or youth, or old age, or if the tension is not very strong, or too cold; and mix cold baths, that is to say cold showers, and oil and vinegar and chamomile, and do not drink wine, do not eat any fatty foods, and do not fill the veins with too much meat, until you are certain that the patient will not suffer from after-pain or swelling of the limb; if the patient recovers before the first treatment has ended, let him rest quietly beforehand.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the bones are broken and begin to heal, if it is known that the patient must not be given meat that causes great swelling, or if there is viscosity, as with flour mixed with water, and rye, and peas, and beans, and fish, and wine, and other things like these.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For part of the swelling subsides when the bone is more solid and the fracture is more stable.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans; mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	And know that bones broken by fractures and decrepitude do not well resume or knit according to their nature because of the drying up of the limbs; neither those that are too tender, like bones of small children; but there is no cure, leave it resting on the broken bone itself with great tension which has occurred, and join the limb together, as much as it forces; and do not move it at all, for because of this it is necessary to nourish with great meats, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And know that fractures are of various kinds in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there are breakages that go to the marrow, and others by cutting, as with the size of a pen for writing.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if there is a breakage with a wound, and a breakage with a small tear.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu; et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main; et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure; mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	When there is stiffness in a limb, it has its own origin and its proper instrument in the restoration; as it is remembered to come in its place; and it is known that the fracture of a bone is recognized by its turning, which is well recognized by its loosening and by pressure of the hand; and when there is no twisting or touching, and the patient does not feel great pain, there is no fracture; but it may well have twisting, or fissure, or a small fracture.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	If it is not possible for me to do anything but move the hand, but put on medicines that come after this, and then hold it now discreetly.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne; et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez; puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	And the wound which bursts forth that is in the armpit, and which are the two parts of the joint, must now be set equally, even as after an incision; and if an incision is made which is too close to the edge, if you leave any hanging, until the incision is healed; then set it equal to the muscle as you can gently and cautiously, and the wound which has burst must be restored more gently than the restoration of these or when there are fragments. Then strain it as you can afterwards.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main; et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor; et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	And if there are broken fragments in the bone, if they are two parts, and it is the hand or the foot, or at your hand if it is a small limb, or two strings, or one string and your hand; and set the limb according to its natural figure, so that when the parts of the limb that are broken are loosened, remember with all your might to stabilize the additions to the muscle as you do, and keep that by your work no wound or pain should arise to the patient; and adjust well the two ends of the bone according to the best forms.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	And he feels well in the hand if it seems to him that it is not well: if the swelling is beautiful, and does not constrain him too much, do not press so much as they do who make it come about by their work at incisions and contractions of the limb, as we have often seen.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere; et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	When the limb is fixed in place, if the patient keeps it still, neither awake nor asleep, neither turning nor moving in any way; and keep the limb firmly secured so that it feels no pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor; et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez; et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	When it feels no pain, if it is not firmly fixed, and you must put it in partial use so that it feels no pain; keep it correctly positioned, so that there is no twisting until it is restored; and the degree of damage to the limb is according to what I tell you.</start_of_turn>
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	The limb is broken in various sizes, shapes and forms.</start_of_turn>
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz; et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche; puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure; et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet; puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus; puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	For there are small members such as arms and thighs and the like: if you must cover them with soft and fine cloths; and for those that are large, such as bones and legs: cover them with a wide and strong band, for the large bands embrace the whole great limb and strain it equally, so that there is no tension; then put on firm supports, three tours or four according to the limb, and strain your hand one inch at the circumference, then go up to the fracture and strain less, than the fracture then lets go a little; and soften the limb a little, as long as you take most of the limb back, then take up another band, and strain the dislocation back to its original position; then put back at the bottom of the fracture, and strain moderately, not too strong nor too weak, as we said at the beginning of this chapter; then put between the bands some supports of linen or cloth, so that they are even all around, and then tie everything up securely with your stitches, without any displacement or swelling.</start_of_turn>
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors; puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	If there is swelling or abscess, put upon something soothing the abscess with heat, which will soften the swelling; and leave it until it subsides. Then strain upon your toes, and let them be half of a large cane resting firmly, or of staff which one makes from sticks, or of rags of wool, and let them be like this figure.
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres; et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor; puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure; plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol; car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	But it is necessary that the staff that one puts upon the break be greater and broader than the others; and be as long as it is suitable for the limb in small or great size; then strain upon the toes just as you did at the first hour, and then bind beneath a thread of linen without too much tension; for if the thread is too thick, like those fools who make their threads from hemp fibers, it is a great mistake, for the thread will not be even if it is too fine, and it will not suffice that there be less space between two bones.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is bruised by the threads after the stripping in the flesh, if you put soap on them, I put coarse linen or coarse cloth on them, so that they do not bleed.</start_of_turn>
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is with a wound-cleaner and the bone is fractured, I will speak of the cure for it later.</start_of_turn>
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And so, if it cannot be forced out by hand, grasp the broken limb first thing.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant; et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	For when the limb is large, it is not permissible to put these stars up except after five days or seven, or more as you deem necessary following an incision. And when this is done, the method of ancient plasters is used to restore fracture, dislocation, and torsion: take flour that adheres to the walls of the mill, mix it with abundant eggs, and make this concoction, not too thick nor too thin, and use it. This is the common method of plastering that restores fracture in various positions, and it is the same for women and young children, for it is neither too harsh nor too rough.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .v. З.; alechil .viiij. З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Another method of packing that restores the fracture and dislocation and torsion: take three barley, linseed, laurel, asafoetida, gum arabic, mugwort, and mix them with an egg; mix mirra and aloes with a third of an egg; mix alechil with eight eggs; and grind them all together; if the patient’s complexion is hot, use this packing, for it is of good composition and restores the broken bones quickly, and is worth more than many homes.</start_of_turn>
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.; acaice VI З.; bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Another method of plastering that is useful for torsion: take mugwort and vismut, mix with X parts; myrrh and aloes, mix with seven parts; acacia, mix with six parts; arnica, mix with ten parts. Grind them well and mix with water or eggs, and administer it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	Other methods of immobilizing joints and bones loosened from their sockets, and relieve pain coming from them, and reduce swelling of the bone, and fracture: take new linen, moisten it in oil and put it on the affected area.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	These bandages do not restore me, but they are good to appease post-cautery pain, and bones properly relieve the pains.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Other means of supporting that is worth torsion: take dried fig tree leaves and terrestrial poppy leaves, grind together, and make a plaster.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	Other methods of immobilizing involve restoring the fracture of the bone and diminishing the remaining after-effects of the cautery
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Take root of chamomile, chamomile flowers, violets flowers, barley flour, and quince seeds; grind them, and mix with wine, and if the limb is swollen, mix with vinegar of coriander or water, and use it
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	Other methods of restoring the limb are more violent than the first, when an abscess hardens during restoration of the limb.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Take root of gentian, flaxseed, balsam, melilot, and chamomile, of each an equal part; and grind, and confect with salt water, or sweet water, or with wine, according to the heat of the limb and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Hippocrates in his book does not put anything on the broken limb to restore it except some wax and oil, and nothing else, and he says that it should be between two not too soft not too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems Galen suggests that we must put something dry and warm on the limb to restore it, such as mirre and aloes and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another way of dressing that is useful for wound and pain: take mugwort and chopped onions or fennel, and balsam, and mix them evenly, and grind them, and make a dressing of them.</start_of_turn>
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor; puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut; et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then loosen a little afterwards, and take care that the patient feels no pain, that the bones are not bruised of their place; if you do not loosen with your hands for days. And if pain comes to the limb, or swelling, sense rest or inflammation, if you are hasty, loosen and oste the displacement now; and take a light bandage, and a wet sponge, and immerse in water, and lift up the limb, until the swelling ceases, and the pain is appeased; then leave the limb rest for an hour, then put on dry linen, soaked in water or oil of rose, and bind on a nut, until you are sure of the abscess being gone; and rest the inflammation of the limb, and be sure of the pain, then renew the gentle binding, and a little displacement, and do not strain it so much as before; and be discreet until it is healed.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	If you see swelling, redness, pain, and swelling around a bone, and if the pain persists, you must support and bind it firmly, just as you did the first time.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII; et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus; adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir; arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure; par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	If it does not move from the limb anything that we have said, if it does not slip out by itself after three days or four, or five, or seven; do not leave it for twenty days, as one sees, until the bruise has disappeared, and the joint has returned to its place; then restrain it more than before, and swell the flesh, as I said before; and if you see the limb drying out more than usual, do not hesitate but to bathe it with warm water every time you loosen it, and each time cut a little piece of the sinew. By this means the swelling will depart from the limb and restore the member without causing further damage.
des diverses manieres de brisure	of various ways of breaking.
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees; car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	Many are the ways of fractures, and diverse figures, and the causes are diverse; for there are fractures which are made by percussion of a spear, and the collarbone which is broken throughout its entirety, as is seen in hailstone or dust; and for this reason this kind of fracture is called "haichure".
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces .ij. brisures grans ou petite.	Or if the spear pierces the bone from the outside inwards, and is called this kind of fracture "absolue"; and is the wound of these great or small fractures.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is embedded percussion, or fracture or dislocation of the bone, or fracture of the nail or other similar things.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is a burst fracture, which approaches the gut that is beside the bone, or it is on the bone, and is this wound great or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»; et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	And if there is a wound which is closed in the bone as subtly as a nail, and the fracture is slight, and for this reason this kind of fracture is called "capillaire"; and if the wound is made by a pierce, or by a splinter, or by a similar thing, and causes the piece of the bone to enter inwards, and is like the swelling which is seen when one boils over pots; if between the teeth.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant; et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	And this happens more often in those who have soft bones, as in children; and in all these kinds of fracture, small pieces are detached if like stars; and I will speak of them later
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And we know of all these breaks by the loosening above them, by the incisions of the tents, and by the corrupt flesh that is above.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The like of hair is known by that which when one has discovered the bone, and has wiped over it, if the black break is opened.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of the break, take care of the patient’s ailments, and if you see no bad accident, such as vomiting of bile, emission of understanding, extension, and swelling, and fever, and the eyes watering and reddening, and other similar things in greater or lesser degree, if it does not sense without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see any imminent mishap, and you hope for health, if so, begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the swelling first comes to you, and it is in the armpit, if so, you must remove the bone in front of the wrist from the joint that you must put in place.</start_of_turn>
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is in this state, if you hasten to remove the bone in front of the elbow, so that the bone of the limb is corrupted, then comes the accident that we have said.</start_of_turn>
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset; et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	If the breaking of a bone reaches the covering of the brain, if you know how to make the fractured part whole, take hold of the patient's head and uncover the bone in every way possible, and on the wound more heavily than you think; and if blood comes from the uncovering of the bone or from an abscess, if you can, use what is useful and fill the wound with damp cloth soaked in rose oil. Then rest the wound until the abscesses have subsided, and be sure of the bleeding has stopped; then begin to bind up the bone according to two methods: one method if the fracture is close to the heel, and the other if it is far from the heel.
Et puis i boute .i. autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then there is another wound that is greater than the first.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	And so if you have various sized swellings, some are thin and others are thick, and they are pointed or iron-like; and on their lower parts, do not touch the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou .i. cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des .iij. manieres de tareres:	And if the bone is thick and tough, if you must pierce through, even if you administer swellings with poultices, do not make them go beyond the test of the bone; and must have beneath the point a margin or circle, which does not allow the point to pass beyond the bone; and you must do this several times, for if pieces of bone come to lie in the place of the thickness of the bone, because of the poultices you must give for the test. And this is the form of the two methods of poultices.
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes .i. tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	The quality for piercing through the brittle bone is that you put on one poultice over the bone, and twist your two hands until you feel that the bone is pierced; then put on another poultice in another place a little later, and do the same all around; then close the incisions of the space between the perforations, and do this more subtly than you could, and lightly, as we have said, until you have brought the bone to your hand, or to any other instrument that you have like nails, pincers; and keep your hand away from the brain and the jaw.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire; et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	When you have set the bone firmly and treated it, if you can, reset the fragment that is remaining from the bone to any other instrument resembling a chisel, but make sure it is more tense and subtle than the other chisel; and if nothing remains of the small bones, do not remove any fragments, if the bones are only slightly fractured by some instruments; then close the wound with sutures and dressings as we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And another method of treatment is like the Galen method, which is more useful; and the load is very strong, and that is his word.</start_of_turn>
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is necessary first that you uncover a part of the bone, either by fracture or by displacement of muscle, so that when you have uncovered that part, you must place the thumb of your injured finger against the flesh, as it is formed:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz; s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	And do not pierce from one side, but from the two costs; if you pierce from the side towards the bone; then make a small mark above, so that you can easily grasp the bone all around, and take good care of the membrane that is below; for if it is near the bone, if the bone is easily moved, because it is well placed, and without fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the bone breaks but does not pierce the skin, the bone is simply cut through from above; and there are small pieces remaining. If you wish to remove the rough edges, you must have various quantities of the blunt rasp available, so as to smooth each piece according to the work and the figure of the break.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If there are before great rasps, and afterwards more subtle, and you do not cease doing this until it is well done.</start_of_turn>
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	In some other capillary and subtle breaks, it is necessary to provide the cause according to its situation; and this is something that is not easily learned by anyone who has not thoroughly studied this art.</start_of_turn>
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie; puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement; et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication; et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	If the ulcer is discovered, then you must take a bandage of linen, according to the quantity of the wound, and moisten it in oil rose, and put it on the wound; then take another bandage doubled in two or three, and moisten it in wine and oil rose, and put it on the first bandage; and do this more gently than you wish, that you do not break the ulcer, and give it by mouth another line of medicine, and do not restrain it more than is necessary to hold the wound only; and leave it in place for one or two days, until the swelling of the wound is calmed, then take it off, and give medicines as above, such as radish root, flour of times, and powdered incense, and an astringent, and similar things; and from these things make a powder, and put it on the wound, and give adequate medicines without biting. And take care that the wound is well closed, that you do not leave it open, nor let it gather pus, for when pus gathers on the linen of the brain, if it is pressed and twisted, it causes great harm to the patient; for when anything biting is put on the ulcer, if it is not done properly by mouth.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Take heed, therefore, if no other mishap befalls the patient, as we have said, if there be doubt concerning it.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac; puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if darkness does not depart immediately, except for the medicine that has been placed upon it, which has some virtue, if you take a part of honey, and three parts of rose oil and in glue one drapel, and you put it upon the wound; then you cure it in the manner of cures which are suitable, until it is healed.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les .ij. parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont .ij. os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	Then comes the treatment in the manner of cures that it is allowed, as long as it is sane.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil; et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	And if one of the two parts is broken, if you can swallow your little toe or pierce the nail without pain, and put the break back into your index finger and at the nail head outwards, until the nail returns to its natural position; do this gently, and keep the patient from feeling pain in your work.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the fracture is in the upper part of the limb, and cannot come from below, if you can, put the limb even with the top of a thick stick.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues; se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	And if the break is of two parts, if you do another, and hurry to restore the first joint if you can; if not, after the seventh or tenth day, when the swelling of the abscess has subsided, then bathe the head of the nail with attempts to strip the linen, if the break is in a part.
Ou tu boutes .i. autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	Or you must break it again somewhere else, if the fracture is there; and be as strong as you can in your attempts to fill the hole in the limb.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	And they say no restorer should mill the tents in the burn, and die each for himself.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	I do not seem to understand that this should be so, but it is fitting that they should be milled in the making of an egg-aubun and powdered spices; then leave the tent until the bone is firm and the cartilages are hardened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a .i. souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	Never put feathers of a goose instead of tents, and if there is any soft drape about, and if you keep the pincer, and blow on the patient among them; or do as you will see.</start_of_turn>
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en .i. poc de dyaquilon.	And if pus comes out while you are working, if you put some lint or cotton soaked in rose oil, or in some linseed oil.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis; et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu; et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if after that the abscess does not come out, if you put on pressure by pushing, with flour of flaxseed and powdered incense, confirmed with egg-aubun; then put on soft compresses, and do not bind tightly; and if it breaks without force, and the pieces are small, if the extractor has suitable instruments for this, then cut the opening, and cure the wound with covering material and ointment, as with pressure and medicines suitable for this; and if there is no wound inside, if you cure the tent, and put in flints of lead, until it is healed.
de la routure de la mandibule	Of the route of the mandible.
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the mandible is routed downwards, and there is no wound, and the fracture is only slight, and is not broken thoroughly, except for the curvature inwards, if one knows it lightly.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	It is necessary, if the fracture is in the outer part, to bite down with the thumb of the affected hand in the mouth of the patient; and if the fracture is in the left mandible, if you take the thumb of the right hand, and grasp the fracture lightly, and hold it apart with the other hand, and keep it even.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en .ij., si covient que tu aministres extension de .ij. pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the fracture of the mandible is displaced in .ij., if it is necessary to administer extension of .ij. parts, as long as they are even.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus .i. drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	If movement of the teeth causes pain, or a fracture, if they are strained by a thread of gold or silver or silk, then put a broken jaw cerate on and put over it a double drape; and put over the drape a large staple well made, or a piece of leather equal in length and width to the jaw, and bind it to the muscle as you please, and command the patient to rest and eat lean meat.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en .iij. semainnes.	If you see that the figure is deformed, if the bone is fractured at the third part, and then reset it to its place; then put on a plaster cast, of pounded powder with much egg or oatmeal, after you have set the cerate; and put on the plaster clean linen, and if the plaster is loose, and the patient’s condition does not worsen, leave it as it is until it heals; many times it heals in two weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if the patient has a wound that comes open, if we have already said many times what we have said.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is a fracture and wound together, award that no part of the bone is fractured; if slight of the bone has escaped, cover it with something that covers it.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is severe, if the swelling has gone up with flame as you desire.</start_of_turn>
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus .i. des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have united all these parts, and there is no longer any displacement, if the wound is large, put on some dressings that cover it, in order to prevent suppuration, as long as it is necessary.</start_of_turn>
de la forcele	forcefully</start_of_turn>
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc .iij. manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en .ij., et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	The strong force breaks several times before, over the shoulder, and if it breaks in two manners: when it is broken and loosened in four places, and there are fragments, and that is the lightest to restore; or if there is a break with a wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies .ij. ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And if the break is when the wound faces downwards, take two assistants, so that one holds the limb where the force breaks; and the other extends the neck towards the part; then set the break even, so that the form is as it should be, and there is neither appearance nor swelling
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And if you must extend further, put under the shoulder of the patient a round ball of lead or linen, and be large as you need; and stretch and hold the forcele, and strain the ball with your hand, so that you set the break even, as it should be.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule .i. oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	If you do not manage to support the head of the shoulder, when it comes out of place, if you must know, the patient lies supine on his belly, and place the shoulder blade between the nipples, and keep the minister there until the bone of the shoulder is raised.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	Then address the fracture to your side, and if you find debris there, if you must know, make an incision there; and force out the pieces gently, and if the bones cannot join together by any means, if the socket is at one of the incisors you have; but that you place between the shoulder blade and the breast bone this instrument to keep the wound open.
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os; et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	And it seems like a scoop, but it is not quite so, and let it be as wide as it should be, according to the size of the bone and the extent of the work; and there shall be two nails, as you see, and one shall be large, and the other small, as is the curve of the wound that you made when you treated the bone; and when you are assured of the suture, if the wound is small, or if you doubt the suture, if you use a dressing and a bandage, according to its quantity.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille .i. drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if the afterburn comes, if it is moist, apply oil of roses, rue and wine, and put on top.</start_of_turn>
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier; puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant; et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint; et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors; puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	The tightening of the bone, when it is in pain and swelling, is that you put on the bone the plaster of the fine powder of mill and egg-white, and put on soft stockings, and put a sponge pad below the rump; then take a very large bandage of a palm of width, then put on two layers of dressing on the stockings, and the plaster; then take a subtle splint of three fingers wide and long, and wrap around that bandage, so that the head of the bandage remains fixed; and put the splint on the fracture, and turn the bandage on the collar, and take off the sponge pad from the painful side, and from the painful side; and leave the dressing part, and when you see that the bandage holds the fracture steadily, and that you clearly see that the splint does not move from the fractured bone, if the reward comes again, and if the patient remains conscious; and do manage the patient on his back, and put under him a small pillow under the rump, to lift up the limb above; if it will align the fracture by the alignment of the shoulder, or you bind the arm to the collar, and do not unbind it unless it is absolutely necessary, until about twenty days; then repeat the plastering, if you see that there is still need for it, and strain and leave it on, until it is restored; and it is restored in about eight days, and in less time many men recover.
de la brisure de l’espaule	Then resume the traction, if you see that it is necessary, and hold and leave it thus until it is restored; and it is restored in about twenty-six days, and in less time to any home.
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en xxv, Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	When the shoulder blade is broken or displaced from its socket, it must not be forced out by force; if it appears according to the fracture figure, and is restored according to its natural form in all possible ways; then take out the limb powder with abundance of eggshell, and bandage lightly, and put on a double drape; then put on a broad and subtle splint, wider than the shoulder, and as the splint is fixed firmly in no place of the shoulder, if you use the bandage of flax, so that the splint lies evenly; and then strain it with all your might, so that the splint does not move from its place, and look at the limb carefully; and every time it softens, if you strain, and put back the splint if it has gone out of place, and leave the patient lying on his side; and the shoulder is restored in twenty days or less. And when this number is completed, if the fracture has healed, and be joyful, for it is not the bone that breaks easily.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a piece of the bone bends forward, and does not yield at all, if it persists, and the bone, make do with the forceps to subdue the abscess at its source.
de la brisure dou pis	And if a piece of the bone bends forward, and does not yield at all, if it persists, and the bone, make do with the forceps to subdue the abscess at its source.</start_of_turn>
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer.	The weight is never broken in a thousand, but it has happened thus; but it often breaks when running away.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	When it is broken in this way, if it declines downwards, and causes the patient great pain, and thirst, and vomiting, and by chance blood spurts from the broken bone, and one feels quite well.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met .i. cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des .ij. costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en .i. drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is that if the patient lies soven on his back, and puts one cushion between the scapulae, then press the scapulae and assemble the ribs of the two costae with your hands, and gently put everything in its place as it should be; then put on bandages and bandage the outside of the bone with fine salt, or some other soft matter, and cover with a cloth, and bind the whole thing around the broken bone, so that it does not move; and turn the patient slowly on his back, and strain gently, and praise for a whole hour when it is loosened, and if it relaxes, strain again; and if it seems to loosen, because of corrosion or because of inflammation that comes from the bone, or pain or swelling, if you are in a hurry, loosen it, and scrape the dressing, and treat what caused the wound; then reinforce the dressing, and strain until it is healed.
de la brisure des costes	Of the fracture of the bones.
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	Bones that break in the chest do not come forth except after a great swelling behind the back, and at the head downwards; and they do not yield forth except for that which makes them slippery; and one feels them well at the inquiry as two.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	The restoration is if you put back the fracture equally, as it should be done
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	Then put on the dressing and bind it with a bandage, if you are able to do so
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And if the fracture of the bones is downward towards the belly, if it causes great pain, and swelling, like blood, for the bone points the belly; and there is vomiting, and all together there is great loss of blood, which is a grievous matter, and many have died from it.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if it is said that it is necessary to administer foods that swell the belly, to push back the wind.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not do this, for after eating hot food, which is harmful, does not go away.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	If it comes, let it be so.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And they say that one should not put compresses on the body to dry it, for this is like reason; however, there is doubt that the compress will not draw out the moisture from the body due to its weakness.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And they say that of nowhere must cover the limb with greasy wool, and put on tenses between the ribs in order to measure equally the hour round, then either cure with the treatment of pleurisin, meat and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot bear from the bone that points towards the belly, and there is doubt in the patient, if it is possible to open above the fractured bone, and put in place some instruments to support it; and then you must fracture the bone, treat it gently, and then suture the two layers of the wound, if it is large, and cure it with dressings, until it is healed
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the armpit sweats excessively, put on wet cloths soaked in rose oil, and put on gloves; and treat until the limb recovers from the swelling, and keep away from the cost of the wound as much as possible, until it is healed.
de la brisure dou col	of the fracture of the collarbone.
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	Never comes a sudden break of bones in the neck, or that it rains; and the same with the spine.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	If this happens to anyone, and you know whether it will heal or not, if you take care if you see his hands swollen and limp and dead, and that you cannot move or extend them, and if you prick them with a needle, if you do not feel it
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	The wounds are deadly in many situations, and if you move them and feel well when you extract them and prick them, the union of the bone is saved, and the patient will be cured, if we put on cure.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	And if any other thing comes to the shoulder blade at the back, and you see whether there be blood or not, if you take care that the bone is softened, and that the accident is as they are in the hand, and on the back there is an excessive wind and a vomiting with force; and when it has been softened on the belly, there is an excessive vomiting with force.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	And when it is softened on the back and it vomits, it cannot be helped.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	Such are mortal wounds: if you do not toil diligently in their cure
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if such an accident does not occur, it is the lighter thing.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And if such an accident does not occur, it is the lighter thing. If there is swelling at the apex, put on rose oil or oil of nutmeg on the spine; until it is calmed. Then put on one of the comforting and drying patches, and bind it with a thread, and command the patient to rest; and do not sleep on that part where there is pain, until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if any bone is fractured, it is necessary to cover over the wound with a bandage; and then to unite the two ends of the wound, if it is large, with a splint, and cure it with ointment that is healing, until it is healed; and if the head of the bone is broken, which is called the "fracture of the heel", if it is in your left hand, put it equal to the right hand in your pocket, and put the bandage and the splint on, if you need them; then strain it, and if there are bones that are loosened, keep it still, and unite them, and cure the wound until it is healed.</start_of_turn
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	Of the fracture of the thigh bone.
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	When the thigh bone is fractured, and if there is no sign of improvement even after a long time, and the limb is drooping downwards, and there is pain at the root, and swelling around that which breaks
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And the restoration is that you extend your hand above the fracture, until you reach the fracture; and keep the limb in such a way that the fracture is properly aligned; and if the fracture is only at the shoulder, put it in its natural position, until it is perfectly healed
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the fracture is long or is drooping downwards, make the patient sit up on his belly, until the restoration of the fracture is visible.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	When you have placed the limb even, if you place upon the socket a peg of wood or bone, and hold the flesh still, if it does not move; then use the hand of the patient to support the cost, as long as the limb is even.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And instruct the patient to rest on his side, or on his back
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	If swelling comes, if it does not touch, until the swelling has subsided, and place what we have said before; and then return to the restoration, and hold it as it should be, if there is no other mishap; and this is the method.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	De la brisure de l’ajutoire.
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren .i. fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	From the dislocation of the shoulder
Et lie as .ij. chiés .ij. liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus .i. siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	And thus take two fingers of the hand and grasp the limb above the socket; then hold the patient above a seat; then gently bend the arm over the fist, as far as it can go without causing pain; and put under the fist a cushion or something similar; then put the thumbs of both hands together, so that the dislocation returns as it should.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a .ij. ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout .i. liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And the other method is that you support the patient on his heel, and bind the arm to his collar, and command two assistants to hold what is above the dislocation with their hands, and the other to hold below all the bones, and stretch the skin to the part.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	And if you see that the extraction is more forceful, strain out the spleen and the bowels, and extend the cheshuns of the ministers at their parts.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	If the dislocation is close to the head of the shoulder, then you must put one finger in the middle of the elbow and another towards the thumb, holding the shoulder steady; and if the dislocation is towards the thumb, put one finger lightly, with force, until the dislocation is even on both the shoulder and the thumb; then put the dislocation back into place if possible, and hold it steady so that it does not come out again.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a .vij. jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	If the wound comes out again, do not strain for more than three days. Put on a thick bandage of linen and oil of roses until the wound is quiet; then strain, and the way to strain is to put in the dressing under the elbow, then reassemble the arm on the splint, and put your hand on the shoulder or the chest; put on the bandage and strain on the splint and the arm, so that the arm is in its place, without anything hindering it, or without breaking the bones.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele .i. doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure .iij. dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	If you doubt that the bone is not moving, use splints, and put under the bone a splint that is wider and stronger than the others, and have between the splints a space of two finger-widths, so that one splint passes over the elbow two finger-widths beyond the other; then strain on the splints, as I have said at the beginning of this chapter, more strongly and less loosely
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	If you see swelling at the elbow and stiffness, as we have said, when restoring the limb after the dislocation, if you doubt the stability, leave it bound until seven days have passed, as we have said; then look for three days whether the swelling has gone down or whether any redness or swelling has appeared in the limb, or whether the limb has become stiff due to excessive stiffness.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	If the head of the shoulder is dislocated, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	If no such accident occurs, if he does not vomit for at least three days or more, and the patient lies down on his back with his hands on his stomach; and put a cushion of wool equal in size under the armpit, and watch for an hour or two to see if the limb is stiff or the ligaments are softened; if the dislocation has been remedied by the power of medicine, and has been given meat as we have mentioned before, in part as before; and when it starts to recover, if it is large.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	It is customary that the arm and shoulder should be restored in forty days in all cases; and then it must be loosened and bathed and treated with ointments to restore the limb to its proper position
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	And if the constriction is painful and emboldened, let it be loosened for a day or two.
de la brisure du bras	And if the fracture of the arm has happened, you must first of all set the limb in its place, and keep it still in this way for as long as necessary; and you must take care that the limb does not move too much, for this would cause more damage.  And you must feed the patient well during this time, and give him medicine for the pain.
Li bras est compos de .ij. os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm consists of three bones, which are called the "humerus" and the "ulna." One is small and is like a nail that supports the pouch; and the other is large and is like a socket, towards the little finger. By chance the large humerus alone breaks, or the small, and by chance both together break.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	When the small bones are fractured, restoration is light, and the healing; but when the great bones are fractured, if the healing is bad, it is more painful than when they are fractured whole.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	If only the small bone is fractured, if it is sufficient to extend it slightly, and put it equal
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	And if the great bone is fractured, if the limb must be drawn out more strongly; then extend over one cushion, and hold the hand of the patient higher than the other, and the small must be lower than the other two, and let the patient cross his hand over himself, and the cushion in front of him higher than the patient; then extend the limb from the elbow to the wrist, or to the hand, and another limb at the other elbow.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And then he sets the eye equal, according to its best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	If it breaks into pieces, if you put some [material] into its place, and if there is none that prick [it] now, you will not be able to restore it to its place, even if you leave it there and the bone as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	If it breaks into pieces, as I have mentioned in the previous chapter; take the treatment.</start_of_turn>
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	And if restoration is commenced, blood often flows from the incisions. If it is thickly clotted with cerate made of rose oil and white wax, it should neither be too firm nor too soft; and it should be bound on loosely, until the bleeding has ceased.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	And then he puts on the cerate and puts in the plug of powdered meal with a lot of eggshell, because he puts in the staples, and let the staple of the trocar be stronger and a little wider than the others; and there should be six staples or arms in more or less positions: either that the trocar is in one of the bones, or in two; and is strained more on the trocar than elsewhere, and less every day as I said at the beginning of this chapter; and let the cloths that are on the trocar be soft and moist, and neither too hard nor too soft; and let the thread that is being strained be of linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And keep the limb and the joint still after that for several days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	And if any other discomfort comes to the limb, such as swelling that comes to the limb, then you must raise the limb high with warm water, until the swelling is calmed; and let the limb rest still.</start_of_turn>
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	Then resume the traction, and if the ligaments are softened and the bones are loosened, and similar things, if necessary.</start_of_turn
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses .i. poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	If you take care that the swelling does not come back to the limb, because it is too tight, you must soften it somewhat, and leave it alone for some days, until the swelling goes down, and then strain it.</start_of_turn>
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	And if none of these things that we have said come to the patient, do not take it away until XX days.</start_of_turn
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	Or when the pulse returns, then he can place his hands at his collar, and let his collar be even, and be careful of movement and food, and sleep on his back; and keep the wound covered for XXX days or in fifty, and sometimes in XX days, according to the composition and the constitution of the virtue.</start_of_turn>
de la brisure de la main	From the break of the wrist
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	From the break of the wrist, there are often breaks at the base of the thumb and index finger. It happens often that there is only blood flow left in many cases.</start_of_turn>
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin.	And when the bone of the wrist is broken or bruised, if it is suspected that the patient has suffered a fracture, one must hold the hand steady and keep it straight in front of them; then place the hand on the extended cloth and extend the broken bones, and put them in their proper place; and put on the dressing and bandage, if there is no swelling, and put on a splint according to the degree of displacement; and be covered with a bandage.</start_of_turn
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	And if the break is at the edge of the limb towards the belly of the bone, make a loop of bandage and command the patient to stretch it over their broken limb; then tighten with a long bandage, and put on a splint as large as the limb, and tighten it as much as it is convenient.</start_of_turn
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	If the fracture is on the side, then you must put a splint on the top and another on the bottom, so that the hand is fully extended; then bind it tightly around the hand and pack the linen between the two.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en .i. tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	If the fracture does not arise from either side, if it is on the pouch, if it is equal, as it should be; and strain it with the splint, and if you see that it does not move, put a right-angle splint below to raise the fracture, and do not move it; or if the fracture is elsewhere, as on the index finger or any other, if it is equal, and bind it with two strong threads that follow; or bind them together tightly, as much as you can, or put on a splint, as with a pouch; and take care in restoring and positioning the burnt area, and secure what comes from it, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	of the broken limb.
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie .i. liien desus la briseure, et .i. autre desoz.	The bones of the thigh are often fractured, and one can see it when it turns forward and backward; and the restoration is when it is bound with a thread above the fracture and another below.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And the patient lies on his face, then extends his limbs equally; and it is when the fracture is in the marrow of the bone
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	If the break is close to the root of the bone, if one of the tendons is towards the point of the break, and the other is towards the outside of the break.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	If it is close to the knee, and then either the tendon is towards the knee, or the collateral ligament; then put the limb parallel to its natural position, and then apply the dressing and bandage, because if it is not done, it will bleed excessively.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	And if there is a boil above, if you leave it calm and return to your work and your treatment; the dressing is made in a rough manner.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	It is necessary to wrap around the break with a strong bandage doubled in two or three places, and to drain the surplus; then rotate the limb until the nails reach the root of the nail, and pass a long thread between the thigh and the limb, below the knee and above the ankle; then rotate the limb and the thigh together with the strong bandage; put on the outer splint and put a splint on the bone of the limb; then put between the limb and the thigh some soft cloth to make them equal in tension; and as you go up the break, and the less you tighten; then take out two threads that you passed between the limb and the thigh, and tie three knots on each side, and keep it like that until the pain is gone; and the swelling, if it does not move from its place, then leave it alone, and do not make any other dressing or inflammation.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	And if there is swelling, if it bursts, and addresses what has come, as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of bone that prick, it is necessary to remove them; and if we are unable to do so, it is necessary to cut the limb open, and drain; and cure as we have said, as long as it is healthy.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	And never is the limb broken in this case when it is set, as in the shoulder and arm; however, in the restoration made thereupon, do not be afraid to make the patient suffer.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en .l. jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And if the limb is set in the space of one or two days, or less or more, according to the variety of temperaments.
de la ruelle dou genoil	of the street of genoil
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	Hair that grows in the groin often breaks, but it falls out many times.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	If it breaks, if it is not merely a split or a hole, and if there is any wound, pain, or suffering, it is well known.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if restoration is to be made, put the round end back into its place, until it is firmly assembled; then place the plug and insert a round pin, if you have need of it, and strain it as it should be strained; then restore all the other arrangements that we have mentioned before, such as cautery and the like; if you put into practice each of the precautions that we have mentioned, as long as it is necessary.
de la brisure de la jambe	And if restoration is to be made, put the round end back into its place, until it is firmly assembled; then place the plug and insert a round pin, if you have need of it, and strain it as it should be strained; then restore all the other arrangements that we have mentioned before, such as cautery and the like; if you put into practice each of the precautions that we have mentioned, as long as it is necessary.
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	Hair that grows in the groin has two roots, for one is called the "muscle" and the other is called the "fleshy part"; and when the latter breaks like that of the arm, restoration is just as it is for the arm, and the work is complete. And if both roots are broken together, if the limb is twisted in every part
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if a bone is fractured in two, the limb is twisted forward
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz.	If the large bone is broken, there is great pain, and it is seen clearly; and it must be sutured
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	When thus the limb is brought back, extend it fully and set it straight; bind the joints equally. However, know that if it breaks again it will be more serious, and there will be more pieces; the extension must be less violent and lighter; and be guided by your wisdom.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren .ij. faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en .ij. leus .i. bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent .i. bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have finished your work, if you take .ij. strips of coarse wool that cover the limb from one side to the other, and be as long as the limb from the knee to the foot; then wrap in .ij. layer of lint from under and over, and bind firmly in the middle; and with this binding the limb will not slip forward or backward, and that is good; and no one should administer any other bandage that is as long as the limb, and if there is swelling, and put the limb in position to prevent movement, and do this at the fracture or wound; and move each joint of the limb to see if there is any displacement or other accident; if there is, cure it until it is healed.
de la brisure des os dou piet	Of the fracture of bones that is inside.
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle there is no fracture, but in bones that are inside there is no fracture ever and two must be left, and there is only certainty in many situations.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a .ij. chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	And if there is a fracture in these bones, and you see these bones pressing against each other, if you put so much pain on the limb that it would be as if it were flying towards you, and then put your limb on the ground, where the bones are lifted up, then press the limb until it returns to its place; then put the dressing and bandage on, and put a little bandage under the belly of the limb, and bind the limb steadily, and cover it with a cloth or other things as you deem necessary.
Et quant .iij. jors ou .iiij. seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when two or three days have passed, if you loosen the limb, because you will find the bones equal, whether they are fractured or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a .ij. ou .iij., ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	If there are two breaks, if you restore them as we have said, do two things with the hand. Then put at the break end a splint of the length of two fingers, and make it wider; then put on the thumb that I have mentioned, and strain it immediately. If there are three or more breaks, break each one and put on at each break an splint according to its quantity, enveloped in a layer of linen, and strain the thumb from the break. Keep the thumb resting on the chief of the thumb over the belly of the thumb as long as it holds it well.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	Remember also the other things I have said concerning other breaks; and secure each accident as it should be secured.</start_of_turn>
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	of the fracture of the clavicle bone</start_of_turn>
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the bone of the limb is fractured, if you make her sit enlarged, then incline her towards the painful side; and hold her there behind. Then fill the limb of the patient with wool, and put as much inside as I have put; then draw out the patient, and keep her back and front, and then pull out the wool, as much as it comes out of the limb; and bring back the bone with the wool inside; and when she sees her piss, if the bone is still in the wool, and when she has pissed, she will recover. If the fracture is restored, if you see it, take a bladder of barley and bind it to the edge with a bandage, and put the whole bladder in the limb; then blow up the bandage until the bladder is expelled: the limb will then return to its natural position; then fill it with wool and leave it for a few days until it is healed.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	And when the bone of a man or a woman is fractured, if you restore it just as we have said concerning the thigh bone; these fractures are not hidden from the one who studies and uses them, and they are mentioned in my book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	For the fracture signifies in many cases the right way of restoration: whether indeed or not you do it.</start_of_turn>
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse .iij. jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	In the groin, when it is broken, take a gooseberry and put it in the groin; then wrap it around with a bandage, and leave it for two or three days, and it will be healed quickly.
de brisure avec plaie	From a break with wound.
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is necessary for one who has suffered a fracture with wound, even if it is great, if like the bone of the thigh or shoulder or similar, that he be sound now, if as we have said the wounds testify to it.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound is healed, if the vitriol remain, if you have nothing else, then resume the restoration of the fracture in this way, or that, if the pus comes out.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if pus comes out, if you leave the restoration until tomorrow, while the pus is calmed, and do not touch neither a third nor a quarter, for you will risk coming to a bad accident.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the bone breaks open is appears above the joint discovered, then you must know that you must hold it firmly in your hands, slightly extended.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a .vij. dois ou .viij. de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne .iii. ou iiij., selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if the extension does not appear to you to hold it equally in your hands, if the handle of this instrument which is of iron, which is three or four fingers long, and the width is according to the quantity of the wound; for this reason it must be grasped that it grasps three or four fingers, according to what is necessary in the bruise of the wound; and let it be round and have a large head, so that it does not press against the compression on the limb at your work, and be firm before, and large from the middle forward.
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	And it is called "palainche," for it is known that the curved limb must be placed above the head of the visible bone; and when it is once again put together, it must be even so that one side is level with the other.</start_of_turn
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And if the fracture is subtle, and the instruments cannot properly hold the bone, you must grasp the head of the bone as long as the instruments have possession of it.</start_of_turn
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	If you cannot restore the bone as we have said, if you have grasped with a curable instrument, such as an incision or hook, at your will; then remove that which remains embedded in the bone, leaving only the rough fragments and small pieces of marrow.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	And when the limb is returned to its place, the patient experiences great pain afterward, swelling that is not in its natural position.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	If you do so that it is in its place, then immediately apply a tight black vinegar compress and keep it in place; do not put any cerote or anything else on the wound, as this will cause putrefaction and corruption; then administer oil when you have restored the limb, and leave the wound uncovered, and bind the covering all around, according to the extent of the wound, and take good care that the wound is not strained with the breaking; for many times this has happened to fools, and it has caused the patient to die or become lame or corrupt many times; or the inflammation is more mild and painless than the other breaks.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	And if the wound is small or large, and you doubt that the accident has passed, as we have said, and you feel pain in the limb, if it does not suffice to set it with sticks; but cover around it, instead of sticks, a firm bandage, and bind it.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And when you see after one or two days that the swelling of the wound has subsided somewhat, if you put oil on the wound that you put on immediately, and you put on healing plasters, as on tetracycline and similar things.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre .ij. fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And it must be that you draw the limb three times a day, in the morning and in the evening, until it is soldered and healed.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And it must be that the limb be put back in place gently as if it had never been dislocated
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if it recurs, and cannot be soldered but returns to its place, with slight pieces of bone, for it must be that you wish to treat the wound with care, and remove all these detached pieces that cause this pain
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	And if a fistula arises in the limb, or any other kind of corruption, if it is possible, cure it, according to what is said in this chapter above
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	And when the bone is broken, and opened on the limb, as the bones of the thigh or shoulder, and others of the great limbs, if you do not treat it, for many times death comes in this case; but leave it alone until it has healed naturally; and if you wish to treat it, do so after twenty days or thirty, and then cure the wound if you wish; or leave it alone.</start_of_turn>
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	Hair that comes out from the beard.
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	Hair that comes out from the beard comes out often after the heat of the bath, even when it is close to the joint, and it is a helpful sign to see the figure of the limb; and by chance it cannot make the limb move naturally.</start_of_turn>
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Take care therefore that it should not slip: if you administer astringent medicines, such as aloes, incense, and myrrh, and sarcocoll, acacia, and similar things, make sure that you do not take any of these things, or all together, and mix them with a stiff wine or with much egg or with vinegar; and put them on the wound in bandage, and strain it well, and do not move it from hand to hand until it is healed; and then dislocate it, and do it again, until the nodulation is bony; or you strain on a well-made piece of lead; for the property of lead is that it can harden all the swellings under the limbs; and if the nodulation has already hardened like stone, it is necessary to break it, if the swelling under the limb is great, and make the excess visible; or do not remove it until it is bony, and cure it until it is healed.</start_of_turn
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	Weak limb after the bandage
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the fracture is restored, and the limb is weak and limp, if there is any fault: because it was too tightly bound and could not be loosened; or because there is too much binding, and it cannot move smoothly; or because of numerous ligatures; or because of too great a movement, not in its entirety; or because there is much blood in the limb, if it is weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the cure is that you make the patient move about, and tighten the limb, until the swelling is diminished in him; and give him baths, and make him comfortable and cheerful; then put on a bandage over the limb, so that the bandage will draw out the great swelling, and the blood flows steadily, until the limb is restored to its natural position; and bring back to its usual shape.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	After the disease, the limb is twisted.
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai .i. emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	When the limb is twisted after restoration, and the bone is fractured open, and the limb is deformed, although it has returned to its natural position: if one does not believe the fools who say that the limb must be fractured anew, and many have had this done in our land; this work is blamed, and there follows great evils, and by chance death; although if the swelling and torture are fresh, if one believes they have arisen from warm water, or soft herbs are cooked, like ivy leaves, root, and melilot, and similar things; and it makes one apply a soft dressing, like good aquaintance, and take the nourishment of ivy, and confirm with butter of geline or oil of sesame, and apply the dressing on; or one takes fat figs, and grinds them with horse dung, and similar medicines that appease the swelling.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	And never is the bone displaced by continuous rubbing and for a long time with wet hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And keep the limb still at the shoulder joint for an hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if the dislocation is swollen and hardened, like a stone, and requires iron, it is necessary to cover the wound with a bandage, making an incision slightly deeper; and to put padding and a support in the cure.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	And thus begins the book of dislocations.
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation comes to no avail, if you must now restore its place.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors; toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	For if it is left too long, if it swells up, and by chance if it is reset, there will be pain in the limb; for this reason one must not move the limb while it is swollen: many times it brings swelling and other pains; however, when this has happened, if you make the patient comfortable, then leave him alone until the swelling has subsided; then raise the limb with warmth and oil, and move it gently, and cure each limb as it comes to its place
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	I have ordered the chapters on dislocations from the shoulder to the foot
des mandibules	Des mandibules.
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	The teeth are loosened and the jaws are dislocated in two ways: when they are united by the root of the teeth; or when they are entirely loosened and hang towards the chin, and cause the saliva to flow from the mouth that it cannot hold it, cannot close its mouth, and engulfs its tongue with speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is small, if it returns by itself several times
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie; et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	If it is whole and complete, if you must move it, do not touch it; and in such a way that the attendants hold the patient’s head, and look at his pockets from one hand to the other of the dislocation of the jaw in the mouth, if the dislocation is two parts; and the other two must be loosened, to make them equal; and command the patient to soften his jaw, his teeth, and move them in all parts.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And behold the mark be equal, until it returns to its place
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les .ij. mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And if it returns crooked, even though the two mandibles are together, if they arose from hot oil, as long as they remain lightly; do not attempt to force it back, as we have said
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens; et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules; et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	And when they are restored equally, and the patient’s mouth is well closed with soft pressure, put upon moist cloths in layers made of rose oil and wax, then bind loosely with fine thread; and let the patient rest on his back, with his arms resting between two cushions, so that he does not move forwards or backwards, neither to the right nor the left, but take moderate food, until the pains are overcome, and keep the jawbone firmly in place.
Et se les .ij. mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two mandibles do not manage to be put back in their place at a single hour, and are not firmly converted to their roots, if in comes fever and customary nausea, and by chance vomiting of pure bile.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en .viiij. jors.	And when you see this, know that it is a loss; and many times death is the consequence, in eight days.</start_of_turn>
de la forcelle	of the snare.</start_of_turn>
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The snare does not know how to unhook from its cost, and is devalued once it is released, and one can feel it.</start_of_turn
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint; et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez; et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	And if the patient lies sleeping on his back, extend his arms; then press gently at the shoulder joint, and it will return; then put on the bandage and bind it tightly, and hold; the limb which is towards the heel cannot slip away; if not, and if it slips even once, if you re-join the shoulder back in its place, as we have said; then put on the bandage and bind it tightly, and hold, and command the patient to rest until he is healed; and in the same way bring back the dislocation of the shoulder when it is loosened from its place.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	From the dislocation of the shoulder.
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc; et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	The nails that are loose from the heel must be removed in three ways: first, at the part of the heel towards the ankle; second, at the part of the heel towards the toes; and by chance at the part above the heel, and this is to be expected; do not remove them from behind the heel or from within the nail; and more often than this, remove them from below towards the heel, even among those who have a lot of hair, for at these leaps they are apt to become insane; among those who have enough hair, they leap at the point of pain and return at the point of pain.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And sometimes there happens to be a fracture or dislocation, and if the shoulder is bruised with a hard blow, it is dislocated by that.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	It is obvious. You must be certain that the dislocation has been completely remedied; only then should you begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste; et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens; et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier; et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	It is known that the dislocation occurs when it is twisted towards the heel, and distinguishes between the diseased and healthy shoulder, and you will find between their difference a bulge; and at the head of the shoulder you will find a pit, and from the heel to the head of the shoulder, just as if it were an abscess; and the patient will not be able to raise their arm to their shoulder, or move in any way; and also, if it has been dislocated upwards, if it is not hidden, because you will find it immediately on examination; and this method of dislocation must not be used to restore it, when it is new, or when the patient is suffering.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	And the way is that the physician holds the painful limb high up, then puts his thumbs under the armpit, and holds the joint forcefully high up; and the physician holds the limb and stretches it high up, because of this it comes out immediately.</start_of_turn>
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree; puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide; et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere: et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar; et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	And if it does not come as we have said before, if you must, command the patient to be bathed in warm water; and give them a soft and soothing medicine, such as a decoction of alum, fenugreek and honey in water, or give it directly. Then either keep the patient supine and put under the seat a cushion of linen equal in size, not too soft nor too hard, and put the patient's hand on the cushion, and support the shoulder joint firmly, and treat the hand of the patient; and another attendant holds the chief of the patient's arm, so that it does not move downwards; the shoulder will return at once, and if you see that it remains as you have said: let a person be present who is greater than the patient; and stand on the side of the patient, and stretch the shoulder out from under the patient's arm, and keep the arm high, so that the patient hangs downwards; and another attendant treats the patient's hand downwards towards the belly.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And if the patient is too weak, if he can hold nothing heavy, the dislocation will return immediately.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile; puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment; et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	And so we shall do in another way: if the head of the shoulder is loose like a stone in the earth, which is as much as to say that the head is as round as a ball and not too thick or too thin; then let the patient sit with his back straight and his arm hanging down; then stretch out his hand from the other side and the joint will return to its place without difficulty; if it does not return by these means, do this cure: take two fingers of two hands and three fingers wide, and put the thumb over the base of the thumb, following this shape:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus .i. eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	Then lie upon the head of the shoulder, draped with a cloth that will not irritate the patient, then put his hands on the patient's buttocks; extend your arms over the patient's long arm, and hold the shoulder at the arm's root, and put your arm on the wrist of the hand, and put the hand on the first space of an elbow of a large size, and extend the lower hands, or leave the forearm hanging down on the other side: the shoulder is now in its place.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is in its place, in whatever way, if you put his buttocks on a sphere of wool equal in size, then put the shoulder pad firmly with a powder of wheat, with incense and balm of egg, on the entire shoulder and around, then strain from the buttocks immediately, and turn the limb over the shoulder, and embrace the hand at its collar, and keep the hands immobile.</start_of_turn>
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés .v. jors ou .vij., et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And it is necessary that he keep moving, as long as the limb is comfortable, because it will heal better; and then move more after five or six days, and move it; and if it is firm and is not softened, if it is healed.</start_of_turn
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint is forced out of place by moisture or any other cause, if you must, administer cautery three times, as it is put before or alongside the cautery.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés .vij. jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	If you do all this, and it lasts for seventeen days, and the dislocation does not hold, and cannot raise the upper arm, then know that the nerves of the shoulder are compressed or stretched or softened; and that the dislocation will never heal in its place.</start_of_turn>
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The dislocation that is towards the elbow, and the arms, or behind, if it is done by impulse, and extension of the hands, and another support is administered; and it is cured as long as it is sound.</start_of_turn
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after healing the limb grieves and becomes stiff, if the patient uses the limb many times, even though the pain is relieved, it returns to its original state.
de la dislocation dou coute	And if after healing the limb grieves and becomes stiff, if the patient uses the limb many times, even though the pain is relieved, it returns to its original state.
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	And if after healing the limb grieves and becomes stiff, if the patient uses the limb many times, even though the pain is relieved, it returns to its original state.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	And when you join the patient with the limb, if he wants to see openly.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	For the joint is tight, and cannot bend the arm, nor touch his shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes .ij. mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And it must be known that if it is possible to restore it again as before, when the limb is relaxed, grasp the hand with your two hands and spread the arms apart, and bend the fingers according to the pain of the joint, forward and backward, and hold the joint together with your thumbs and index fingers until it returns to its place.</start_of_turn>
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is in front, if it returns when you double your hand over your hand, and press from the root of the bone that is loosened.</start_of_turn
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large; et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne; et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	And if he does not see it return to its place, if you administer strong extension; and if two assistants extend the arm and support it from below, so that it does not move in extension; then turn the arm from the shoulder joint, and when you have wrapped a double-length and wide bandage around it; and when you look at the joint with the hand, if there is any oil on the joint to soften it, then join the joint firmly, until it returns; and when it is in place, put on dry plaster with an egg-shaped weight, and strain the arm, and support the arm at the shoulder of the patient, and leave it for a while, then remove it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	If the joint is firmly fixed in its place, if you detach the limb and leave it; if you see that the joint does not hold firmly, recommence the displacement and reattach the limb, and leave it thus for some days, until it is firmly set; then detach it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain; et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	If he feels pain after the joint is reset, and it moves, bathe and rub thoroughly, and press until it is eased; or put on the joint a fat sheepskin nail, then leave it in for a night, then take it out and bathe; and when it sweats, wipe the joint gently, then put the nail back in, and then bathe again; do this two or three times until it is healed. If you see that it has returned to its place, put on a moist poultice soaked in urine and hold it in place; if it returns to its normal position.
li dislocation de la main	The dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	The dislocation of the hand has loosened, and the return is slight, more so than in other joints, so it must be forcibly returned to its place immediately, while it is still loose, and even if there is swelling or if there is a wound.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	If you put the affected limb on a table and extend the limb, and look at it so that it rests equally, then let him put his palm on the surface of the joint and press until it returns normally; it is necessary that you watch to see if it is well placed. Then put the patient’s hand back on the table at the extension and the reset.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	If the dislocation is at the back of the hand, let the patient place the back of his hand on the table and the observer place his hand on the appearance of the joint.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If it returns now, that is well. If not, if the strain of the loosening muscles subsides, and you let it resume its place naturally.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte; et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	And if he cannot bear it, and you do not put it back after a few days, the joint will stiffen; and it does no harm to the patient to leave it loose, and he cannot move anything at all: except that the nerves are severed, or the artery; for there is no other reason to extract except by cautery in this case, and by chance there is nothing else
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse .v. jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hand is at rest, if you place upon the place mentioned above, then strain and leave for five days, then loosen and leave thus.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it does not move well, and if there is no pain, if there is warm fluid, and you rub it until it is healed
de la dislocation des dois de la main	of the dislocation of the arm bones.
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre; adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins; et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	Never are the hands desoiled at the wrist part, never at the back of the palm or belly; therefore is the hand stretched out, and the dislocation is held in his pouches until it returns, then the head of the hand is supported and bent towards the part where it is joined; and it is left for two days, and then it is put back in its place; and it is not to be moved, as we have said, until the hand is whole again, and the wound is healed; and do the same if it is desoiled at the belly of the hand, and do as you have done before, until it is healed; and do the same if it is desoiled from another part.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	Because of the loosening of the scapula from the back.
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the scapula of the shoulder or the collarbone is loosened, or if there are several dislocations, and there is no remedy, for the patient's life is hurried.</start_of_turn>
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»: li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	And the sign is that the blood egestions spur in a contrary direction, it cannot be held, and often the limb is softened, or the two thighs or two arms or one. And often the marrow moves at three parts; that which moves at the back is called "gilbosite": it is cured if it is known that the gilbosite comes from childhood: if there is no cure or healing of the whole.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit; mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	And that which comes from sitting or from blows or from similar things, they say that the old doctors used great words in their cures; but I have abridged it according to my intention, and I have formed instruments in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit; et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis; et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece; puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles; et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons; et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	I say that in the swelling that comes before the heel, there is no health; and also that which comes directly to the two costae, and one cannot cure it except for that which comes from behind, as I have said; and that the patient should be placed with his face down one inch even, and should have a strain of urine from him, that it does not swell; then I put a cushion under the heel and another at the toes, and I bind the linen around the patient’s ankles, and another at the waist, and I have haunches and calves; and two assistants know the linen, one at the heel and the other at the toes, and they must be well closed, the cushion as we have said, and the patient should put his palms on the spine until it returns.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee; et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	If it does not return by this remedy, take a cube of three fingers in length, and sew the thumb to the side; and let the patient lie on his side, and hold the thumb of the cube to the side, then put the middle of the cube on the spine; and put the thumbs of the two pieces on the other side of the cube, and press well, until it returns to its place; and if you see that it is at the root that makes it rotate at the hand.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc; et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet; et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	If you see two veins at the root of the patient’s arm of a great length, and two others at the end; and between each vein, sow and sew, a palm’s length; and in each vein one hole, or the knot is corrected, and the veins are firmly bound to the earth so that they do not move; and between two veins are one vein returning, so that the string returns; and there are two minor veins of a palm’s length on either side of the returning string, to bring back the knot; and then bind the string that is between the bones at the knot towards the root, and the other string towards the pieces at the other knot, and the minister binds his knot on the whole string, and the master puts the spine even as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	When it is even, if you put on a dry dressing with plenty of eggshells, and then bind them, and then support it with a tablet of three fingers' length, that will cause the swelling to recede from the rib cage and the upper part of the spine, and then bind with a thread, as we have said; and let the patient take nourishment secretly until he is healed; and if nothing comes to an end of the healing, if you must administer soothing and calming medicines, with the support we have said before; and never give him a piece of lead, and never does it appear behind the shoulder blade, and take care that it is not a dislocation; for it is the bone that has burst, for which we must have no presumption: by chance there will come death.
des dislocations de la hainche	hip dislocation
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc .iiij. parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	The hip joint and shoulder joint never dislocate except for dislocations alone, never if like other joints; and the joint of the thigh is damaged in three parts: front and back, and front and back; the more inward it is, the more it is damaged in front and back.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu; et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	And the knowledge of its dislocation is this: when you join the painful limb with the tendon, if it is longer, and opens more the patient's knee than the normal, and cannot double his knee at the fire; and it is the thigh that is split open from the heat of the cautery, for which the head of the femur comes loose.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of this displacement is that these accidents are contrary to those mentioned above.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the sign of this displacement is that if the limb is well placed according to the completion, although it is not doubled at the knee with pain, if one sees that it is done too violently, it cannot be done immediately and is delayed, it retains the urine, swells the belly, and when it walks, it passes over the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the sign of that which has behind, if it cannot expand its knee, cannot double, and is that limb shorter than the other, and the ankle is softened, and the head of the thigh is displaced from its socket.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	If this semblance of dislocation recurs, if it is an old dislocation and does not move according to its setting, if there is no remedy; then I advise you to have suspicion.</start_of_turn>
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des .iiij. manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	And in this case where the dislocation is fresh, and there are three ways of dislocation, if you hurry that you return the joint, and stretch it inwards and outwards, and move it to the right and left; by chance if it returns, and there is no need for any other remedy.</start_of_turn
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil; et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien; et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	If it does not return in this manner, if you must, appear I with a strong minister, and with two hands hold the limb firmly, or with one that you shall bind upon the knee; and another minister stretches out his hand from under in part as much as he can reach with his hands from his knees to his buttocks, and then he grasps with a loop of thread upon the hip; and another holds the head of the limb; and extend both upwards and downwards together, until the patient is lifted from the earth at once, and remain suspended.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as .iiij. semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This method of extension is common in three out of four cases. If the dislocation has returned, as we have said, that is good.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele; puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	If this does not happen, if you must, put a remedy in his appearance. When the dislocation is complete, if you can, lift the patient onto his side, then put the limb on the root of the hip, and the limb which is beside the ankle, then stretch the limb upwards towards the ankle and towards the heel; then take another minister and grasp his arms, and embrace the great limb of the painful hip, and stretch it forward until it returns to its place: if it returns now; for this method of dislocation is lighter than the others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres; puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc; puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	If you do not secure it in this manner as we have said, if you know that the two feet of the patient are bound together with a strong thread on the two nails, and on the two knees, and that the limb is extended two fingers more than the others; then suspend the limb from the head of a pole, or upon the ground two arms long; then command one minister to embrace the heel of the ankle, and let another minister stand with the patient, who embraces the ankle, for the joint is now restored.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi; puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme; et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	When dislocation has occurred, if the patient lies down, as we have said in the case of gout, and grasp the limb properly at the ankle and foot; then place two cushions, one at the shoulder and one at the hip, and insert one cushion between the patient’s buttocks in the shape of a triangle; and cover with moist cloths, so as not to harm the patient. Then extend your hands ministers towards him, and watch that the dislocation is even with the hand that is holding it.</start_of_turn>
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	If it returns, that is good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If not, put on the table as we have said in the treatise, and press on it with our hands as we have said, and keep the patient lying on the stable side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And when the dislocation is forward, if you must extend the limb gently, as I have said; and put your eyes on the pain of the shoulder of the patient, and press on the other hand, and extend it towards the groin.</start_of_turn
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches; et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table; et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve; et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And if the dislocation is at the shoulder, if it does not yield, do not raise the patient from the ground, but rather that it be as if it had been loosened at the shoulder; as we have said previously concerning the two thumbs; and be on the face, and extend the limb as we have said before, and must press on the joint at the table; and it will be at its end when the patient extends his legs, and they will be even; then join the thighs, put on the bandage, and strain with a belt, so that the shoulder does not move; and rest for three days or four, then loosen it, and put on the bandage again; and if you see that they are even, if the strain, as before, and leave for three days; then loosen it, and do it cautiously, until the limb is comfortable
de la dislocation dou genoil	And if it rests for two or three days, then loosen it and place the bandage upon it; and if you see that they are even, if strained as before, leave them for two days. Then loosen it and make it bleed gently until the limb is comfortable.
Li genous est desaluez selonc .iij. manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	The shoulder joint is dislocated in two ways: front to back and front to back; and do not strain it forward.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez; et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez; puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement; et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And the sign is that you command the patient to bend his limb at the knee, and if he does not feel it at the knee, his bowels are evacuated; and restore all this if you make the patient sit upright, and extend his limb if he can, and place your back against his face, and place your hand on his toes; then take his heel in your palms, and pull between your thumbs, and bend the two costae of the heel; and one other attendant extends his hand, as long as the heel returns to its place, and the sign is that he has well bent his limb lightly; and put on the dressing and make the limb firm at the knee, and bind them together firmly for three days or four, and then take it off. Do not let the patient move until the limb is comfortable.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	And if the limb is not at a point, if an extension is administered strongly, as we have said in the treatment of the hernia, until it is healed.
de la dislocation dou talon	Until it is healed.
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	Never is the shoulder dislocated, and never is it completely loosened, and always inward and downward.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee: li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	And the sign is that the ankle is swollen, and that it has been loosened beforehand at the part where it is loosened: it must be held lightly, and it must be gently stretched out with the hands when it is slightly limp
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville; puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut; et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient; et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide; puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet; puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent; puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	And when it is thoroughly drained, if you make the patient sit upright, and hold him firmly by the leg under the ankle; then bring your hand to his right hand, and then to his left hand twice, and extend the limb upwards, and hold it firmly; do this twice as we have said, pressing and pulling the limb; if it returns, that is good; if not, repeat the work, for it will return; and if it cannot return, make the patient sit on his buttocks on the earth, and put a supporting pillow firmly under his thighs, and cover him with a blanket, so that he does not bleed; then hold the patient’s thigh and one other attendant extend the limb with his hands or by force, as he lies on the neck of the limb; and extend the muscles equally, and tie the bandage either tightly between the patient’s thighs to hold the patient when extending; then put the eyes equally on the dislocation with his hands, and one other attendant holds the limb firmly at the knee, and the dislocation will return immediately.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois; puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors; et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	When it reaches a point, if you put on the dressing and bandage above, and the swelling forms, and you tie the limb to the leg, and keep the nerves above the ankle behind, that the ligature should not be too tight; then leave it for two or three days, and if the swelling subsides, if the swelling has gone down; then remove the ligature in a third or quarter, and tell the patient for three days. And if it comes before this end, it is not certain that it will not swell again.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the afterbirth remains in the vagina, as we have already said, until it is sound.
des dois	If the afterbirth remains in the vagina, as we have already said, until it is sound.
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the afterbirth is discharged, if one believes it diligently, it is a light matter.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne; et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the dislocation is not in any way at the back of the limb, it is to be advised that you make the patient sit on one leg or on a table quite upright, and place the limb on what is open of these joints, then press the limb firmly until it returns; and when it is equal, and there is no opening, if you put on a bandage to the limb on a table for two fingers, then the swelling forms, and leave it for three days, then remove it; and make it rest until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	And when they are even, and there is nothing open, if you put some salt on the root of a thistle and hold it against the shoulder for three days, then the strain will subside, and you should leave it for two days, and then remove it; and then rest it until it is healed.</p
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert: si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis; et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit; et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne; et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis; et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples; et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	When a wound comes with a dislocation, and it is seen to be restored, many times it has happened that the patient has died: if you are not cautious in the cure and do not know how to do it and have not used it for a long time, and if you are not compassionate and merciful and late, do not be ashamed; and start with calming things about the wound, and leave the patient in the hands of God, if you do not see hope of health; and when you see hope, if you remain the limb in its place, even if the wounds remain; and when the limb is in its place, if you administer calming things about the wound, and cure the wound, as it should be, of dried pus; and if with the dislocation there is a fracture, and bones are fractured, if the bones are displaced, do as we have said in simple illnesses; and keep yourself from going into fear, as I have said, for this will bring you distress according to your Creator, and for the preservation of your arm and body.
Amen	Amen.
