O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	O you, very dear children, I have completed this book which is the latest of the science of medicine, assembling its employment, and have finished it by its demonstrations and pronouncements.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it has come to my mind that I shall complete it with this treatise, which is a part of the work of hands, namely surgery
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of hands is foreign to our region and is strange to all, if the science and dexterity are lacking, and nothing remains of the forces but the small descriptions in the books of the ancients that the hands have moved
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this comes the error and the emptiness, and are closed the understandings and is displaced the science.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	Or it seems to me that I can make it alive together the order of this treatment in accordance with the way of exposure and declaration and of the abbreviation; and I shall come together the forms of the instruments of cautery, and of the other instruments of the work with the adjustment of the declaration and preparation of it, as it is necessary
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And it is known that few masters of hands are found in our time, and therefore the art of medicine is prolonged.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And thus Hippocrates teaches us that the hand does not move without moisture, and that work is best done with moisture; the same with the art of surgery.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	We must say at the beginning of this book that he who is not skilled in the things which are before him, if he be rash and does not consider the homes, will often make mistakes in this science; as I have often seen happen with many who are entangled in this science and who abandon both science and sense.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa .i. apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	For I have seen a madman who, being in the midst of treating scrofula or a woman’s fistula, has closed the arteries of the neck; so that so much blood has flowed out that the woman has died between her hands.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens .iij. jors.	And thus there was another occasion where a stone from a bladder was extracted from a man, and the stone was large; so it took with it a piece of the bladder, and he died within two days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	I have already been called upon to treat, and behold the condition of the patient and the greatness of the stone, and so if it had been cut out, he would have died.</start_of_turn>
Et vis .i. autre mire qui prist en cure .i. duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi .i. termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And thus there was another occasion where a duke from our land had his limb broken, and with the bruise there was a wound; and the physicians were ignorant and constrained the bruise above the wound as if by strong wire, and did not allow the wound to discharge any blood, and left it like that until the limb was completely gone and the flesh and bone were lost.</start_of_turn>
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I beseech thee to come hither, and I hasten to come and loosen the limb; and when I find it dislocated, it is at peace and feels no pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	But every way the corruption is already confirmed or the limb is unsound, and it cannot be cured; and it does not cease the corruption from recurring in the limb until the limb is entirely lost
Et vis .i. autre mire qui effondra .i. apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And thus another mire which undermines the bone swells, and then inflames from the malice of its governance.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For the swelling which is caused by melancholy humor, it does not suffice to touch it with iron except when it is in the open, for it can remove all that is corrupted.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en .ij. divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And thus, I say, take heed, for the hand is divided into twelve sections: that is to say, thumb or any finger has more than one position; and I will show in every chapter where there is doubt and peril.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	For you must indeed hold your arms firmly, lest the fools speak evil of you. If you take your weapons in custody and cautiously undertake your ailments, and use the best way, by the grace of God you will reach salvation and be healed; and leave the avoidable diseases of grief behind; and remain armed only with what makes you doubt, and have faith in your ability to journey from this world to the next in glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	The fools deride my cures: "Do not take me for a madman, for I am not reminded of fools.
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	I have composed this treatise in three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapter deals with fire cautery and medicinal poultices, and the second chapter teaches how to prepare the instruments and the materials necessary for these treatments
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapter deals with fractures and cuts, abscesses and wound treatment, the extraction of arrows, and similar procedures; it also describes the preparation of the instruments and materials for these treatments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapter deals with restoring dislocations and twists, and similar matters; and it is ordered from the chief down to the lowest ranks, and from the forms of the instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	So it is remembered from our works that it is necessary to say what is the quality of the help and the danger of great complexion.</start_of_turn>
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the quality of the help and the danger are the longest word and the subtlest science and the secret response; and about this there speak many of the sages, and they agree with each other; and I cannot endure their words, for I reduce the length.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que .ij. complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that the fire cautery helps universally to all complexion or where there is matter, because there are two complexions: that is to say a complexion that is hot in the sense of matter, and a complexion that is dry in the sense of matter.</start_of_turn>
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In complexion chaude et seche, assemble matter, they say that cautery is a great aid; and others say that cautery is of no use in diseases that come from heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	For the nature of fire is hot, and it should not be used to cure heat diseases by heat, nor should it be used to dry out; and thus those who say the opposite that cautery does great aid in heat and dry diseases that arise from the humors.</start_of_turn>
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you compare the body of a man and its moisture to the complexion of fire, you find the body cold.</start_of_turn
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I consent to this word.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have never found it to be so in practice.</start_of_turn>
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And all the way, I do not know of any fire cautery that has been practiced without great experience, and without knowledge of the chapter of fire cautery, and the variety of humoral constitutions, and the causes and dispositions of their diseases, and the issues and means of treatment; for other humors we have no experience, even in cold and moist diseases.</start_of_turn
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And they all agree to the cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	Know this, child, that fire cautery is more effective when applied to secret exudates than burning cautery.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For the fire cautery, it is simple, and brings no more heat than to the part that is burned, and does no harm to any other part besides that which is treated.</start_of_turn>
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	Medical treatments that burn come from one member to another, causing ailments of grief to depart from the member; and by chance they cause the patient pain. The fire thus increases in height and through the goodness of its substance does not make me do this, unless there is unnecessary swelling
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	The fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	Know then, son, when the cauteries must be made and when they must be abandoned.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	I say that the cautery is permissible in all tensions, for the harmful effects that arise are overcome by the aid of the cautery; and indeed if the cautery is for necessary pains that are urgent and cannot wait until the greater harm has passed from the limb.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And think not, my son, that because it is done by fools, fire cautery is ineffective; for in the disease which it cures, there is no recovery to be had; and he says so himself. But it is not thus that it cures; for fire cautery is but a medicine that changes the complexion, and dries up humors which are the cause of pain, and is worth no more than medicine for its haste, and for the excellence of its work and its lordship.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	Indeed, it is known that no disease ever comes about according to the complexion of the patient and the nature of the disease and its virtue; and there are assembled in him the superfluities by the acquisition of food and other things, if these are not administered with fire cautery when there is little superfluity and moisture, for fire cautery is but a medicine for pain, and other things, and only partly for pain which does not return; but this is often the case.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And many people do not understand that fire cautery is called a remedy in vain; but behold; they do not believe that fire cautery is better than medicine, but their understanding is false, for fire cautery is but a remedy compared to other cures for any disease in which they have no efficacy; so we administer it, and it is worth it.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Therefore, although cautery is behind medicine, it does not agree with the intentions of the fools of this age.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	The ancients say that gold cautery is more effective than iron, and they do not say that fire is good for anything except for the quality of the gold and the fineness of its substance; and they say that the leaches of cautery do not cause harm, but this is not true, for I have proved it, and I have found that it is seen in some people; and gold cautery is worth as much as iron, as they say.</start_of_turn>
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	And indeed, when you burn an instrument of gold, you do not know how much it is blackened by the color of gold, and when it is cooled down; and if you burn it too much, it will burn; and there is enough hindrance.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And for this reason we use the fire cautery, as we have observed it to be useful in our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	Or you have commanded this chapter from the head down to the feet, because in this way it is easier to see
dou cautere olivaire	the work to be completed.
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	These cauteries are useful for moisture and cold, and there are two types that are done because of a disease called "soda," and because of the descent of many humors from the head downwards, as in the case of eye, ear, and for a multitude of dreams and pain in the teeth and throat, and even for many diseases that come from cold such as paralysis, soda, and apoplexy, and similar diseases.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief .iij. nuis ou .iiij., selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The form of this cautery is that the patient be purged by a soluble medicine, modifying the chief of the dose according to the virtue, the ease, and the custom of the patient; and then make the patient recover the chief of the patient.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses .ij. eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	Then make him sit quietly between your hands, and put his hands under his feet; after that place the root of your thumb on the root of his thumb between his two nails; and there or will come your two middle fingers, if it bleeds from the root then withdraw the cautery which is called "olive", for this is the form:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os .i. sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren .i. poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse .iij. jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	And put out the sign of ink, and make descending and extracting your hand back and forth; then keep your hand still, and renew the cautery until you see the bone somewhat; and if you do not see it, if you renew the cautery until you see the bone as I have told you; then take one pace back, and put in awe and cotton within, and take out the bone, and leave it for two days; after that put on a soft bandage and leave it until the swelling is bony; then cure the wound of the swelling which is called "tetrafarmaçon", until it is healed.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And the elders say that the more time passes over a wound, the more it purges; and for this reason it helps to move.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And they say that one must leave the cautery on for as long as part of the bone is not burned, and then withdraw what is burned, and be cured.</start_of_turn>
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme .i. vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And others say that one must leave the cautery on for as long as the bone is not broken; and one must press so hard that the bone breaks as wide as a woman puts out her thumb for fear of too much blood coming out; and one must leave the wound open for a long time; and afterwards one must cure and bandage.</start_of_turn>
Et ces .ij. manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	These methods of cautery do not seem to me to be appropriate for all bones; for in some people or where there is doubt or fear; and I believe that I must leave it [cautery] alone; for the pain of the patient is often trifling by nature, and the first semblance of cautery is more salve and gentle for me, and for this reason I will abstain from it in these cases.</start_of_turn
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	From ancient times pain has plagued the head.
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	When in the head there comes chronic pain, lasting a long time, the patient must use medicines which are called «cochie», and expectorants of head and oils and plasters; and if we make the cautery as we have said before, it is of no avail.</start_of_turn>
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Take care if the patient’s condition is of great nature, and that it is not too severe; then the cautery must be applied only as much as we have said before.</start_of_turn
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai .i. cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est .i. leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	After having made the cautery upon the bone of the head as we have said, and having made the incision of the vein which is called the «vasselz», which is in which we put the sponges; and keep your hand still so that you do not see blood until you reach the bone: the patient feels much more severe pain in this cautery than in others, and I shall speak of that later; and it is necessary that the incisions of the horns be more subtle than those of the middle of the head, and this is the form:
dou cautere dou chief	Dou cautere dou chief
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc .ij. manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When sudden pain occurs in the shoulder, and the disease extends to the root, and the head of the shoulder is ejected by medicinal means, and other cures have been made as mentioned in the division of diseases, and all this has not been of benefit: therefore, burn according to two methods, that is to say with vinegar and oil.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope .i. poc as .ij. chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi .xij. houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi .ij. jors ou .iij.; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	If vinegar is taken as a dose, and the skin is stripped and scraped, if there are two heads of the shoulder, then make the temple where the pain persists as much as possible so that you can reinsert the vinegar dose under the skin; and when it is reinserted, if you bind it firmly and hold it for about twelve hours; then remove it and burn the dose of garlic, and leave the wound for two or three days; then put on a bandage that will cover the wound until it is healed.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the cure of inflammation when it is healed; and if you see that you must make some burning medicine as I have written or dose them with burning medicine.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	The iron cautery is as it is said in this manner.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Leave the hairs long and even.
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait .i. poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And it is called "closed" because the head is made in the shape of a keyhole, and in the middle has a small appearance; and put out the painful limb, and hold your hand and touch the fire slightly, until half of the thickness of the hair is burnt; and keep your hand still so that the artery does not burn, which is dangerous, and drain abundance of blood.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par .iij. jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	After putting on cotton wool around the area, and taking out the limb by two days; then put on wet cotton wool in the wound, and then cure the limb of inflammation until it is healed; and if you cauterize this abscess with the cautery which is called "cultellare", at the tip, and keep you from covering the artery in this abscess which is not ancient.
de emigraine	De Emigraine.
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait .ij. coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	When you see that the cautery does not suffice for the ailment and the patient is suffering, cauterize the area as we have said and cure the wound until it is healed; and if you see that it is necessary, administer the cautery that we have said or the chapter on the extraction of the artery, with the cautery which has a mill better cutting edge.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	From the cold of the ears to the part of the head.
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When the ear suffers from pain of cold, and there is swelling of the parts beyond remedies and other cures which we mentioned in the previous division, and the pain does not subside, then withdraw this cautery which is called “points,” for in this shape:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les .ij. se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait .x. poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the cautery has been performed around the painful ear, or around the parts where the pain persists, when the pain remains in both places, then remove a point from the root of the ear once the incision has been completed; and there should be ten points around the ear; after that, cure the wound until it has healed completely.
de la torture de la bouche	From the torture of the mouth.
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	Torture which must be cured by cautery is not fierce except those which move with phlegm, as we have said in the division of diseases; and do not make any cautery which resembles those which come from drying and swelling of nerves.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de .iij. cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des .ij. levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When you cure this semblance of torture which moves with humours of tears and purges of head and gargling, and this is not worth it, then you must burn the patient with three cauteries: one at the root of the ear, and the other at the middle of the temple, and the third at the junction of the two eyebrows; and put the cautery on the healthy side, and make the cautery in the place where the root of the ear is under a little distance from the corner of the eye, and another in the temple as long as a thumb; and leave the cautery on until half of the hair is burnt; and this is the form of the cautery.
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And it is the semblance of the cutlet which we have placed before you, but it is a more subtle and effective treatment than the knife should be a larger one; after curing like this as I have said, as long as it is healthy.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai .iiij. cauteres: .ij. sus les .ij. cornes dou chief, et .i. emmi le chief, et .i. ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When the patient has a long-standing apoplexy and you cure it as we have said, and he does not recover, and the patient does not have a fever, then you must make three cautery burns: two on the two corners of the head, one at the root of the head, and one on the belly of the stomach; and thus he is cured as we have said before.
de litargie	When the patient has a long-standing apoplexy and you cure it as we have said, and he does not recover, and the patient does not have a fever, then you must make three cautery burns: two on the two corners of the head, one at the root of the head, and one on the belly of the stomach; and thus he is cured as we have said before.
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	When the patient has a long-standing apoplexy and you cure it as we have said, and he does not recover, and the patient does not have a fever, then you must make three cautery burns: two on the two corners of the head, one at the root of the head, and one on the belly of the stomach; and thus he is cured as we have said before.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai .iij. cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere .i. doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai .i. cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, .ij. autres sus les .ij. cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If he is sane of mind, well and truly; if not, two cauteries are to be made on the head downwards to the collarbone, with a space between each cautery of one thumb's breadth; and the cure is to be as with the others. If you see the patient groaning, and the patient is suffering, make one cautery in the middle; and if the patient is a woman, make two others on the two corners, and the cure is until he is sane. Let the cautery which is called "olive" be as I have said before.
de la froidor dou chief	If he is sane of mind, well and truly; if not, two cauteries are to be made on the head downwards to the collarbone, with a space between each cautery of one thumb's breadth; and the cure is to be as with the others. If you see the patient groaning, and the patient is suffering, make one cautery in the middle; and if the patient is a woman, make two others on the two corners, and the cure is until he is sane. Let the cautery which is called "olive" be as I have said before.
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et .i. derrier et .iij. sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai .iiij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	It is necessary that the head be freed from hairs and what we have said before; after which the head of the patient is to be raised, then the cautery is to be made on the head and on some corner, and one behind and two on the spine of the collarbone; and if there are more physicians, and the limb is moist and the patient is groaning, and the disease is urgent, three cauteries are to be made on the spine of the back; and it is to be left until more than the current pain is gone, and keep your hand still; after which the cure is until he is sane, and the cautery which is called "olive" that we have said before.
de l’epilempsie	De l’épilempsie.
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	The epileptic seizures should only use fire cautery when it is phlegmatic, and first modify the marrow of the bones and other cures that we have said in the division when the patient is great and suffering from lack of medical care.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai .i. cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et .i. cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if it is a child who cannot endure suffering, make him gargle and chew, modifying the marrow often with bones of meat; after that you should break the head in half, and make one incision according to what we have said before, and one incision on the artery, and on the spleen; and if the patient is strong and suffering, make incisions as we have said for those with paralysis and softening of bones, on the spine of the back and the neck, or the olive cautery as I have said.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai .i. cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is feverish, do the cautery superficially as it is said above.
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When melancholy is the cause, the superfluous humours or corrupted moisture and large phlegm arise, then you must burn with some superficial cautery as we have said to the paralytic.</start_of_turn>
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	When melancholy is the cause, if the superfluous humour descends to melancholy and the body of the patient is moist, then you must give him something to drink that will dry out the moisture, according to what is before in the division.</start_of_turn
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai .i. torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com .i. cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After that, you must apply a well-made liniment of flaxseed to the patient's head; as with a circle, and put it on the head; and the patient will feel cross, and must be held firmly from all sides; then present the liniment, and mix with an old balm of berberis; and burn with moderate heat, so that it does not cause him to suffer; after that, empty the circle from inside the head, and leave it to cool; and do this to the patient once every week with another good medicine, until he is healed.</start_of_turn
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	When you prick at their base hold the eyes steady until they grow
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	This method of cautery is useful for the common headache; then put some soft cotton wool in the wound and grease it with lard
de l’awe des eulz	Or if you see burn marks from the cautery done with many pricks, this method of cautery softens the brain somewhat; then put on a moist cotton plug in butter and grease of geline.
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When awe comes first of all, as signs that I have said in the division, then encourage and give the patient something to drink that will moderate the head, and guard against all moisture, and make him sweat or bathe more often on an empty stomach.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as .ij. eulz ensamble, ou en .i. se li dessendemens est en .i.; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	After that you command him to rest his head, and you make him cauterize the head, and make three cauteries on each temple if the dizziness persists from the awe, for there are three eczes together, or if the dizziness persists in one; and cut at the root of all the veins and arteries that are under the head, and let them be as long as the width of the temple; and take care to avoid excessive bleeding, and if you see too much blood coming from a part, as if the blood were being squeezed out as much as possible like you do.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les .ij. os derrier.	And I will teach you concerning the extraction of arteries and the incision of the cautery how you shall extend it; and in no way shall you cauterize or irritate these bones behind the eyes.
dou cors des larmes	And I will teach you concerning the extraction of arteries and the incision of the cautery how you shall extend it; and in no way shall you cauterize or irritate these bones behind the eyes.
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: .i. cautere emmi le chief, et .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples, et .ij. cauteres ou haiterel desoz les .ij. os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout .i. petit cautere.	And when the tears of the eyes are ancient and accustomed and are above the veins, or if you remove the arteries that appear swollen; and it is seen that these are cold fleumatic superfluities, then you make the cautery as I have said at the beginning of this chapter: that is, cauterize the head and two cauteries on the temples, and two cauteries or irritate behind the eyes; and if necessary, if there is swelling, if you cauterize gently above the eyebrow with a small cautery.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	The tears flow down the cheeks.
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide .iij. nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai .ij. cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les .ij. sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you apply the medicine as we have said in the division, and it does not help, then give the patient two eggs to drink; after that, raise the head and make a burn or half-burn with olive oil; make three burns with the cautery called "clavilis" on the three hairs, one at the root of the eyebrows; and keep your hand away from the artery so that you do not stop the flow of blood.</start_of_turn>
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	This is the form of the cautery that is called "clavilis":</start_of_turn
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	When the fat of the oil is softened by disease and moisture, then the cautery of this cautery which is called "olive".
de coi ci est li forme:	The iron cautery is as it is said in this manner
Et se tu vues si fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you see that you must cauterize upon the two sores as long as the hairs are long; do not leave the hand but until a third part of the hair has been burned, as I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	And if you see that you must cauterize upon the two sores as long as the hairs are long; do not leave the hand but until a third part of the hair has been burned, as I have said.
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	Never has it happened that the hairs of oil become converted to sparks, and prick the oil, and this is done by cautery in two ways: that is to say by fire, or by burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they are born and are equal, then command the patient to keep the hair long; after that mark upon the root of the hair a figure which is as thick as a poppy seed, or as thick as the beginning of a goose quill; then put a soft cloth soaked in egg white and mucus on the oil, and cover the cautery with wool of this sort:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi .iij. jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After cauterizing upon the figure which you have marked, and doing it several times, so that the hair curls up at that place; and the sign of the work’s safety is that you see the root of the hair receding, and the hair is raised to the point of the oil; then take your hand away, and leave for two days; then put soft wool in the wound until the scab has ossified; after that cure the wound until it is healed.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	If after this the hair grows, and the burn is softened, then repeat the cautery on the same limb as before; and if the hair is plucked out, burn as long as the burn is restored to its natural state, and is even, and does not prick the hair.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en .i. oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en .i., et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse .i. poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The burning cautery of medicine is that you command to the patient to leave the hair long and even, then make a patch in the shape of a laurel leaf; then take French soap and live salt, each in three, and grind together well; and make it frothy, if it does not freeze, then put it on the shape that you have made like a laurel leaf, and put the burn on the patch; and if the patient only tolerates oil, do the same; and put cotton wool soaked in oil on the wound. The head of the patient should be in its normal position and the hand showing on the medicine should be pressed one time and lowered every time the patient feels a tingling of the medicine, because he feels tingling in the same way as from fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done this for a long time, if the medicine has reached your hand, put it down again.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	And when the bite has passed, if you lift the limb, and you see the fat rise up just as it had risen by contraction of the fire or by incision; and if it is firm, it is well
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If not, if you recall any medicine from before, or if the medicine has not been done, as long as your works are even, and your eyes fixed in point; then put on a moist cloth in the burrow until the hairs are clipped, afterwards cure the swelling which is called "dyafenis" and others, as long as they are healed.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	And if you have become aware that you must take good care of your work with great care that it does not require any medicine, as there are eyes.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And if the patient becomes limp afterwards, and the hair prick in the oil, if you begin the medicine again on that limb which has become soft from the oil, as you did before; afterwards cure until it is healed; and that is the form of the mustard plaster
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And know that the souls of men are diverse in greatness and smallness, and according to that be their constraints; and do not be answered in the right way to him who is studying this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	Of the cure of fistula by cautery.
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat fistula as we have said in the division of diseases, and your treatment brings no benefit, then you must cauterize according to this manner.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	Instruct the patient to hold his head still; and keep his ears between your hands in a gentle manner so that he does not move them; then put a wet cloth or juice of persil on the oil; then burn the cautery which is part-burnt: and hold it to the head as if it were a sparrow’s beak, gather what is around it so that it is the cautery; if you see that the head is pointed from one ear to the other, or that it is as if there is an attempt; nevertheless, that which is held is more useful for your work.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	After pressing the fistula until it is overblown, and draining the pus, and drying; and if it is closed, if you see the wound, and drain the fluid; then put on the burnt cautery which remains; and hold your hand to the cautery at the part without feeling pain; and put the cautery in the fat of the oil, and corrupt it.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	If you approach the beginning of the cautery treatment right up to the bone, that would be well indeed.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	If that is not the case, if you must repeat the cautery once more, and you must wait until you have finished, and leave it for three days; after that put on a wet bandage over it, and treat the wound with a desiccant until it is healed, and if forty days pass and it is not healed, put on an caustic medicine until the bone is exposed; and withdraw as it comes in your chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	And there is a method of cautery for fistula of which none of the ancients spoke.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	When there is a fistula, and open the vessel; after that put in the groove one half of a barleycorn of charcoal, which is the form:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	and make at the quantity of a third of an ounce; and hold your hand or camphor firmly, and do not move the patient at all, only let the melted wax run down to its oil; and it is advisable to put on the oil to the patient a moist cotton bandage over bone or skin: the wax will then adhere to the fistula and the patient will recover with great delight.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	And if the fistula is cured by the cautery as we have said, it is well.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	If not, if you must administer an incision to the nerve, and bring the fistula back to the root of the nerve as it should be in its proper place.
des crevaices en levres	And if the fistula is cured by the cautery as we have said, that is good. If not, if it is necessary, it may be necessary to administer a perforation to the nerve, and to reduce the fistula to the root of the nerve as it should be in its proper place.
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	And if the fistula is cured by the cautery as we have said, that is good. If not, if it is necessary, it may be necessary to administer a perforation to the nerve, and to reduce the fistula to the root of the nerve as it should be in its proper place
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe .i. petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these wounds of which we have spoken in dissection, and the cure proves ineffective, then expose [perform] a small cautery burn according to this fashion:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	When you treat these wounds of which we have spoken in dissection, and the cure proves ineffective, then expose the wound immediately until the bleeding stops; after curing the wound until it is healed.
de l’aposteme de la goule	of the abscess of the armpit.
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies .i. cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou .ij., aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When the abscess comes to the root of the arm or in the armpit, or in the palm of the hand or as the root of the teeth, after making an opening and cleaning and emptying it becomes a fistula; and you must cure it as we have said in the divisions, and it does not profit much: therefore it is enough to have a cautery according to the quantity of the fistula; after having opened or pierced the fistula, and keep your hand as long as the bleeding persists at the font or behind; and do so once or twice, that is, after curing as we have said in the cures, until it is healed; and if it is cured once, that is good; and if not, you must uncover the limb and remove the corrupted bone, as you would do in its chapter.
dou movement des dens	Pain de mouvement des dents
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicine and it does not help, then put the patient’s hand in your own; after that remove the cautery which will form from that moment on in part as if you put a pin on the tooth; and put inside the cautery hot immediately, and hold for as long as the patient feels the heat coming from the root of the tooth; then withdraw your hand and resume the cautery as you please; then fill the patient’s mouth with salt water, and hold for an hour or two.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in part as the tooth which was moving if confirmed, and the softened gums restrained, and the moistness corrupted dry.
de la dolor des dens	From the pain of the teeth
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc .ij. manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When the pain of the teeth comes from cold, or there is cold or heat, and medical cures are of no avail, then there must be recourse to cautery in two ways: burr cautery and fire cautery.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus .i. fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	Burr cautery: if you take burr of licorice, and put the end in a spoon of iron or pewter; after taking cotton and wrapping over the point of a needle, and the swelling is in burr, and put on the aching tooth immediately and hold until it is cooled; and do this often until its virtue comes to the root of the tooth. And if you see that there is still swelling and cotton in the burr, put on the aching tooth, and put on the iron again until the fire comes to the cheek of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	The cautery is like a burnt cane of iron or charcoal, and be large enough that the fire does not reach the patient’s mouth; after burning, cool the cautery, for when it is cold it will form like this, and put it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery is cool; do this often, for the pain will be great like that of a toothache or a wound tomorrow
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And you must make the patient fill his mouth with good burr in the haste of this cautery, and then pull out the hair; this is the form of the cautery
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	And make the cautery where you wish, and according to what you have purred; and that is the form of the burn.
des scrophules	And the size upon the pierced wound and the moisture, if it is less severe, because they are from little blood. And if there are any of these wounds or chieftains or it has no moisture, and of these wounds that I cauterize or chieftains of an old woman; and find the wound just like a pierced stone, rough and pale, and cannot break. And if there is no bruise, we must do just as well for the wound as with a stone. In other wounds coming or chieftains, for those that come from the head of the fetus and have roots of the ears, it opens if it is always dependent every day, because of its swelling; and it cures as it should.
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the scrofulae are of phlegm and cold moisture, and are not subject to digestion by medicines, then evacuate the cautery head immediately; for two wounds will form on the other side of the cavity because of the fumes; place the cautery firmly over the abscess once, or two if necessary, until it reaches the base of the abscess; and if the abscess is small, place the cautery according to the quantity of the abscess and leave it in place for three days; and place upon it a moist bandage until the swelling has subsided.
Li forme de la cainne:	The formation of the abscess:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	When moisture prevails over the pores of the skin, and indeed when this comes from a cold complexion, it is necessary that the patient be first relieved by solutive medicines; then perform the cautery at the root of the throat, and keep it until the throat is reached, without going further since there is enough.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	After that, do another cautery at the joint of the neck to the top of the scapula, and let the cautery which is called the "claw" be as it is seen; and cure the limb as it has been said above until it is healed.
de la toust	When moisture overcomes the channels of the pores and even when it comes from a cold complexion, then it is necessary that the patient be first treated with resolving medicines; after that one must perform the cautery at the root of the throat and keep it until the pain has ceased; do not go any further until the pain has vanished. After that one must perform another cautery at the joint of the collarbone at the base of the scapula; and this cautery is called the "clavile" because it has the shape we have seen before; and cure the limb as we have said above until it is healed.
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et .i. autre cautere emmi le pis entre .ij. mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When all and diseases of the pores are caused by cold moisture, and the patient has neither fever nor sweating, and is an ancient disease, if one performs several cauteries on the forcele in the veins; and another cautery between the two nipples; and the cautery which is called the "clavile" according to the shape which is said above.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	And if you see it, do a cautery by pricking all the cautery which is called "toes" which are like this in the ear disease; and let the toes be until XXX, or until they are bent over.</start_of_turn>
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	After that, cure the limb as has been said above, and let the cautery be three times as has been said above.</start_of_turn
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais .iij. a cop.	And thus are the cautery more gentle, forasmuch you make .iij. at a time.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners douqueil ci est li forme:	When the shoulder joint is loosened by moisture, and is reset but does not stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have seen, then first reset the dislocation.
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble .iiij. cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a .iij. ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a .iij. ners:	and cauterize the joint until it reaches the ribs; then withdraw the hand that was at the armpit; and if the joint is loosened, if necessary, burn the cautery with the three fingers together; and this is done with the cautery which has two nerves, for the form of cautery which has two nerves is this:
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce .i. nerf por coi il i a .viij. cauteres.	And never is the suture adjusted upon this nerve for there are six cauteries there.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	Then put on the cautery, broil the wounds with oil; then rest the patient, and do not hold the limb long tense until it is well comforted.</start_of_turn>
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	And if there is displacement under the shoulder, whatever the cause, do a cautery on the thick part of the claw cautery, or prick with multiple cautery.</start_of_turn
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	For the joint is closed, and the moisture is bony, and the patient is cured.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	When cold and moist substances come into the stomach, as they are ejected from its surface, they multiply the discharge at that time; these are customary methods of treatment, but they do not benefit him; therefore it is necessary that the patient rest on his back, extend his legs and arms.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture; et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	After this, there are three cauteries which one does on the buttocks, over the amount of two nails; at every cautery the needle is grasped, and two cauteries are made on the two costae as long as the figures of the cauteries are at three angles, and there is some space between one and the other so that they are not joined together when they swell; and the cauteries must be made so that they do not penetrate the two parts of the kidney, and the figure of the cauteries must be as described above
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme; et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche; puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if you see a great burn in the stomach, as described above; and he who has fear of this burn, burn at the prick and mark upon the stomach a point, as much as you see of the swelling; then burn at all the burn that is called "poins".
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the treatment of the wound that we have seen before, as long as he is well.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez; et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil; et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient; et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi; et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere; et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez; et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais; et c’est li forme:	When the liver comes with pain of cold and moisture and great swelling, as long as it is forced out of its natural position by the humors; and the patient is cured of what we have said in divisions, and it does him no good, if he does not keep the patient quiet on his bed; and sign of swelling three burns according to this form and this figure and this quantity on the liver, drive away the hypocondria, the spleen or the testicles of the man; and have between each burn the thickness of two eggs; and let the burns be long as the thumb, and do not press too hard with your hand over all the burns; and let only half of the burn be blackened, and let the patient rest on his parts; and if he cannot, if let him lie down, and extend his legs, and keep his arms stretched out; and that is the form.
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors; et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	If your will be, if you cauterize these superficial cauterizations, if you are skilled and prudent in the art, and take care that you do not burn too much, because you are fearful of drying out the whole body; and that it does not come to boiling, for the body is very subtle in that place, and the blood is visible.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile: s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort; et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	When it has burst in the liver, and you know if it is in the gall or in the flesh: if it is in the gall, the patient feels little pain; but if it is in the flesh, the pain is violent
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste; et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	And when this treatment has finished, if you think the patient is asleep on his face; then mark that the vein or the burst has stopped, and then burn the cautery which is like a splinter, for this is the form:
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers; aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez; et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	And cauterize I cautere while the hairs are coarse, and come until the root is white; until the wound is quite strong; afterwards the cure as before when healthy; and I advise you only of this cautery that has not failed with anyone who has studied long and diligently in the art of medicine, and by whom these diseases have never occurred.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	Therefore, one must be wary of working at it, and indeed I seem to think that it is better to let it lie alone.
dou cautere de pleuresin	of the pleura.
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize .i. cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et .ij. petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et .ij. cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et .i. cautere emmi le pis, et .i. autre sus l’estomac, et .i. entre .ij. espaules, et .ij. as .ij. costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre .ij. espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	The ancient said that we must make at pleasure cauteries of root of aristolog, and in part manner: take a root of aristolog long, the greatest that thou shalt find, and be dry, and be as thick and as long as thy two thumbs; and the grease in oil, and the mark at the fire, and cauterize. I. cauterize between the nipple and the collar, and II. little cauteries one in descending in the part which is under the beard; and III. cauterize between the fifth rib and the twelfth, declining behind one inch. I. cauterize the heel, and I. another on the stomach, and I. between two ribs, and I. two costae below the heel of the cautery which is between two ribs; and do not press me thy hand, but make it open as much as in smelling.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	And they say that no ancient man has ever used a fire cautery resembling a barber’s razor, and that he should place it between the ribs, until it reaches the abscess; and that great pain will result from this, as we have said concerning the abscess of the liver.</start_of_turn>
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	But in this work is fear or the patient dies now, or an abscess comes which cannot be healed.
de la mice	Of mice.
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent .iij. manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you cure the disease of the mouse from what we have said about the divisions of the cures, and it does not profit, then there remain two methods of cautery that are good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos; et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	If you do three cauteries or four, and bind them according to the length of the hair, according to the shape of the cautery of the liver as we have said before; do not press your hand on all the cautery, and let the patient rest on his back; and another method of cautery if you are afraid of the cautery which has two hairs, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; and hold the limb which is where the hair is, or the edges of the patient’s wound come from the left, and lift up what you bind of the limb according to the limb, according to the length of the bone, and let the cautery be according to the size of the bone.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	After that, take two nerves and flame them until the burn is perceived from the other side; then quickly take away the cautery, and there will be three. And if you see that the burn has extended to the entire nerve, take away the cautery at three nerves.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After that, when the cure has grasped by its root for a long time, and this is worth as much as the other cures that have been mentioned before
de ydropisie	of dropsy.
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	The cautery is not worth applying, except in the case of the symptom called "asclytes".
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	When you have cured as we have said in the divisions, and your cure does not benefit you, then you must make three cauteries around the belly, one on the stomach, one on the liver, one on the spleen, and two behind the shoulder blade, and one on the heel; and keep the cautery very close to the hair root
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les .ij. ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	After leaving the cautery open for a while to drain for a long time, do not leave the dressing on the patient after the cautery; and healing will be expedited, and the two intentions will be reunited with the help of God.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The shape of the belly cautery is like the key we have in front; and for the back it is olive-shaped, as it is seen here
de l’enfleure des piez	of the swelling of the pieces
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	When the nails are inflamed in the hydropic person, and are full of yellow pus, it is proper that you cauterize on the back of the thumb between the auriculaire and the anulaire; and hold your hand with the cautery towards you.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	And do not enter too deeply, for fear you will burn the yellow pus, and keep the cautery as follows:
Aprés fai sus .ij. jambes .ij. cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After that, make two incisions on either side of the ankle at the ankle bone; and let the incisions be long, one of them above the front of the ankle and the other below, between the ankle; and leave the incisions open for a long time in order to cure, that they may heal in place; after that cure the other wounds that we have mentioned.
de la menoison	After that, make two incisions on either side of the ankle at the ankle bone; and let the incisions be long, one of them above the front of the ankle and the other below, between the ankle; and leave the incisions open for a long time in order to cure, that they may heal in place; after that cure the other wounds that we have mentioned.
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai .i. grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et .iiij. cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout .i. cautere clavile subtil, et .ij. cauteres sus les hainches.	When a solution of the belly comes from cold and moisture, and the protective and digestive virtue which is the stomach and the intestines is emptied, and cannot be cured by any means; and you see the patient suffering greatly and having much vomit, if you make a great burn on the stomach as it has been said above or a burn of the stomach, to the burn that is in circulation; and three burns around the spleen at all times.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et .i. cautere sus chaicun yle, et .ij. petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see moisture gathering and the patient suffering, perform cautery on the navel, and indeed cautery on each lobe, and two small cauteries on the stomach below the great one, for the cure is beneficial when there is good aid.
de la cure des emorroydes	And if you see moisture gathering and the patient suffering, perform cautery on the navel, and indeed cautery on each lobe, and two small cauteries on the stomach below the great one, for the cure is beneficial when there is good aid.
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois; et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	When there are hemorrhoids, or swelling, or one or more, and they are old and are of thick cold humors and corrupted moist, and are cured as we have said in divisions; it does not help to cauterize: three on the spine of the back, this being all that is sufficient above the buttocks and below in triangulating, and one cautery on the buttocks two below; and if you think that his stomach is chilled, and the meat is not cooked, and you see swelling in the face, then you must make one great cautery on the stomach, as it has been said before, and one on the liver, and one on the spleen with the whole of the cautery clamp; and leave the cautery open long and tight.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After treatment, let the limb be sound.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	And if you think that his stomach is chilled, and the meat is not cooked, and you see swelling in the face, then you must apply a great cautery to the stomach, as it is said above, and another on the liver, and another on the spleen throughout the entire cautery clamp; and leave the cautery open for a long time. After the burn is healed until it is healed.
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou .ij., et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you deal with the thelul, if you see that the cautery seems to burn, then grasp it and put it completely over that thelul which is coping; and leave it there until the vein is born without restraint; do this once or twice. And if there is much thelul, if you cauterize each one as we have said; after that cure the wound with beneficial remedies until they are healed; and if you cauterize with a great cautery on the bone, there will be more great help.
de plaie mal curee	From an untreated wound.
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot endure pain or opening, as we have told, if there is any disease that cannot be healed except by cautery
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	When no fistula comes, and it is swollen and emits putrid and moist pus, if the disease has already progressed to a slight degree, and you see that it continues to worsen as much as before.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	After burning off the cautery that seems to have raised the wound, and has gone into the fistula as much as it tries to enter, begin to burn again the cautery until the burnings are as thick and corrupt as before; once, or twice, or three times, according to the quantity of hair that must be removed; and beware of burning the nerves that are nearby, and the great veins.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	If the fistula goes towards the bladder and the intestines, be careful of these parts, and do not make the burn too deep; think that it is not always necessary; after treatment, let the limb be sound, and if the parts are sailez and the matter is solidified long enough, then you can consider that the limb is completely healed; if the matter is not solidified, leave it alone, and the burn will heal itself; just as we have said concerning this limb.
de la maladie des reins	De la maladie des reins.
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra .iij. cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When the kidneys are affected.
de la vessie	Of the bladder.
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et .i. a destre et .i. a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais .i. cautere defuers le dos, ou .ij. se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladder is full and weak with pain and moisture, and if the patient retains urine, then one should cauterize on the lower part of the bladder, where the hair grows down, and on both the right and left sides, and make as many burns as are necessary; and one should also cauterize the back or front, as needed; and one should cauterize the needle according to the form mentioned before.</start_of_turn
de la marris	De la marris.
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice .iij. cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et .ij. cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the marrow is cold and moist, and will not allow me to perform work, and the flowers are corrupted and their ends are delayed; and when they come, if they cause great pain: then it is necessary to make two incisions around the belly, as we have said, or to cauterize the bladder, or three incisions on the back; or the cautery needle, as we have said.</start_of_turn>
de la hainche	Of the hip.
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a .i. cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When viscous moisture descends to the hip socket, and because of this it moves out of place; the sign is that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and it is found that the thighbone is bowed inward, so it is necessary to cauterize the patient on the hip socket like a circle, and to mark in front of the limb around the socket if it is turned, so that the socket is within the circle; and if the cautery is made as it should be, like that which we have made to the stomach.</start_of_turn
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai .iij. cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if these [fire cautery] are not present, make two large cauteries of olive oil, and let the cautery be as strong as all the others; and cure until it is healed.
de la dolor de la hainche	And if these [fire cautery] are not present, make two large cauteries of olive oil, and let the cautery be as strong as all the others; and cure until it is healed.
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain comes to the groin, and it is from cold and moisture, and the patient is cured of this by what we have said in the preceding chapter; the cure is not of great value, and the disease is ancient: therefore it is expedient that you purge the patient of the humors by means of foul pills or other solid pills that are similar.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	After the burn; and the manner of burn if it is according to two methods: that is to say together medicines in the embers, and burn with fire.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	If the burn is as it should be by two methods, which are these: to burn with medicines in the embers, and burn with fire.
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you see that the burn has been made at the circle that we have mentioned concerning the dislocation of the hip; but make part of the manner that the circle encompasses the entire hip, and all the thickness of the thigh is firm.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	And this is the way we do in sciatica, when the pain persists in the hip, and does not reach the thigh or the leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if it comes down to the thigh and the leg, if the patient says that the pain persists, and there are two blisters above the ankle, at the left side one; and either the blunt cautery or the needle cautery, and if the patient feels that the pain extends to two places or three at the cautery which is called "points".
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	If the shoulder joint is dislocated, and it is reduced but cannot stay in place, repeatedly reducing with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reduce the dislocation.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	And I myself have seen many who have cauterized on the ankle bone and left it until the limb was entirely gone, and it split in two, and was pierced and corrupted throughout.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	After a solution of the belly from which death often results.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	If the pain is in two parts together, make cautery in both, according to this method
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	And they say in the cautery of the groin, since this is the method, make I like this and let the chief be as great as a hazelnut or less, and with interstitches and without, up to the quantity of a nut of barley; and let the interstitches be over two parts, and as big as nails, and there should be one handbreadth of iron well done; and this is the form:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois .i. cautere reont et lou laisse .iij. jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is scald [burned] so that it is all red and black, and if it sends pain, put it on the box of the painful limb; and turn it on the edge of the bone; and burn it once. Leave it for two days. Then make a dressing of lint and leave the wound open long and tense. After that, cauterize until it is healed.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Albucasim says that our practice does not often use this cautery because of its harshness, and we see those who use it; and all these are burnt bones, which can suffer from it, and where it is applied it is painful
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi; et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	The burning cautery of medicine, if you make an instrument of tweezers between the nails of the thumb and index finger, and either of iron or steel with a round head, and in the middle has two nails, and between each has the quantity of grease of an olive; and be open wide and downwards, and join together according to this form:
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche; aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	The burning cautery of medicine, if you make an instrument of tweezers between the nails of the thumb and index finger, and either of iron or steel with a round head, and in the middle has two nails, and between each has the quantity of grease of an olive; and be open wide and downwards, and join together according to this form:
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu; et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit; et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait; et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	For indeed, there is biting pain like fire; and when the biting pain has passed, hold the hand with the instrument and raise the lower lip slightly, and leave it for three days, and put on ointment until that which is black of the scab is osteized; and leave it for three days that putrefaction may abate. This would be the last aid after the treatment of wounds as long as it is healed.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument; et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	And if the pain has spread as far as the thigh or as far as the leg, make an instrument that will hold the lip firmly according to what you have done to the lower lip; and this is the method of warming the lip, and I have written or treated of its rectification in medicine.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	Take alkali and live charcoal, as much of one as of the other, and grind them together, and put them in a new pot
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir; et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main; et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	Or if there is a little loss of blood when the point of a knife can enter; put aside that vessel another vessel well closed, and put on alkali and chalk and soft wool above, until there is one drop of blood below the powders you can see well with your hand; and let it remain so until the bleeding stops, and then take away all the blood, and pour it onto the chalk and alkali as before.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	And thus if there is moisture and it is administered in moistness of works of medicine and in cauteries of other members; for it makes part of the overwork with fire, and if there are other medicines of which we cauterize well the navel with resin and honey beeswax and chalk with soap, all these things mixed together
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	Galen tells us of a cure by which some honourees were cured of the pain of the navel and sciatic vein, and he says that no other cure was done, and that they were healed once when this cure was made, and that he bathed as it is taught afterwards.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie; et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	And thus in part, take two green fresh and dry barley grains, crush them with a little fat, put on the hip and thigh and leg where the pain persists, and bind; and leave for three hours, by which time the patient will no longer feel the burning.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	Then make him enter or bathe as much as the limb is stiff, and then make him enter or lie down, and the pain will disappear and be healed.</start_of_turn>
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	And give that no one should use fire cautery of such things, except after the evacuation of the limb.</start_of_turn>
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout; et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	And Diascorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with the help of cloves, if it helps; and must be made in part cautiously.</start_of_turn
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	Take linen and soak it in oil, and put it on the pit between the thumb and the little finger and the one which is called fossa.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains; et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee; et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	Take fine pliers dry, and grasp the fire until it is charcoal, and put it on the linen, and leave it until it is stained; and do this again and do not stop doing this until you think that it will reach the hip, and that the pain is gone; and this manner of cautery is called the "pliers cautery.
de la dolor dou dos	from the pain of the back
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes from the back, or from sitting or from percussion or from too great an evacuation, or from similar signs of cold matter expanding, none of these symptoms is worth cautery, except for that which comes from the infusion of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne .v. cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	When the patient is free from stinking pills or other similar things, make three lines signed with a nail on the back, loin or where the pain persists; and perform the cautery as many times as the patient can tolerate; and perform the cautery as follows:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	Many times this disease comes as a slight swelling, and the sign of its approaching when the ailment has spread to the loin; and fear or pain is found behind the lower vertebra of the back and in us the appearance that comes after the others.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this and you see it healed, if you cauterize with the fire according to this fashion.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	If the fire cautery burns some part of the bone excessively.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	And if you see it, if you burn around the bone at the piercing of the cautery two lines or three, and be close to each other
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	After treatment, keep the limb sound as we have said; and beware that you do not make use of cautery excessively, which is harmful to nerves.
de la dolor des jointes	When you see this and you see it healed, if you cauterize with the fire according to this fashion.
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When you see this and you see it healed, if you cauterize with the fire according to this fashion. When joint pain is caused by moisture that is spread throughout the limb and when pain arises from swelling, call it "podagre" properly. And when the cause is cold and the pain can be cured by medicine, it cannot be cured by cautery in part: make the mouth of the cautery around the joint and burn according to this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	And if there is need that you prick on the face of the bone, if you burn with the cautery all at once, you call it "point".
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if the pains come up to the joints and other parts, and this happens many times, if you burn each joint with three or four cauteries or with two from each part, with all the olive oil; and if you must do more, if you do more, but do not hold your hand fast until the pain is gone
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	And if the pains descend to the joints and the back, administer the cautery as we have said in the chapter
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	And if the pains are like those of hands, if you make points on the socket of the thumb for two lines; and if there remains no pain there, if you make points on the wrist and on the base of the thumb; and if the pains reach up to the elbows or up to the shoulder blades, if you cauterize some part, and make the patient comfortable and prescribe medicines.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	For if you make him comfortable and purge phlegm, he will be healed by the grace of God.
de la routure dou syfac	From the root of the wound.
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When the routure comes, and the belly descends like rats, it is new; if you see it cured, do not touch me that for certain; and if you use things that leave the belly open, so that the worms descend from the belly; after that, make him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to hold his flank tight until the belly is healed, and hold him there, and sign with a mark on the routure above the tender bone, and do everything like half of a circle below the ribs. Then withdraw the cautery.
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	as long as he is soft and sweats sensations.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	Then rest the buttocks in their place; and the minister holds his hand over so that they do not return backwards; and work well the seams at the patient, and put ice on him at the cusp and on the wrist, and another on the palm of the hand; then put the cautery on the sign at all your hand, and keep it straight and hold it until you have reached the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, try again another time until you reach the bone; and beware cautiously that the buttocks do not swell when you are making the cautery; that you do not burn them; and that by this the patient does not die, or any other harm.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	And soaks that when you do not arrive at the bone with the cautery, your work is worthless.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And it is recommended that the cautery of small intestines be subtle in measure and of great people also great in measure; after three days cure the belly of the burn until the eschar becomes bony; after that cure other matters until they are healed; and keep the patient lying for forty days on his back until the wound is well closed; and it is recommended that the incisions be left long, so that the pus does not come out when it wants to go to the chambers.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	After forty days, when he wants to rise, let him be supported by a well-made stool, and let him rest for forty days; and let him have good rest, that he works little and avoids too great a indulgence in drink and eating, and too much braising; and when he has followed this advice if he is well he will be entirely healed
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And I shall speak of the treatment of the heel in this chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	And after forty days, when he wishes to rise, let him be brought a well-prepared poultice, and keep it for forty days; and give him good rest, that he work little and take care to eat neither too much drink nor too high a diet; and when he has followed this teaching, he will be entirely healed. And I will tell you afterwards about the treatment of the tail in this chapter.
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	When wounds come to other parts and are known, and you see that they do not grow further, if you make the burn cautery again according to its quantity, and either a third of the nerve; after the treatment according to what we have said; and no one has ever said that it should be cauterized with the cautery at three angles according to this form.
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	but first sign the mark of the nail and make a line perpendicular to the wound, and another below, and hold your hand firmly with the whole cautery handle.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But the first cauteries are lighter and softer.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	But first mark the limb above and make a line parallel to the breadth below the groove, and another at the base, and hold your hand firmly at the whole of the cautery nail. But the first cauteries are more slight and soft.
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	When pain comes in any limb, or from a burn or wound, and this pain lasts for a long time, and the medical treatment is not worth it, then it is appropriate to cauterize with the cautery called “points,” and the cautery should be performed according to the length of the limb, its width, its weakness, its toughness, and its tendency to twist and its pain
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	If he is sane after the first cautery, that is well; if not, repeat the cautery upon him, for it is customary that it must burn the part which is nearest to the lesion, so that you may make the cauteries while the patient is sane.
de meselerie	De meselerie.
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	The sickness helps neither once by cautery, and the very disease comes from the corruption of phlegm and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief: I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	Can you see the cautery? Take care if the disease is at its beginning, and if it is cured as we have said in the division, and do not linger, and you doubt that the corruption does not spread throughout the whole sickness, then make five cauteries on the head: one at the new bone, and the other towards the forehead at the end of the hair; and two on the two corners, and one behind the shoulder; and leave the hand as long as the cauteries come up to the bone, and as long as the scabs come out so that the vapors of the humors can escape; and cauterize on the mouse according to what is before you.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et .i. cautere en som lou neis, et .ij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et .vj. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et .i. grant sus la crupie et .i. autre delez, et .ij. sus les .ij. espaules; et .ij. sus les coutes, et .ij. sus les tendrons dou pis, et .i. sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et .i. autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et .i. autre sus lou foie.	And if the mesentery is scattered throughout; and it manifests clearly, if you must cauterize, do these five cauteries which we have said or at the chief, and one cauterize on the lower lip, and two upon the eyebrow, and five upon the shoulder, and one great one upon the hip and one other on the buttock, and two upon the flanks, and two upon the tendons of the arm and the leg, and one upon each joint of the hands and feet; and beware of the nerves that are on the back of the heel, that you do not burn them; and never make the cautery upon the bone of the heel or upon the bone of the stomach or upon the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	And so it is that the more often the fire cautery is done, the more aid is done, and more profit is made; and so it is that the patients do not feel pain from the cautery as much as when they feel it from the healthy, because their flesh is already corrupted.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	And it must be known that the cautery must be great and small according to the members and joints, according to what you find in their manner of walking
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	After treatment with flour poultices sometimes with honey and other remedies, until they are healed.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	When swelling comes to any limb and is cured by medicines and oils and plasters, and is not healed, then one must burn the limb according to the greatness and smallness of the limb; and that the burn be deep enough to reach the marrow; then cure with ointments until it is healed
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	And never do we burn with fire on hand, foot, or back, at the issue of a nerve that makes the limb move, and if it is broken it swells; and in all this time nothing should intervene except those who are skilled in limbs and the issues of moving nerves that lie close to the bone.
de albaras	De albaras.
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the disease called "albaras" is present, and the medical treatment is useless, then cauterize with a cautery once for each wound, according to the quantity of the black bile that comes out, until the wound is ossified and its colour is changed; then treat with flour of times, lentils with rose oil and plantain leaves, with colon and alum, a part of each; mix them all together and bind with a bandage, and keep it in place until it is healed.
li cure de chancre par cautere	cure de chancre par cautere.
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	When a boil starts, and you see it is necessary to stop, if you burn it with the cautery that seems like a circle, all around the boil
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	And all these people say that we burn at the middle of the boil; and in all this time I do not think it is good, because I fear that it will be ulcerated and corrupted, and I have already seen that it will happen again; and the right thing is to burn around the boil, with the cautery which is called the circle, as we have said before
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	When the swelling will not subside.
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi.	When anyone has a disease which is called "adubelati," and it delays in healing or because of its excessive growth or because of the swelling of the patient when he is decrepit (that is to say too old) and there is little blood remaining, or because of the tension; and you see it haste to heal: then you cauterize around the mouth of a few cauteries by pricking; after that, you leave it alone.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	For it will haste to heal.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see the fire cautery burn, if it is fierce, the fire cautery is like this:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	And put your hand in the middle of this disease which is called "adubelati" as long as the cauteries perceive the pain, and be such cauteries as the patient feels relieved in part as the course of the decay is expedited.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	After that, cure as long as he is perfectly healthy
li cure dou feu par fer	The fire cure by iron.
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	Another disease that is called "corrodens" is nothing other than the swelling of a limb, for it causes the limbs to swell just as fire causes the dry sticks to swell.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	If you see this disease in the limb that can suffer from fire cautery, then evacuate the nails with small and large forceps, according to what is appropriate for the limb or the disease; after that, cauterize all parts until you have eradicated all the corruption, and leave nothing except the bone itself.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	Then leave it for three days, and put on the cauterized limbs so that they are supported with oil until the burnings from the fire are ossified, and all the corruption is gone.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	After the cure of external inflammations, charcoal is recommended.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	And if after three days the hair does not grow back, it is good; and if this is not the case, repeat the cautery on that which remains corrupted.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	This swelling is never cured by water medicine instead of fire cautery; but all the same, fire cautery is of greater help, and I have already said the cure of water medicine in the division: take as much as you need.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	From the hairs that come as nails
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	Often happens that when the teeth are loose, a disease arises called "clos," which is a great burden that makes the teeth white.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	And the cautery of this disease is done in two ways.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	That is to say, fire cautery and warm water cautery
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	If you are scorched by fire, I order you to cauterize as with a pin of gooseberry; make the burn from good iron of the measure that it can penetrate the root of all parts, and there must be subtle margins; after that put all around the burn, and keep your hand tightly around the burn until it comes to the front of the burn; and leave it for three days until it begins to fester; then make an embalmment of wild mallow seeds bruised with beeswax, and leave the embalmment on all night, and close the wound securely and remove it from its roots.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then cure the wound of swelling by applying pressure until it is healed.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	And if there are converted by defluxes of the cors, and many times happen in the hands and in the feet, if you must bring cautery of hot water; and it is partly a manner: take a bowl of rue or iron, or a pin of gooseberry, and put on the wound and the dressing, that is to say put nails of barley; and put the bowl on so that it covers everything around, then put a little of hot water, and hold your hand firmly, and press your hand by turning so that the margin of the bowl comes to the root of the wound, and can find the hot water going deep down to the root; and offer the patient a little of the bitterness of the hot water for an hour; then leave it alone, and it will discharge all of its roots.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	Thus do another after another, until you have scraped away all that is on the surface, then cure the wounds which are caused by the carbuncle.
li cure dou trembler	The cure for trembling is...
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres ou .iv. sus l’espinee dou dos, .i. cautere entre chescune espinee; et .i. cautere ou pez, et .i. sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	When anyone trembles from cold or from a quartan fever or from another, if it is commanded that three or four cautery marks be made on the spine of the back, one mark between the shoulder blades; and one mark above the belly and one on the stomach at the olive cautery; if this is left, the trembling will cease and the health of the cold sickness will be restored.
des pustules puans	pusules full of pus
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	At times appear by boils the body bathes, or pimples filled with pus, which come from putrid matters.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	If it is possible at the first when they appear that we make cautery upon each head of the boil: a subtle cautery of mustard flour, or with a needlepoint poised over the fire, or with long aristolochic root, or with the lenticular cautery.</start_of_turn>
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	And never should the cautery be begun when they appear, according to this manner, but is broken the moisture from which they come, and are healed; but it is necessary that this be done after the evacuation of blood.</start_of_turn
quant li artere est copee	When the artery is severed.
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	There are often great discharges of blood from the artery which is severed at the wound that comes from the surgeon, or at the incision of the abscess, or at the cautery of the limb, and similar things; and it is a great grief thing to extend
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren .i., ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	And whenever this happens, if you are in a hurry to put your finger on the wound of the vein, and you do not restrain it too much, and no blood comes out any more; then put the olive cautery on several small and large sizes until they are all red; then take hold, that is, or great or small as you please, according to the wound and the limb in which the artery is broken, and put the cautery on that vein or hold your finger there, and hold the cautery as long as it is not restrained
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement .i. autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	and hold it as long as it is not restrained.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des .iiij. manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And do not cease to perform this one after the other until the limb is stretched; and beware that you do not damage the nerve that is below, and that no other evil comes upon the patient; and take care that when the artery is large, it is not possible to fill it up properly again even if it is not treated in one of the three ways we have said: or by cautery, or by extraction when it is not treated, or by strong ligation of thread, or by medicines put upon it which have power to fill up blood. And let it be bound and strained afterwards.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Whoever brings rest to the strained limb by tightly wrapping it with cloth or putting things on it, or other things of that kind, will not profit from it if it does not do good
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And if there is no remedy and no medicine present, if he must put his thumb on the wound of the vein as we have said, and keep it steady until it is healed from the wound and from the vein; and do not move it, but moisten it with cold water often so that it is cold as long as the limb is frozen and swollen and healed; and make inquiries in front of this which he must do of cautery and medicines.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	This text is not provided in the given context, so I am unable to translate it.
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	As we have already said in the first chapter, in all diseases where it is necessary to cauterize with fire or apply warming medicine, we will specify the ointments, causes, instruments, and forms of cauteries; and in this chapter we will discuss the most legitimate way to approach this subject because we have found it to be lighter in this way.</start_of_turn>
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And so it is necessary, my son, to learn that in this chapter there is more peril and fear than in the first treatise on cauteries, and for this reason it requires greater caution.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	And I warn you that you must not act rashly.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	For out of the recklessness of men come cures.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	if they come from those who have suffered so greatly from their ailment that they move carelessly because of the fear of their disease, and from the greatness of their malice; and of these things we must have fear.</start_of_turn>
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse.	And of these things there are some who will tell you: "Wait, I am ready"; and the disease is odious.</start_of_turn>
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	I tell you only that you must consent to those who come to you who have this manner, but put more great caution in your honor than in your covetousness, and do not be reckless more than wisely in what you know to be true, and what you have learned; and use prognosis and indication in the treatment of your patients so that salvation may be either achieved or averted; and this will help you to acquire great renown, glory, and long-lasting fame.</start_of_turn
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Very dear son, our lords command you to understand and fear, and if you return with a spirit of inspiration from the hand of God, amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selon que ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’à piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.
dou chief plein d’aigue	Or I have ordered this chapter in dividing by chapters, according to what is before or the chapter of cautery, that I have ordered from the chief until the foot, for you will find it more easily what you have to do
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	When this ailment comes from the moistness of the flesh as soon as the child is born, and when the bail is strained too strong the head of the child is struck; and in no way does this come from a response that we do not know of.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And I have never seen such a disease depart from me except in infancy, and with all those that I have seen, the patient always recovered; for this reason it seems to me that it is worth leaving the work in parts for the cures.
Et je vis .i. enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com .ij. nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	And I often saw in infancy the head of the shoulder being dislocated, and the head growing larger every day until it could not be supported; and I thought that the moisture was too great, causing the patient to become limp and faint; and this moisture if it is gathered on the bones above the hip joint, between the thigh and the bone; and the work is such that if the moisture is between the thigh and the bone, and the abscess is small, that you make a wide incision through the head; and it must be as long as this, until the moisture has gone; and when this is done the limb will take its natural shape.
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai .ij. fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is deeper and the abscess is bigger, if you make two incisions like a cross, following this form:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief .iij. fendures selonc ceste maniere:	If moisture swells the bone, and you see the edges of the fracture protruding outwards, and it is painful when you press it with your hand inwards, and this does not subside: if you suspect that the bone is fractured in two places, do this: make two incisions as described in this manner:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	And after the incision, drain out the moisture with all your might.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	Drain the blood clots and pus from the wound, and apply wine and oil, and leave for five days; then remove the dressing, and treat the wound with stitches and ointments, and leave the dressing in place, and give the patient dry meat until the limb is comfortable and healed.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	Another method of incision is to look or open the greater curvature of the abscess, and the collection of fluid; for it never lies before; never behind; never to the right; and never to the left.</start_of_turn>
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides murió dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.
de reume	When the shoulder or the armpit is open, and the injection of liquid, and you do as you please; take care not to cover the artery; and let blood flow freely, so that the patient does not die from excessive bleeding and the evacuation of moisture.
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les .ij. arteres.	When there is no other ailment that is called "catarrh," and there are boils or phlegmas, and the ancient disease does not profit from medical treatment, then the only cure is to cauterize with that which will cover the arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	It is necessary, therefore, to uncover the wound; after that, rub the limb with a rough cloth until the arteries open; then pull out the patient’s head from under the dressing; then look to see if the vein has burst, and if its edges are beyond the ears; and if so, they must be repositioned; then suture the wound, and cauterize one-eighth of an inch from the edge of the vein, until the size of the vein reaches the bone.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com .ij. dois au traver.	If you see, grasp the cautery from below the artery and hold it above, cutting as much as .ij inches deep across the vein at its widest point.</start_of_turn>
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	When the vein is cut, if blood spurts without stopping, continue to hold the cautery above.</start_of_turn>
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	If the artery does not open on examination, if you know that there is space of three fingers, mark the spot and proceed until the bone; and what you must do is pour out six cubic centimeters of blood, or somewhat more or less, according to what the patient can tolerate, and the refill of the artery; then look at the wound: if it remains on the point of the spur, if the edges of the incision do not join, then strain the wound and ligate it, and cure it with oil until it is healed.
de emigrainne	If the artery does not open on feeling, if you must measure the quantity of the space of two fingers' breadth, then mark it and keep it until bone; and whatever else must be done if the patient can endure, and the filling of the artery; then look at the wound: if it remains on the point of the synostosis, if the handle of the stitches does not suffice, then strain the wound and bind it, and treat it until it is healed.
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When ancient dropsy comes, and acute catarrh, because of the moisture of tears and the choleric humours in temples and the ancient sode are loosened and similar things, and it is treated by methods of medical treatment and all that does not profit, if we extract the arteries of the temples and cauterize them, as we have said.</start_of_turn>
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	And thus the method of extracting them [arrows] is that if the patient makes a rear movement of the hair of his temples, and understands the artery which opens in the temple, for it opens well with its beating, and is returned forcefully more than in certain men who are too cold; and if it is returned, the patient must hold his head still from some bandage, then wipe the limb of any rough hair, and rise the limb of warm water until the artery appears to open continuously; then take the sponge.
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	Then strip the skin lightly until you reach the artery, then bring it up with forceps, and withdraw the surrounding tissues that are below the chest; and if the artery is tense, if the vein has a bulge at the shoulder, then close that part according to the quantity of two fingers.</start_of_turn>
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	For if it is not firmly grasped, if I do not leap upon it without doubt in all things.
Et trai dou sanc des .vj. c/, jusc’a .iij.; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en .ij. leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les .ij. liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	Then draw out blood from the veins for two ounces, and if the artery is large, it is advisable to tie it down with two strong threads of silk, so that no blood will be seen before the wound is sutured; and draw out the surplus that is between the two sutures in the middle, and if you see, burn with a cautery needle until the arrows are cut off; this is the best remedy, if the patient has no fever and is of warm complexion.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	For the fire cautery is helpful in finishing off moisture: for this reason it is more helpful for moisture.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de .ij. pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	For it is recommended to extract the arteries with great care, filling the body with much cotton and placing over it well-made bandages; and when you remove them, if you have cured them with dry medicines that cause the hair to grow and bandages, as long as they are healthy; and if you do not take care of the artery in this way, if you hurry to cover it with the cautery, or if you use too much of the caustic, you will stain your hand; and if you do not have this, if you must remove the limb, you must do so while the limb is still warm, and raise the limb with cold water until it stops bleeding, and strain it as necessary; and what is more gentle and lighter in the extraction of the artery is to cauterize the vein of this cautery, cutting off about one-eighth of an inch, but the cutting must be well-spaced to prevent it from lasting too long.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the instrument is too tense, it holds less heat.
Et doit avoir entre les .ij. coutelz .i. doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les .ij. leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en .ij. leus; et soient esloigniet entre les .ij. chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	The fire cautery must have between the.ij. nails. The.i. must have great space. Then when you have signed with the.ij. nails, and you must let the fire burn up until it reaches the bone, and press the wound in.ij. nails; and let them be separated between the.ij. bones because they are not soldered by this cautery in any way. And this is the form of the cautery.
des larmes	The fire cautery must have between the nails. The nails must have great space. Then when you have signed with the nails, and you must let the fire burn up until it reaches the bone, and press the wound in nails; and let them be separated between the bones because they are not soldered by this cautery in any way. And this is the form of the cautery.
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When the tears of the eyes are descending from the veins that are above the test of the head of the sufferer, and it does not profit any medical cure of what is being done, and you see the face of the patient become swollen, and feels pain in walking if like from fear; and if there are threads and moisture if some papers are wet, and they are soiled by the tears, and scorched by the heat of the tears, if there is need of this cure.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins; et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	For it is called the old 'contusion', and you must make the patient who has this disease let the hair grow long over the wound, then make three incisions or an even front as long as the front; and let one of the incisions be as thick as two teeth down to the root, and the other two as thick as two ribs by the edges of the wound; and keep away from the incisions of the arteries that are as two ribs by the edges of the wound; and hold your hand from the continuation of the two mandibles, and if there is a wound of any kind, let the amount be three teeth through the joint; and put a piece of sponge and cloth over the wound to absorb the blood, then tighten the ligature with two parts of cord which is the form:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les .ij. fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	from the incision which is over the temple until the second incision; and squeeze out all the marrow that is between the two incisions towards the surface of the bone, and then do the rest of the wound until the other second, and then withdraw this bandage.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	If in the first fissure the instrument which is called "cultellaire", and is very well-trenched on one side, and on the other side is soft, not well-trenched, that is the form.
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	And place the cutting edge of the saw towards the cartilage at the shoulder, and the cutting edge of the saw towards the bone, and leave it there until it reaches the middle fracture line.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And cut through the veins that descend from the head as far as the incision is continuous until it reaches the shoulder, and then finish by making the incision in the middle fracture line until the other side; then draw out the blood equally, and express the wound for the blood taken; then put into the wound a piece of cotton lint, and cover with wet cloths soaked in wine and oil and herbs, and keep that the incisions do not move; and after three days remove the dressing, and put in great plants of stinging nettle, and treat with basilic ointment with rosemary oil, and other treatments which are used for wounds, until they are healed.
dou reume des eulz	because of recurrent bleeding
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	When no sudden burning arises usually, and you see the eyes tense and small, and the face pale; and the hair snaps, and where formerly there was no pain, now there is acute pain, and the patient expels; then these matters and the burning arise from many veins, and the wound that results from this is severe, if this be the cause.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	And commandest thou the patient to return his front, then make a great fissure at the middle of the front, and another deep enough Ipoc.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	And commandest thou the patient to return his front, then make a great fissure at the middle of the front, and another deep enough Ipoc. Begin from the left temple to the right temple, and be sure the incision reaches the bone; and hold your hand away from the nerves of the temples that move toward the cheek; and when the bone is uncovered, evacuate all the blood with a sponge, and then drain between the two layers of the fissure and put in cotton wool, and try to hold it in place; then lay over soaked bandages in wine and oil, and keep it from moving; when it is set, be sure to rub the bone until it begins to grow, and then treat it with drying agents, which cause it to harden.
En teil maniere: pren .ij. parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine .iiij. parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In part: take three parts of barley flower and three parts of colophony, and make into a poultice; and apply it to these wounds to absorb moisture for all.</start_of_turn>
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the swelling of the ears
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des .iiij. choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	Whatever is causing the swelling of the ears is one of three things: grains, or pus, or a stone or some other foreign body; or semen, as in boils, beans, peas; or a discharge as in inflammation and pain, and other things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	When he complains of pain in the ear or any other part that does not fit with the ear, do not believe him; put the ear to the sun.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus.	If you see the ear, if no drops of violet oil or sesame oil distill, then order extraction; and make him spit out the contents, and wipe his nostrils when he spits, and put in the ear pieces of cloth or wool; and hold the ear up
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	Many times comes forth by this cure; and if it does not come forth, order extraction as subtle as possible, for this is the form:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If the stone comes out by itself, that is good; if not, you must remove it with a fine needle of double curve; and if it does not come out by this means, take a clove of garlic and place its head over the hole or break the ear very badly, and stop up the hole with wax so that it cannot enter with the needle; then the pain will go away, for often it comes out by itself as we have said; and if it does not come out in this way, take hold of the bone with your hand and put no other instrument that can cause damage, and put a little cotton around; then press the bone against the stone or whatever it is, and the pain will go away.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If these things do not suffice, if you are in a hurry to make the incision, do not hesitate to perform the chalazion on the vein and the eardrum; and the spasm. If you make the incision first of all, you must take the pulse of the patient and discharge blood in accordance with its virtue. Then seat the patient between your hands and turn the ear downwards, and make a small incision at the root of the ear, at the fatty or glandular tissue underneath; and make the incision as wide as a moon, until you reach the bone, and the bone according to your desire, and suck the blood away immediately from your mouth.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre .i. spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	If the grains are swollen and painful, administer extraction; if it will not go away, give an injection of sponge-rubber according to this form:
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	and order incision of that grain.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	But do not do this until you think the grains are moistened by the moisture of the ear, until you have made many incisions; then extract as subtly as possible and with sucking, as we have said, so that the extraction is aligned
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	When the ear aches, it is necessary that the patient use a compress first, and fill the ear with plenty of cotton.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	And if there is no pain in that ear itself or the pain is not there.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	If the ear is pulled out for this, that is good
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	If this does not happen, take many pins according to the length of your fingernail must hold and lean, and push them with a hand towards the fire; and put the patient one or two fingers from his ear, and pull from the other side of the ear; and pierce with another finger on the side of the ear which is in the ear; and do not stop doing this until the pain is completely gone, and when it has gone, if you see, take an inch, and hold one of the joints in the ear, and the other joint grasp with fire as long as the pain is not completely gone; then do the rest of the fingers until the pain is completely gone, as we have said concerning the stone.</start_of_turn>
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	In the extraction of the tooth, if it is of small root, as with a flea and similar things, cure it as we have said in the division; but if it is of great root we must feel it, if there is danger of extraction of teeth; and that is the lightest thing to remove that is in the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	In the extraction of worms from the ear, when you have cured as we have said in the division or when treating distillations, and the cure does not help, if you must, look at the ear in the sun: if there are no worms visible, if you find only superficial wounds, and if there are none, take the tweezers which are like this:
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	And let the dressing be wide and loose.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	And let the dressing be wide and loose. And if the pain of the patient is great, put more salve on the ear, until you see it all go away. Do this often until you see that it has gone away.</start_of_turn>
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And if it does not go away, if I put a stopper in the cotton wool as I have said concerning the stone; and if it does not come out as we have said, give distillations that the ancient ones have proved useful in the cutting of worms, and you will find them or treat them with distillations; and if you distill your oils and medicines into the ear with all these instruments, as you see.</start_of_turn
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a .i. petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a .i. estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren .i. raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations .i. poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And be it of silver or gold, be the sores about the ear. That is, small losses, and about the over for distilling; and for pressing within the distillation be a well-made instrument of gold, and if you see take a scraper and wrap round the point immediately cotton; then pour out your oil or juice, and what you see of your medicines in the caning, and the caning be in the ear; then put back the scraper to all the cotton, and press your hand gently until the oil is distilled or until the ear is numb; and that the patient feel the medicines within, and that the distillation be not too cold, for the medicine will not be so good.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the swelling of the ears
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient .i. poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born without some imperfection in their ears; and the same thing happens as adults in the case of wound infection or earwax buildup. These stampings never come to an end in the ear if one cannot see them; and never is there any sign of their having departed, although one can see them well.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	Whenever they come to an end in the ear, if one cannot see them, it is a sign of serious illness in various conditions. In this case it is seen that one must put the painful ear in the sunlight; look inside: if you see the pus clearly, if the matter has all this spittle, that is its shape:
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	And either the front or the back of the ear, if it does not bleed, if the pus is of earwax or a horn of the ear, if you see little scratches, and the tumor is easily lifted, as long as the tumor is entirely bony.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	And if the ear is affected by swelling, take a mild scraper and burnish it with a little fire, then put on or bandage the ear.</start_of_turn
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	If you feel the prickling sensation which the patient feels at the ear, prick lightly, and keep your fingers away from the ear; then place in the ear a plug according to the size of the opening, and pour in a little unguent Egyptian.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Do not do anything until the wound is healed; take a sponge and moisten it with rosewater, and sprinkle it with ground vitriol; and if you see the ear bursting, since you must remove the sponge and insert another sponge soaked in oil of roses and beeswax, until the swelling is bony; then treat it until it is healed
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	If blood vessels burst, immerse a sponge and wet it with cold water, and place it on the ear, and use other treatments that can stop the bleeding of blood vessels that are bursting or that have burst.
de la char des papieres	De la char des papieres.
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	This is the beginning of the text, which continues: "This is the reason why comes out of paper things from the eyes when they are moist and are dry, so it is convenient that you extend them with nails and pincers, and put out a piece of sponge of its roots; then pull out the vitriol juice which is thick."
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And if without that, if the cautery is done with the lenticular sponge, and after the incision is worth moving; and often repeated, can neither thing remain from their root; and when they are cauterized by fire, if they are burned those roots and do not return anymore.
de la gresle	De la gresle.
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	Many times come in paper scraps of things that seem to glitter in their form and in their hardness, and for this reason this disease is called "granulation", and is an accumulation of large moisture in the substance of the skin and bones; the work is like this: take hold of the wart if it moves from one side to the other, and it is a light thing to know; then do as follows: make the opening wide, then gently burn away the outer part, then take hold as with tweezers, and close.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	If you do not cover the wound with a covering, if it does not grieve the patient; and if the opening is large, if the collection has a bulge, and cure until it is healed; and if it is small, do not use force, for the moisture will restore itself soon and cause swelling
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	And if the grancline descends into the ear towards the upper part, if you reverse the papere, and pull out the grancline with a grip, and press from one side and the other; and if the papere is slipped by the incision, this will not grieve; and when the grancline is grasped, if you leave the dirty oil, cure the limb of what it causes harm until the patient is healed.
de la graisse des eulz	of the fat of the hair.
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	The oil of Exinach is enclosed in papers of paper mulberry, and this happens more in those who have no nails, and grieve much at their eyes; and they come to a catharsis in the mornings, and cannot look at the light of the sun for that the tears hurry to their eyes; and for that they lie down with their faces downwards, and sleep upon it, and their papers are moistened about their beards as they swell and appear covered with the exinach which appears in the oil.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	And when you press the limb to your chest and feel the exinach between them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren .i. drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	And the manner of the work is that the patient puts his head in order; and then take one bandage of linen, and make a circle about the quantity of exinach from the buttocks, and put it on; and press on the thighs from one side and the other, so that the exinach is gathered into the circle; then make an incision in the middle of the moisture at the tip of the thumb, and do not make it any larger than the wound made to the vein; and make the skin firm until you see that the exinach is gone; and in many cases comes exinach from the incision, according to the shape of a white fat piece.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Extract the fatty tumor from all a piece of chalk between your thighs at the base of the thumb, and turn your hand to the right and left as much as possible; and keep that you do not touch the incision, that you do not go beyond the thumb until the oil, that you do not bleed.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	If the shoulder dislocation does not open at the beginning of the fissure, if you add a little pressure to the fissure it will open; then take out the dislocation as we said before, and moisten the bandage in oil and water, and put it back in place, and strain well.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	And if in such houses where they rub and put on the ground to corrupt that moisture which remains immobile
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat it until it is healed
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it comes to the wound being deep, if the treatment of closing wounds is applied as long as it is healthy.
des poilz des papieres	hair of paper
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc .iiij. manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When paper is born with hair attached other than its natural state, and is covered with dust, if it prick at the eyes, it makes tears come, and causes various ailments like customary weeping and softening of paper and gum, as well as the destruction of the eyes; and the cure for this is in three ways: either by entire fire cautery, or by water medicine as it is before or alongside fire cautery, or by incision and stitching or by sutures, as I will say.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai .i. fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai .i. fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	You must put the patient’s hand on your left; then push the paper from the oil towards your left hand; if it has moved, it is good; if not, if there is a needle at all times of the thread below; either cut the margin of the paper or the hair will grow out from these hairs; take one thread at the base of the paper and push it to the end; then pull out from the lower part of the paper, remove the hair attached, from the whole surrounding area, from the great tear until the small one; then pull out one thread and put under the paper a small patch of cotton and bandage, then sign on the paper like a thrush, as for the thrush of ivy, and it is understood that the sign should be according to the quantity that you see that the paper that is assigned to you is elevated.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor; et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	If the wound is deep, if the treatment of closing wounds is applied as long as it is healthy. And if there is much bleeding at the root of the wound, hold the edges apart for two lines as you have marked, and from the great margin downwards to a small distance; and let one of the sutures be at the base of the hairs of the natural thickness in the thickness of an almond, then pass the suture through one of the two angles of the wound, then pull it tight; then gather the two layers together with a stitch of fine thread, and dry the blood, remove the surplus of thread from the two edges at all edges where there is anything sticky, as you see to do; and if this does not suffice, if there is no other remedy, leave the suture and the thread for three days or four. Then cure the wound with sutures of dry and constricting things, for the blood will return to its place at the bottom of the wound and the gathering of it, but the suture is stiff (as they say of the old ones), and this is laborious; and if there is another way: and let you mark the wound with a figure which is as large as the head of a berry, as we have said, at three nails distance as is this:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	Then apply what is above the small forces equally according to the form which is mentioned above.
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans; et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	And if you are unable to hold the teeth firmly, and the thing is not quite right, take a needle or two and pass one loop around the figure; and pass another loop loosely around the great loop, and the second loop loosely around the small loop, and assemble between your two thumbs the two loops equally; then keep your hand equally, and keep all the surrounding skin as taut as you have signed, as we have recounted; then assemble the two layers of the wound with sutures, and cure until it is healed; and if the abscess comes to your incision, if you apply cerate and other soothing ointments. Never again shall the hair of the patient be converted: if you use what we have said concerning the incision; but the sutures in one and the other are more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai .ij. caines par art, et .ij. liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as .ij. chiés de .ij. pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les .ij. cainnes des .ij. parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	The cure for boils is as follows: convert the papillae and the hair downwards as I have said, then make two incisions by art, and two sutures as long as the papillae and as wide as a mustard seed; and take two threads of two parts or hold the threads; then assemble the one and the other securely over what rests on the papillae of fat, and strain the two incisions of two parts together; and leave it so for several days, and the leather which has been strained will dry and become brittle and will peel, until it comes loose by itself.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	If it is late, if the abscess has great force, then cure until it is healed; and when the wound has healed, and if the abscess has burst, and will not bleed again; and this is the form of two nails that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of length and width:
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute .i. fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse .i. autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	The works are such that you grasp a subtle needle, and there is.i. a silken thread of silk and subtle; then join the heads and do not let one touch the other subtly, and let the length of the threads be equal to a palm; then order in the chase.i. another subtle thread of silk briefly, and do not tighten the chief of the thread; then put the patient’s chief in his place; and let the sun go if the works are declared, for it is a subtle and small work, then take out the needle throughout the chase at the root of the hair growth, and make it pierce in the papillary area as much as you can until you have pulled it out as much as the natural hair; then draw out the hair until the vein is completely out throughout the chase with the natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne .i. poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	If the chase is treated and the hair does not come out with it, if you draw out the chase to the end of the thread that you have ordered, until the chase vein comes out from the hole and you see it through the sight of the oil; then if you draw out the chase and the thread, close the oil and leave it closed for two days or three, until the hair has healed in its place and the burden has gone; and if the hair is small, if you accompany.i. long hair of the natural kind, and be gone with that or leave it, as long as it is elongated and then let it go.
de la porriture de l’oil	from the stink of the oil
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	When this disease which is called "aleacrati" or the coming forth of worms appears in oil, if there are two methods: one natural, and the other unnatural.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	And there follows from wound, or from a cut or burn, and from similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	The way of working in this is that you close the wound, dry the flesh, put in linen bands, and keep it until it is healed; and do not use anything except for things that dry and restrain
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	For if you do this, the disease will be worse than before; but it is useful to apply softening things, such as fennel; and mustard or alum and flaxseed boiled in any oil, and it covers a bandage, and treats this
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the treasure of your treatment is that you must take care that it does not solidify too much like before; and these works that we have said are not fierce except for addressing this disease, that they do not return like before.</start_of_turn>
de la char qui vient en l’oil	De la char qui vient en l’oil.
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	This disease which is caused by moisture is called "axacrati", and is natural and accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	The accident comes from wounds and cuts and burnings and things of that kind; and the way of working in this is if you grasp an awl, because it has two needles, and the point in the flesh, and it makes burst the left earwax as much as it can, so that the needles break in two at the root of the ear; then the flesh is above all the awl, and the head has one large swelling.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the head of the bone returns as it should, that is good; if not, take an awl and put it into the incision, and twist the bone, make two incisions or break two parts of the bone; and if there are two incisions from two angles of the incision that you made, or make an angle so that when they are assembled, the figure is as if it were the letter which has not "I big teeth"; then fix that bone according to the quantity of its costs and moisture, of that which teaches the bone, then join the two separated parts, and bind them with a thread of silk; then cure this according to what we have said of the mollifying medicines and bandages, until it is healed
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les .ij. leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	And if the disease comes from a fracture or a sprain or from cautery, if it be necessary, make a full incision around the hairs of paper; then separate between the two layers of skin with a needle as I have said; and must be done according to the form of the disease, for it is diverse in form, and the wise men appear to know well of everything that can be done to restore the limb to its natural shape; and the patients themselves, according to what is done of work and of instruments in many cases.
dou soudement de la papiere	And if the disease comes from a fracture or a sprain or from cautery, if it be necessary, make a full incision around the hairs of paper; then separate between the two layers of skin with a needle as I have said; and must be done according to the form of the disease, for it is diverse in form, and the wise men appear to know well of everything that can be done to restore the limb to its natural shape; and the patients themselves, according to what is done of work and of instruments in many cases.
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if this sprain has happened with the arm at home in such a way that the limb below is soothed with oil, and cannot move or do its natural works, if it be necessary, then you must bite the tip of a scraper from the bone of the limb, and hold it high; and extend as far as you can without causing pain, as much as the patient can bear, for the sprain is too tight and the oil is not enough; and your incision, which you have made to gather that which is together, must be slight, so that the limb returns to its natural shape; and all that is together must be bound up, and no more salt water should be put on it, but rather fresh water and oil; then put between the limb and the oil a pad of lint, and put on top of the oil coarse wool in abundance; and after that put on a bandage and other things as necessary until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
de l’ungle de l’oil	From the root of the oil-pine.
Saiches que li ungle est selonc .ij. manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a .i. dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	The nails of the pine are two kinds: one is nervous and appears like hard resin, and the other is not nervous but appears like white moisture frozen; when touched with iron and boiled, it does not burn; both seem to swell towards the greater marrow, and grow so much that they cover the eye, the light, and the movement of the oil.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met .i. poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et .i. fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	And as for the incision, if the patient places his hand in its sound position, then open the eyes; then take the palm of your hand and with your thumb grasp the nail at the base, and pull it out; then take a needle, and put in one hair of horse, or feather, or beef, and a strong thread; and double the point of the needle once and fix it firmly to the nail, and pierce through all the needle, and tie the nail with a thread and pull it out, and support all around the nail the cost of the nail which includes the pulp and the dentin until the root of the marrow, and leave the remaining part in the natural position or marrow, if there is no discharge of tears from the incision as is usually the case; and in no way should the nail be stretched only with the needle and thread, as we have said; then support all around the nail the surrounding tissue to give it this shape:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	And keep that the spatula does not touch the fatty substance and break it, and that the needle does not pierce; and after the incision, pour in oil a little ball of bruised salve, and place a bandage around it, and leave it until the other side; then cure what is necessary until it is healed.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And if the nail is not nervous, and you cannot push the needle, and the thread will not pass, many times this semblance of nail is cured; and as I have said in the division, if you see it covered, if you pour oil on the patient, and take the spatula lightly according to this shape:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	And remove the nail silently, and if you see that it has diminished point and you press it down, if the distillation comes from your mouth into the oil bandage made of litargire and red salve and bruised oil, and stamp the oil until the other side; then repeat the other work according to this same work, until it is entirely healed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing opposes you, like an abscess, then milk; first treat the abscess thoroughly until it is healed, and then resume the work as before, until it is healed.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if during the oil bath there appears dark blood at the surface, if you suspend it with alum, and extract a portion but not all, that blood does not reappear; then distil in the red oil of poppies which is made from litharge.</start_of_turn>
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	from the seed that grows on the plum.
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre; et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	The hairs grow long and even; if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	However, you must know that you must nourish the cure with a weak oil from the natural way; and from the accidental way, in the work of iron; and do not stain your hand in any of these works until you see that this limb is suffering from that work.
des voines des eulz	Des voines des eulz.
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	The skin is red and covered in oil, and endures the heat of the sun without burning or spoiling the oil for many days.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	The master must first look at the oil when it is placed on the wound; for indeed, in this case, it is strong and there is no other disease more fierce than this; therefore the master must proceed cautiously: instruct the patient to put his head in his comfort, then suspend the veins entirely as he pleases, and if necessary double the stitches according to this fashion.
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en .i. cors selonc ceste forme:	And be doubled in number by degrees in one inch according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	And keep that there are no blood clots remaining in the oil; and let the patient spit furiously during his work so that you can remove those veins from the oil; and keep that you do not stain the oil with the tips of the spatulas, and do this work at midday before the sun, and be very thirsty during your work if you do not feel faint from those veins; and when you have done this, if you distil in the oil a green and red coliere to corrupt what is remaining doubtful.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	If you are unable to grasp all of the things in this hour, make an embalmment over oil of soothing things to ease the pain of the eyes, and leave them thus until the pain has subsided and is secured with a hot compress; and then resume in the same manner as before until they are healed; and this is the form of the forces.
de la fistule de l’oil	If you are unable to grasp all of the things in this hour, make an embalmment over oil of soothing things to ease the pain of the eyes, and leave them thus until the pain has subsided and is secured with a hot compress; and then resume in the same manner as before until they are healed; and this is the form of the forces.</start_of_turn>
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	If you name it "arissati" fistula: when you cure it with cautery and medicine with burning water as I have said before, and it is not completely healed, if there is anything remaining on the abscess, let it measure, and drain away all the moisture, until the bone is uncovered.</start_of_turn
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a .i. chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bone is fractured, and you see the corruption and blackness, if the limb has all the signs of this form; it is called an "aspre chief," and is made of tough bone like that of a nail, and is pointed like a lime when it is in this form.
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And put upon the limb the fractured bone, then twist it between your two hands, and press your hand until you feel that the corruption is gone; do this once, and then restore the limb with drying medicines.</start_of_turn>
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	If the limb is swollen and there is swelling at the base of the bow, and the swelling persists for forty days, and does not abate and is not relieved by the incision, and there is no other remedy than to open the fistula at its source, as follows: uncover the bone for the second time with iron, and with sharp medicines; and when you have discovered it take hold of the limb according to this fashion, and keep the iron at an angle of three, and the swelling should be reduced until it reaches the head as you see here.
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	Then put your thumb on the bone below the elbow, and wipe your hand with oil, then pull your hand back until it breaks the bone and the patient feels it through what comes from under his arm if he keeps his hand on his elbow; and since restore the dry medicine, as I have taught you, and when the wound comes and endures, if there is anything at the elbow; if it is a lighter matter for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	Then place your thumb on the bone below the elbow, and move your hand away from the oil. Then pull your forearm back until it pierces the bone and the patient feels it through what comes out from under the thumb if he keeps his hand on his elbow. Then restore the dry medicine, as I have taught you, and when the scab has formed and hardened, if there is matter in the elbow; if it is a less serious matter for the patient.
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil .i. liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en .iiij., et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the limb appears to swell up for all of a sudden, and there is no swelling or pain, if you tie up the patient; then wait a while, and then apply a bandage or dressing in a counterclockwise direction to draw out the wound, and then put on olive oil seasoned with acacia, aloe, incense, and ochre, and then strain the oil, and put it on strips of linen and cloth; and keep the cloth in place if you take cloth enough soft, and two layers of gauze in three, and then put one on top of the other according to the quantity of wound there is to mix; then strain by means of a bandage that is firm in shape, and resume the dressing in a clockwise direction to draw out the wound; then hold the dressing and let the oil drain for a while and night, and if the swelling subsides, if you remove it by mouth; then support the limb after the swelling and the nut, and if you see the oil returning, that is good; if not, continue the dressing and the cloth and the limb and the dressing until it is healed.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	Dou derrompement de toile uvee.
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com .i. grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait .i. fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When the dislocation comes in the shoulder joint, and it is dislocated, and comes forth with papers like grains of resin, and is expected to be seen; then if you see it covered, the work is like biting a thorn into the root of the limb up to this very bone, and then biting another thorn or there is a double thread of the limb; and you make it pierce, and leave the first thorn as it lies; then you grasp the double thread and tie a part of the limb around, and strain it well, then take out the thorn and put on oil soaked in lint in abundance; and leave it until the thread is severed with the limb, and cure the oil of comforting things until the wound is healed; and never restrain the wound with the limb bandaged from one circle to the other until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the blood is discharged with great appearance, if you pierce at the fatty substance which comes out with the oil, and correct the moist vaporous liquid and draw out the blood, and put in between so much; then take it out as soon as it is healed.</start_of_turn>
de la bowe de l’oil	De la bowe de l’oil.
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	This ailment called "alcunnati" is not fierce but appears like a descending water, and it is not water; and the manner in which it appears is that you make the patient sit on the apparent and straight chair, then take hold of the head between your hands two parts, and move it until you see the swelling coming down towards your eyes; then either bind it tightly or do not descend and break the light, and see the patient the things as he alone would see them; and if it does not descend from below, apply a poultice that it is as if it were water, and when it descends from the swelling it does not appear as we have said.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If you make the patient sit between your hands, then take the sponge and put it on the corn of the eye [iris] by the continuation of the conjunctiva with the cornea, as long as the eye is closed; and when it comes out, distillate in hot aqua vitae mixed with honey, or vinegar or fenugreek is boiled and honey, then let the eye be healed by some other cure until it is healed.
des aigues de l’oil	from the oil bowl.
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit.	We have seen signs of inflammation in division [of the eye], and this is what we must perceive; if in this matter we must adhere to the rules of health.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	It is necessary that you make the patient sit between your crossed hands, protect the eye from the sun, and apply warm oil; then put the bandage over the eye that is on your left hand if the pupil is on the left, or on your right hand if the pupil is on the right; then take in your right hand, if the pupil is on the left, the instrument which is called the almond, or in your left hand if the pupil is on the right; then put the point of the instrument under the cornea by the thickness of a hair in the corner of the eye that is full of oil, and press the instrument called the almond thoroughly, and restore your hand until it breaks through the oil, and feel that the almond has come to the empty space; and it is necessary that the measure of the almond be equal to the measure of the space from the pupil to the end of the black. This is the cornea of the oil; if you see the bone in that bandage because of the clarity of the cornea, and then put the instrument until it is level or until the water is, and press the socket after each time.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	If the pain increases now, if he sees the patient in front of him and the instrument in his eye.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	After a little rest, if the pain returns on the second side, put the force with the instrument, and when it is firmly fixed and does not rise, if it is an abscess, press gently around your hand and hand; and then put in a little of the salve again, and remove the oil from within.</start_of_turn>
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	Then put out the greasy oil with lint or cloth soaked in rose oil and plenty of eggs, and bind with the good oil.</start_of_turn
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	Yes, and those who are of our friends, put on a coarse broth with plenty of eggs.</start_of_turn>
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if the almagda does not want to enter the oil because there are too many hairs that have grown too long, it is necessary that you take the instrument which is called “alberit,” which is like this in shape:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	And pierce only the conjunctiva slightly, and do not poke too deep, but do it skillfully, then put in an abscess, as we have said; and when the work is finished, the patient will awake with his head resting on his back in the dark; and let him have no movement, and give him light food, and do not move his head to the right or left, and bind as he pleases until the seventh day; then take him out of this house into the fresh air, and ask him what he sees, and then bring him back and bind him again until the seventh day; and do not do anything else in the meantime, except for the time of treatment or after the incision now, but make sure to nourish him, because his pain will increase greatly.</start_of_turn>
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	Leave the hairs long and even; if they prick at their root, keep the eyes still until they grow.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	And then is he gone out of the house and out of the house, and he turns into his case; and let no disciple interfere in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And one came to us from Yrach who said that in their peace they often saw the almond tree bloom before the leaf appears, but we have never seen or read of such a thing in our land or in the books of the ancients; and it is a new thing to us.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And these are the signs of the forms of an almond, for those who do not know them, and be like spiders properly:
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en .iij. angles ague.	And be like the tops of these almonds with the same subtlety, and the back in two angles like a bow.
de la char sor le neis	From the shoulder socket to the hand.
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	Never are born or eaten various hairs, for there are some that seem like scorpions at the mouth of bones; and if there are such or if there is hair entangled with dog's dung color, or if there is hair of bone color.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	In those days when these hairs which are soured, and do not entangle, you must make the patient sit between your hands facing the sun; and cover his nose, and vomit the urine from those hairs, and pull them out; for it will be clear that what you support with your thumb will become swollen from the sharp of those hairs until you know that the hair is entirely bony
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout .i. des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	If nothing remains to be done, if you have already grasped all of the subtle instruments, if nothing remains; and if without your sleep being disturbed, or by incision or dressing, if the pain persists as it should; and if it is a malignant abscess, hasten and cauterize it as soon as possible, until all the pus has drained out and the surrounding tissue is firm. Then evacuate or drain it immediately and with ease or with wine.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	If he does not move, and moisture comes up to his throat, saliva which is healthy; and if moisture does not pierce as it should, saliva which is in the teeth above, because the instruments do not come down to the root: then it must be that you drink one thick thread of linen and hold the hands together, and leave between each knot no space at all or less; and put the patient’s chin over the thread at the front and treat with odor until it comes through the mouth; and many times they do this to the children, and it is a light thing for one who has seen it done; then keep the head which comes through the hand to one hand, and the other head which comes through the mouth to the other hand, and join the one after the other as we are or as they are.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait .i. mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	And whether of silver or gold, resembling a large lamp, if like a cautery sponge, and guide accordingly; and if you see, make a closed cautery sponge, and keep the instruments flat to evacuate the head; and have one hand on the chief to hold it when we burn the oil or no liquid.
de la char sor le neis	From the shoulder socket to the hand.
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	Many times there arises at the head of the arm a disease which is called "telul", and it grows and becomes great almost as soon as it is seen; and for this reason it is necessary to begin treatment at the outset, and to break the bone thoroughly, then to apply the cautery or burning medicine; and if it is delayed, if it is hard, of dark color, and without sensation: if you do not touch it with iron, for it is a very painful abscess, for when it is treated once, there follows great harm to the patient; and if the abscess is of soft touch, not of dark color, and you can see that it can be completely treated, if the patient is emptied and treated with soothing and restraining things.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	when the arm is cut and bound
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	Do as much as you can until you perceive that the wound has healed, then draw out the thread, wipe the blood, and moisten the thread with Egyptian balsam, and reinsert it as before; do this for three days or more, until the wound has corroded everything that remains of the tissue; and then put in or withdraw a sponge clamp for several days until it is healed, and if there is need for sedative medicines, use them. This is the form of the instrument for purging the head, from which oils and medicines or the like are distilled.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it happens for no reason, if you see that the wound is fresh throughout its extent; then immediately join the two layers to a support, and cure until it is healed. And if the layers are already separated from one end to the other, if you must pull out all the parts from their root until they bleed, then reassemble the two layers to a support, and tighten, and sprinkle over the powder dragon’s blood, and incense broiled; and put upon the powders a piece of packing of strong or another packing that adheres, and leave it until it bleeds by itself, then cure until it is healed.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The manner of making the bandage is that you assemble the solution: or with needles, as we have said in the bandage of the belly; or with thread, as I have told you.
des apostemes des levres	abscesses of fingers
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	At home on the hands there are often thick and tough nails, sometimes like grains of wheat, minor and greater; therefore, it is right that you turn the nails, and make incisions on each nail, and grasp them with tweezers and hold them in the center; then use the lancet afterwards to break the blisters, as long as they are not stained; and then take away the pus easily, and cure the hand of dry things until it is healed.
de la char des gencives	From the teeth there is often thick and tough nails, sometimes like grains of wheat, minor and greater; therefore, it is right that you turn the nails, and make incisions on each nail, and grasp them with tweezers and hold them in the center; then use the lancet afterwards to break the blisters, as long as they are not stained; and then take away the pus easily, and cure the hand of dry things until it is healed.
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Many times it happens that on the teeth there are thick nails of garlic that the old people call "albulus"; if you support it, grasp the root and leave the socket or blood clot alone; then take out the broken tooth, or other powdery astringents and drying agents; and if the tooth comes back after the incision, and happens many times, if you grasp it a second time, and cauterize it: if it does not come back after the cautery; these are the forms of the instruments for covering.
des sordens	Des sordens.
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	When teeth are once united at the root, within the mouth between the gums, which are white and rough; never are the teeth black and yellow and curved, until the decay comes to the gum, and they are biting; if you make the patient sit between your hands, and his arms are by his side, and open the teeth or the gums, until nothing remains; and do thou make black and green, and yellow and other spots, until they are cleansed; and if that which is at the first sign is broken off, that is good; if that is not the case, if thou recommencest to repeat the second and third time, until thou hast done all; and teeth that have mixed with various forms of instruments to remove them, according to what the work demonstrates, because the retractors which we use to drive out the teeth have other forms than those which we use between the teeth; and these forms and others are seen with thee.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	It is necessary when you cure the tooth of its pain to wait a while before retracting too much, because this must not make me do it; for it is a viscous substance so that we have no excuse for leaving it
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	Therefore, when the patient is forced to bear pain, if you must be certain that they will endure it.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	Many times the patient complains of pain, and you must know if it is acute or chronic, and make the patient bear the pain of the limb; and although he does not suffer from the pain at this time, because of the illness, for we have already wished to do this to these scoundrels; and when you are well certain that he will endure it, if you must pull out the tooth at all costs, then grasp the tooth firmly with strong forceps from the first socket and the second socket, until it is well loosened, then secure them well; and let the patient keep his limb between your knees, and hold it firmly so that it does not move
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	After that, draw the tooth straight out with a broken beak; if it does not protrude, seize none of these instruments and pull it out from the softer part nearby, and move it as you did before.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	And if the pulp is pierced and bruised, if you can, cover it with cloths, or remove it; and if you strain it cautiously with pincers, do not break it while straining; and you must gently bite over the gum next to the tooth.</start_of_turn>
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	Take care that you do not break it, and leave some behind, and return to the patient with the greater pain of the first.</start_of_turn
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	Beware that you do not act carelessly like the ignorant layman, who break the jaw many times without any result, and bring no remedy for what we have told you; but they bring about many times by the biting of these great diseases from the roots that remain, or from the jaw that they break, as we have often seen; and when the pulp is torn, wash the blood of wine or vinegar and oil; and if blood comes again, which often happens, apply the broth of vitriol burnt; and if that does not suffice, cauterize.</start_of_turn
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The forms of instruments, so that they may remain silent at first, shall have long points and large handles, so that they do not double when you draw the tooth; these are the forms:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And let them be of great size so that they do not bend when you draw, and be made of good iron, and have teeth to hold them in place.</start_of_turn>
de la racine des dens	From the root of the tooth.
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou ij.,	When the root remains at the back, if you know that you must put out the wet cotton ball inside or outside,
tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	When the limb is limp, since the teeth are loosened which are called "algefri," for in this case the head of the shoulder appears like a beak of a vulture; and they must be made as with a file and this is the form:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not yield to all these tensions, if you know that you must uncover the bark entirely surrounding the root, and put in the instrument which is called the «althali», which is to say a pair of pliers, for this is its form.
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	And be strong and forceful if it does not break me, and if the root jumps by this, it is good; if not, if you aid with all your tools, for the shapes will come afterwards:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait .ij. rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you use this instrument which has teeth, for this is its form
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	And other instruments which are before in the reason of the density, and of this instrument which appears like a great clamp, of which this is the shape:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	And other instruments which are before in the reason of the density, and of this instrument which appears like a great clamp, of which this is the shape: let the master surgeon himself find his instrument, according to what his works and the disease show, for there are many diseases where the old ones did not teach any instrument because of the diversity of them; and if it breaks at any time of the fracture or any other bone, or if it hangs, if he seeks these instruments which he must have, as I have said, and helps with gestures, for this is the shape.
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And let them be thick and well-held to hold the bone, that it cannot escape, but can hold and restrain; and then restore the limb of medicine suitable for this, and if there is inflammation in the bone, and it is small, if the wound has all these instruments:
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a .i. petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When teeth appear contrary to their natural order, and their form is deformed, even in women of childbearing age, if it is suspected that they are too close together and cannot be corrected, then extract them; and if they are loose with the tooth, grasp this instrument which has a similar shape to a small beak, either of iron without a cutting edge at the top.
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And their roots are always together in the jaws for a long time, and for this reason you must not move the others; and if they appear, you can limber them, if you can do so with a file like this, which has the same shape.</start_of_turn>
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	It is like making nails; and when you file the tooth too lightly, the tongue swells up and becomes too thick, so that it bites the tongue and corrupts speech.
quant li dent lochent	When the tooth comes loose.
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	When the front teeth loosen, by percussion or by pulling, and the patient is unable to press upon what hinders them, and you must cure them with restrictive medicines, this is useless; if you know how to restrain them with a gold thread, for the silver thread becomes green and falls out, but the flesh does not move. Neither must the thread be too thick or too thin, according to the quantity of space between the teeth; and if you see that the teeth are in their proper place, if you take the thread and pass it double between the two front teeth, then place the head of the shoulder between the front teeth, if there is one or more of them, until you see it clearly reach the sound tooth on the other side; then resume the coverage until you reach the part where you began, and strain your hand skillfully and prudently, until it does not move. And if the shoulder escapes the tooth, if it cannot escape.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	Then take the head of the humerus and stretch it over a pair of pincers, and assemble them, and put them back between the teeth of the socket, and keep it in place so that it does not slip; and when it comes loose, or the bone breaks, or if the strain of another bone; if it should remain and serve its purpose, that is the form of teeth and the setting of the two front teeth and the two lower teeth, as you see.
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And when the tooth bleeds, if you reset it again and again, as we have said; and do not allow anything to interfere which is not wise and soothing, and never make its shape like that of a chipped tooth, and put it back into its place where the fault is, and restrain it as we have said, and remain and serve its purpose for a long time.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	De coper, lou liien de la lengue.
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	Never is it thus that the tongue or nature escapes the wound, that it is not born anew; or by accident of a deep wound; and the work is such that you must offer the mouth of the patient, and take hold of his tongue, and hold the tongue in place; then take hold of the large nerve of the tongue, as long as the tongue is loosened from its dwelling place, and if there is delay or not, and that is the support of the wound, if it should stop bleeding and take hold of that which is strong; and keep that the wound is not too deep, for the artery that is escaping; and when you have done this, if you lift the limb of the rising heat and ease, or of the cold heat, and put under the tongue a little attempt of thread; and bind the patient tightly, that the limb does not swell.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	And if blood flows from a vein, take out the glass vial immediately; and if it does not stop, burn with the lentiginous cautery, which is good for this; then treat with other remedies until it stops.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if you see black or red or hard pus, if the patient does not feel it, do not touch it, for it is a boil; and if it is declining with moisture, if it is bleeding, if you remove the clot, and you make a splatter of silk, and deliver from one side and the other; and if it does not go away from your work, if you put a glass fragment on it until it is stained, then come back to your work until you have finished everything; then lift the limb easily and slowly, and cure it of other cures until it is healed.
des apostemes de la gorge	Des apostemes de la gorge.
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	Sometimes comes from the throat boils which are called "godath", and they have two almonds in them; and when you treat them, as we have said before, and they are not cured, beware: if they are hard abscesses of little size and colour of rust, do not touch them with iron.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	And if it is red and the root is thick, do not touch it with iron; but let it bleed until it stops by itself; and then you can remove it, or it will break by itself; and if it is white in colour and the root is small, if you have applied the instrument to cover it, but first look to see if the abscess is settled and calm
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	Therefore make the patient sit before the sun, and stretch his limbs to their natural position, cover his mouth with his hand, and grasp the genitals between his hands, and press the tongue downwards with all his might, for this is the posture; and let it be of silver or gold, or like a fine needle:
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	... press the tongue downwards with all your might: this is the form; and let it be of silver or gold like a nail. Can you press the tongue against all this instrument? And you see the wound, take the sponge and stick it in the almond, and pull it out forcefully more than you wish; and do not put anything of the towels on it, then close the wound against the instrument, for this is the form, that looks like a force. And all around the head are bent, and one place is more bent than the other, and are very acute, and is made of iron or tin.
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have this instrument, if you can grasp them with pincers, know that this is the form:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les .ij. amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les .ij. amandres igament.	And if you do not have this instrument, if you can grasp them with pincers, know that this is the form: grasp one claw of the pincers at one end and the other at the other end; and when you have grasped one claw, grasp the other in the same way, and then make an incision and immediately gargle the patient with hot water, hot and easy, and if blood flows, gargle the patient with hot water, or wash away grapes or plums, or ivy leaves, and the like; until the wound is healed; and never again shall there be any other opening in the throat except for the two claws of the pincers, if you grasp them just as before.</start_of_turn>
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	Therefore I medicinate a woman with an abscess that was in her throat, that is to say I make an abscess of small size; and I keep the throat very close, so that the woman cannot breathe through the passage that was blocked, and cannot eat or drink, and she died as soon as she fainted in that state or for two days.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	And the abscess was so large that it had forced out two stones through the two holes of non-healing
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	I had done so much, and remained in one place, then I saw the flames coming, and in the flames a great portion of the house; then I took the rest to the other side where there was no noise, and I closed my mouth and squeezed my tongue; after that I took the oncine back to those abscesses, and put a part of it in, and did not come out of it except for a little blood; and thus was loosened the guide of the throat of the woman, and it began to drink water and then wine, and did not cease biting at that abscess for a long time; and the abscesses were returning to their place, and filling up the body as I had avoided vomiting, until it returned almost whole; then I embraced it and cauterized it inside the throat: thus did I leave sense crossing; and I departed from those parts, and only God knows what happened to me afterwards.
de l’uve	De l’uve.
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	When the limb hangs downward, and it flees and is elongated, if it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is broad and round, it is called "globe".
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	When it is cured as we have said in the division, and the cure does not help, and you see that the swelling has subsided, and it is subtle, if you must, you must grasp it; and that which is round and thick is not long; and it is bloody or yellowish or black, if you must avoid the incision of the latter.</start_of_turn>
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	For there is great peril for the patient.</start_of_turn>
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	Therefore, when you see it, as I have said, according to the manner that I have mentioned, you must set the patient before the sun and press the tongue with the instrument that I mentioned earlier; then close the wound with two fingers as I have said in the incision of the two thumbs.</start_of_turn
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And you must know that you should not cover more than the excess that is beyond the natural limit; for if you do more, you will grieve the voice and the tongue; and after the incision, use what we have said in the incision of the two almonds, and cure as long as it is sane.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	And if the patient has fear of covering, then you must know that you should use an instrument for the cauterization of the painful side.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	And the method of cautery if it is acute is harsh and severe
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	And that the patient puts his head in his sound, and then presses the tongue to the instrument that we have said or the surgeon of cautery, and grasp with live hair, if it is not too thick or too thin; and apply the instrument with the help of the grasp of this instrument, because it is thus formed:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés .iiij. jors ou .v. Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	When moisture descends to the armpit, and it escapes and becomes long, if it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is large and round, if it is called "armpit". When it is cured as we have said in the division, and the cure does not benefit, and you see that the armpit is appeased, and it is subtle, if it is necessary, that you must keep the limb still as we have said, from its armpit to its elbow, that you make the patient sit in front of the sun, and press the tongue to the instrument that we have mentioned before; then close the wound with silk thread and draw out the drain, and close with eight sutures that we have mentioned in the incision of the two amandres. And it must not be closed more than the excess that is beyond the natural limit; for if you do, if the patient groans or speaks too loudly; and after the incision, use what we have mentioned in the incision of the two amandres, and cure until it is healed. And if the patient has fear of closing, it is necessary that you use an engine for the cautery in the direction of the fear. And the manner of cautery is acute. And it is that the patient puts his hand on his chest, and then presses the tongue to the instrument that we have mentioned or the cautery book, and grasp with strong water-grip, if it is neither too thick nor too clear; and use the handle of this instrument, from which this form is made. And have either a bandage or something put on the medicine, such as the nails of a spoon, and put the instrument on all the medicine on the armpit; and the patient should keep his hand still on his chest, so that he salivates and swallows from his mouth the medicine inwards, if it does not go down to the throat, and the hiccup; then keep your hand on all the medicine and press it on the armpit, for the amount of half an hour, until you see it is limp and the bites of the medicine are appeased. And if you see that, take cotton and wrap it around any instrument, and moisten the cotton in the medicine, and remove the instrument from all around with the cotton on the wound, until the cotton is aired out on the armpit; and do this often, until the cautery is perfect, then leave it dry, and wait three or five days. And if you must restart the cautery of the medicine, if you restart it, and after the cautery wipe around the armpit with cotton wool, em buttered up, and cover what is around the medicine; and be raised from cold water, and be cured of hiccups until it is healed.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en .i. pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait .i. estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This treatment is safer than incision, for it is cured by fumigation according to this manner: take calamine and isoprop and origanum and rue and chamomile and ivy and vinegar and similar herbs, and mix them all together in a pot, and put it on the fire, and boil it. And let the pot be well glued with strong earth, and in the middle of the pot there is one instrument which is named after this manner:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	And be it gold or silver, or be it one of the bones broken in the mouth of the patient while the vapor rises up to the eye through the caning, while the eye is mortified; afterwards it must be repeated often, until the eye is dry, and keep that you do not do this at the commencement of the event of the hot eruption, because many things happen; do not do this unless the eruption is waning.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	And if this instrument is not present, take a caning and put in the head a piece of egg, so that the patient’s mouth does not get too hot; for the piece of egg does not make the vapor become greasy in the mouth, and this is a good remedy altogether
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou .i. morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge .i. fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren .i. estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Many times it has happened at the throat bone or a fish spine, or nothing; so it is therefore necessary that you recognize what you see, and press the tongue to the sun with all the instrument, so that you can see the thing; and what does not appear to you and is returned in the throat, it is necessary that you make the patient vomit the patient immediately as the meat is cooked in the stomach; by chance if this thing is expelled by vomiting; or the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of navel, or a lettuce root, or a piece of dry bread; and join the sponge to the thread and then transfix it. And when it comes back, if it is swollen, then draw it out, and then try again; and if it does not come out except for what we have said, take one instrument of lead according to this form:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	And let the corvus hook rest at the head if it can enter more easily through the throat, and keep the head lifted high; and beware that you do not touch the epiglottis, for all else will be in vain; do not push too hard inwards, or the bone will break. The patient must pull the instrument towards himself, for otherwise the thing is lost; if the epiglottis is swallowed, or if you force it out with all the instrument equally, as much as it is forced.
de la sansue de la gorge	And let the corvus hook rest at the head if it can enter more easily through the throat, and keep the head lifted high; and beware that you do not touch the epiglottis, for all else will be in vain; do not push too hard inwards, or the bone will break. The patient must pull the instrument towards himself, for otherwise the thing is lost; if the epiglottis is swallowed, or if you force it out with all the instrument equally, as much as it is forced.
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	Medicine is never without its shortcomings, as I have said in the division; by the treatment of medicines; and when this does not help, look at the patient’s throat in the sunlight, and then press the tongue to the instrument that I have told you of.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	If you see the shoulder without its head, if the bone has even a slight fracture, or if there are subtle tears that are worth as much.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	If this is not the case, if you take a saw and put it into the throat of the patient, then saw or cut off the limb from the shoulder joint.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	If the patient groans in acute pain all around.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	Then take cold water and pour it into the mouth, cover the mouth and let the patient swallow; move the limb frequently; if despite all this the shoulder still feels pain, cut it off
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	If it does not stop, if we have said what we have to say, if you fumigate the patient with vinegar, using the instrument that I have mentioned in the fumigation of the eye; do this many times, for it will soon become effective.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	And thus for fumigation, if you take one pot or charcoal is visible, and let the cover be covered with a gauze cloth of a mile wide, and in that hole let the head of the instrument be; then pour the fumigation, and the patient puts the chief of the cane in his mouth, closes his mouth, so that the smoke does not go out, but comes out only through the nose; and the nose will now sneeze, and if it does not sneeze, repeat the fumigation many times; and the patient will suffer thirst, eat dirty and nasty things, and drink no water; and thus will it be necessary that it be driven out by this government.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	And the form of the instrument, as we have mentioned, is like a pair of tongs with a curved handle to enter the throat; and it is similar to a beak of a bird, and has a rough lime-like surface, so that whatever it grasps, it cannot let go. And when you have this form:
li chapistres des apostemes	it is finished.
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	Wounds of various kinds are, as it is remembered in this book, diverse in perforation and size; and there are two manners in which they are like each other, one of which is in their appearance alone, and the other of which is because they hold moisture.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	And if the limb is at the shoulder or fixed to the bone.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	for the armpit swelling is different from that of the root, and the swelling of the bone joint is different from that which occurs in the joints, and they must judge for themselves in the work.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	If the swelling does not depart, we must not pierce it until it softens according to its degree; and if we must pierce it when it is stiff, and it does not soften as much as its degree, like a swelling of the joints
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	For when a swelling comes from the joint, and we leave it until it is inflamed, by chance if the bone and nerve of the joint are corrupted, this is the cause of contraction in that limb.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	Or if the incision is made on the principal part of the limb, and if you delay the perforation until it is even, it will go to the principal part of the limb; or if it is made on the root, if you do not pierce it immediately when it is even, it will be useless; and I advise you to pierce only in the upright position during digestion, except for the one that is made on the root, which must not burst or perforate, but must be along the edge, and there will be fistula; and it will not heal in great time.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	And you must know that you must wash the wound of the abscess that has died according to its course, when the pain has subsided, and the departure of fever, and the diminishing of pain and redness, and the fading of the debate and the tingling of the head of the abscess, and other signs; and you must make the wound sit or be more dependent on the abscess, and the place where it opened. And let the perforation be long enough for the abscess to be grasped by the hands or feet, or in joints and nerves and arteries, and all the bones or whatever is equal or there is no fluid.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	When these things happen, according to this limb.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	And when the incision is in the flesh, if you wait too long to pierce it while it is confirmed during digestion, as we have said
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	For if you pierce it before this one, if there is along the skin of the poison from it, and there is plenty of vomit; and by chance it endangers the liver and you pierce it through from it.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	And if there is no wound that is perceived according to the great pain, according to what the limb has to bear.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	And so you must bring in small wounds, small perforations; and in great wounds, great perforations, and many tears according to the measure of the size of the wound; and if there are such wounds or if you must doubt that they will burst, and cover them; when they are become as full as flags, and are softened, if you can do the same as with bubbles: and if there are such as are torn at three angles, and such as are copied like the berries of mistletoe, like wounds of anger; and if there are such as you make a circle of the same size, and others of a similar kind of cover.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	He who has no head, if there is only a superficial wound, it is enough to pierce it straight through; and pierce when the wound is large, and it has become greatly swollen, and you pierce, do not remove all the swelling at once, but remove a part; then squeeze the wound until the other side is level, then remove nothing further; do this many times with great force, until the swelling is all gone; in the same way as if the patient has little strength, or a woman in labor, or a young child, or an old man decrepit.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Eschew this chapter with great caution. When you have perceived the abscess, if the wound is small, if it is a full-blown abscess, if there is much pus, if there is doubt or fear, if you have pricked in the abscess a part of the leather, and you have bound it in place, if you must fill in the abscess with linen or coarse cotton, and if there is a large abscess and there is much pus, if you have swallowed in the abscess a portion of the purulent matter, if you have grasped in the abscess a part of the skin and you have bound it in place, if you must fill in the abscess with much cotton or coarse linen in the direction of moisture, and you must bind it until the bone is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	And if blood evacuates from your work, if you must add cold and moist pressure and wipe away moisture, and draw out the offending matter many times.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if bleeding persists, if there is a government and a cure, and the powders that I have mentioned in this book, and if it is spring or summer, and the wound is deep or the stitches are loose, if it is necessary, you should put on tight stitches and moisten the wound with wine and oil; and if it is autumn, and the wound is fleshy, if it is necessary, you should put on moisten the wound with water and oil, or with wine and oil, up to the third joint, as we have said; and then remove the stitches and cure the wound, if possible, until it is healed.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	And this must be known throughout the treatment of abscesses: or as I have said before concerning the preparation before treating abscesses, and thus it is with this chapter.
des soros	This must be known throughout the treatment of boils: or as I have said before concerning the preparation before treating boils, and thus it is with this chapter.
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	Or when the head of the shoulder comes out slightly, and is managed as we have taught you, like the joist of a gable roof, and there is a resemblance.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	There are fat and tough ones or there is moisture also like poultry; and if there are some that are hard and stony at the root, and there is no doubt if the artery does not do otherwise.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	And concerning the work of this size, if you suspect at all that all the instruments which are called "entrant" are there, from which the shape comes afterwards, what thing does it contain?
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	For if it contains moisture, if indeed it has come through long days.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	And when the moisture is drained, if you leave the peel which contains that moisture, it returns in its place when you leave it alone; then soak cotton in Egyptian balsam, if it is present; if not, in water and oil, and use the bandage, and leave it until the other side is healed; and that will fix what is remaining which is delayed from before
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And thus when the fire has recommenced, as before, the second time, and the third, until you are certain that it does not move at night; then cure the wound opportunely, as is proper.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	And if the abscess remains filled with fluid, if you cut it according to this form, long; and discharge your pus, and the swelling of all parts, and put all your care to prevent the swelling from coming back; and if the vein bursts in this case, do what I have told you afterwards.</start_of_turn>
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	And do the same with the abscess if it is perforated, and cut and cure as I have told you.</start_of_turn>
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	And the size of the perforated abscess and the moisture, if it is less severe, for it is a matter of blood.</start_of_turn
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	If there are any abscesses or swellings, or if there is no moisture, or if these are old abscesses which I cauterize or remove from a woman of mature age; I find the abscess just as hard as a stone, rough and white, and it will not break. If there is no fever in such a case, it is just as well to make an incision as if it were a stone.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	In other abscesses which arise from the head and have roots in the ears, it is because these arise from the head of the ribs and the roots of the ears, that they open every day the most dependent part of the limb; and they are cured as they should be.</start_of_turn>
des scrophules	And the size upon the pierced wound and the moisture, if it is less severe, because they are from little blood. And if there are any of these wounds or chieftains or it has no moisture, and of these wounds that I cauterize or chieftains of an old woman; and find the wound just like a pierced stone, rough and pale, and cannot break. And if there is no bruise, we must do just as well for the wound as with a stone. In other wounds coming or chieftains, for those that come from the head of the fetus and have roots of the ears, it opens if it is always dependent every day, because of its swelling; and it cures as it should.
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	Often these abscesses occur at the collarbone, and from the armpits, and down the arms, and never elsewhere or on the bones, and are black, and are joined together.</start_of_turn
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	And if there is a scrophula properly inside its coat, as we have said; and the signs of these scrophulas are many.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	And there are some diseases that contain moisture, and if they have malignity that does not obey health.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	In that case that you see good arrangement at the touch, and it is similar to the color of bone, and is mute from one side and is neither red as the cheek nor pale as the palm of the hand, neither deep; if you must do so, cut from below, and strip off the outer part, and hold the two thumbs as one has observed in apostemes of the head; and the thumb and index finger together, and so that you do not grasp the nerve or vein, and do not cause spasm or tearing, that the hands do not escape, and do not make a great noise, that you do not cut more than is necessary.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	And if you prick the vein or the artery, and this does not allow you to work, put in the wound a piece of vitriol that is broiled, or some powders that remain bloodless, and hold the wound; and leave it until the bleeding has ceased, and soften the wound, and begin to move again.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	When the wound is not stained, if you return to your work until you have completed it; then whatever must be indicated must be scraped away if there are no small scars left, if you scrape and remove them.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	And if there is in the root of the wound a large vein, if you cannot manage anything but to scrape that vein at its root, but bind it with a strong double thread, and let it slip by itself; then apply pressure to the wound with cotton wool soaked in Egyptian balsam, and cure it
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	And if you pull out all the pus, if you know that you have put together the two layers of the wound, and close them now, then there will be no further swelling due to the great amount of pus.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	if you know that you have grasped the root of it [the shoulder], and pulled out the spur, and closed it as we have said
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	The swellings that keep swelling up, pierce them out or they will burst; and pierce them out like those before said, depending on what is necessary, and join them with ligatures and similar things, so that what is remaining of the corruption is consumed; and when the wound is well healed, if the dressing is removed, as long as it is healthy
de squinance	If you drain all the abscesses, if you can gather up the layers of the wound and suture them now, and there is no further swelling from the greatness of the abscesses. If you understand to close the root of the joint, and to draw out, and to suture as we have said. Those abscesses which retain swelling, pierce them through or they will burst dead; and pierce just as before said, depending on the situation; and join with sutures and similar things, until that which is remaining of the corruption is overcome. And when the wound is well drained, if you apply an oil dressing that will heal, until it is healed.
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	The old men spoke of the size of the gorge; but I have never seen it in our land, and that is the writing of their words.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en .ij. amandres.	As to those who grumble, it is necessary that the flap of the throat called the epiglottis be freed; and this will not help, for all the veins and blood vessels around the patient’s mouth, throat or almonds are affected by the inflammation
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the disease is in the channel of the tonsils, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to prevent the loss which comes from strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige; et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	It is necessary therefore, when our wounds open the epiglottis, that we cut it out three circles or four, a small incision through two circles or according to the quantity of the incision of the epiglottis; and that we do not go into the cartilage; and if the vessel is big enough to be coved by the section of the epiglottis, there will be no more pus, and the vessels are long enough.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit; et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix; et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	If the master is fearful, if you can, stretch the skin of the throat to the chin; then make an incision as far as the nail; and take out the blood vessels, if you see nothing; and then close the wound as we have said; and demonstrate by the section of the smoke of the nail that the fracture has disappeared, and by the absence of voice; and leave the wound open for a piece.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the hour has passed since it was doubted that the strangulation had ceased, gather the four limbs of the wound together at the corners, and bind them all around with the cartilage; then administer medicines which cause the growth of hair, until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Thus the albino does not do this until the throat is completely closed and the patient is judged to be dead, and the default is abandoned.</start_of_turn
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort; et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee; et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	Then close the epiglottis because the patient cannot breathe; and he breathes through the wound; and thus they command the old man to leave the wound open until the malice of the disease has passed; and it passes in three days or four. And thus they command to suture the wound and treat it, until it is healed; and I will tell you what I saw.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon; et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	I saw that a woman took a knife and plunged it into her throat, and cut a part of her windpipe; and I fled called to cure her, and I found her as dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I discovered the wound, and found the blood that was coming from it, and saw that it had not pierced any vein or artery except for the throat, and that the wound came from the wound itself.</start_of_turn
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee; et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition; por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	I hastened, and dressed the wound, and cured it until it was healed; and the woman did not feel any pain, and returned to her usual state; for in the handling of the epiglottis I did not see any fear
de la grosse gorge	of the great gorge (laryngeal opening)</start_of_turn>
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes; et est selonc II manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	These abscesses are called "throat hernia", and are great abscesses of a yellowish color, and are very common in women; and there are two kinds: natural and accidental; or naturally there is no cause.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere; et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire: se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point; et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And the accidental kind is of two kinds: one is like grease to us, and the other kind is like an abscess which comes from an artery; and there is fear, and one cannot do anything fierce except in this small thing, and prove and seek all the surrounding: if you find it just like fat, and cannot reach any vein, if it breaks, as we break bones, and pulls out all its hair, if there is none; and encircle well around, and cure as it should be, until it is completely healed.
des nous	And embrace all around thoroughly, and cure it as it should be, until it is perfectly healed.
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances; et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	Many ways are there for us, of which I will speak of all; and know that I will tell you all the difference that is between a wound and an issue.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that dislocation is caused by heat and fever that persists, as long as the inflammation has not subsided, and is accompanied by pain; therefore rest the fever and heat.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros; et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	With neither wound nor fever nor pain does it contain heat, and contains I saffec, which is its own bag and is like the color of warm gold, and begins just like fat, and grows large; and it is like grain or grease or moisture, and its color is like I have said in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	It is necessary, when you come to the cure of the wound, that you ask and inquire first about all the instruments which are called "instruments of entry," according to what their form will be or what chapter it is following.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme; puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	And the manner of inquiry of abscesses is that you take more moisture than you find in the abscess, and press your thumbs and fingers, until you know that the instruments have grasped the knot, then that it be according to the size of the abscess; then draw out the entromissorium, and beware that the spur escapes.</start_of_turn>
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes; et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout; et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	If moisture comes too quickly, that is to say when it colours like I have said of other abscesses; and when afterwards the moisture does not come, although it is greasy, if you do not then pierce it, take hold of the piece, and burn it lightly from one side and cover the other with a cloth which you must keep warm with your hand. And if you do not keep it warm, if you tear it out piecemeal, nothing will remain.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois; et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	If nothing remains, if it comes back many times; if some remains, and you grieve not, if you apply to the wound some corrosive powders, hold the wound, and put on soothing things above the wound, and cure it in other ways as long as it is healthy; and if it is great, if you remove two fingers of the wound, and cure it of that which engenders scar tissue
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	If the vein is beating against you or otherwise if you are in a hurry, employ the broth of vitriol, broil it, and leave it for three or four days until the wound has healed; then return to cover what is still remaining
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule; et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule; et sont de III manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	See here the forms of the introspective instruments, and they are of three kinds: great, middle, and small; and there are three quarters which are called "albaret," and one which is called "breb," and there are three kinds: great, middle, and small, to encircle the fistulas; and they are like nails which we sew up wounds, and they are of gold, silver, or iron, and sometimes yellow silk which is worth a pearl which are more proven for encircling the corneas of fistulas; and they are of three kinds: great, middle, and small, according to the quantity of the wound.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi; et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	The forms of the instruments are like the seeds of plants, as you see here: great, middle, and small; and there are instruments which have two corneas of three kinds each; and there are instruments which have three corneas, and they are also of three kinds; and there are instruments which have two corneas, and a single cornea only, and they are of three kinds each; and all these are necessary in their place.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf; et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes; et sont de III manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois; et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus; et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	The head of the humerus is fractured, and there are some that cut only from one side, from which we drive out the nails; for from these introspective ones are the bones restored in sleeves, so that the patient does not lose them at the opening of the abscesses; and there are three kinds: great, small, and medium, as you see; and we use them only in bone fractures, as in legs, arms, and ribs, and angulus, and in similar cases; and we never make use of any other instrument small, resembling nails, according to this form, because in this way we retain blood.
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	And he must never put it on the limb which has already suffered from veins, and arteries, never again in this great form.
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme; et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	We never swell the breasts of many patients when they begin to decay, so that they seem like female breasts; and they endure pain and discharge, and who sees them cured, if we cover them according to this form from this line b. up to line g.:
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures; de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.; puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif; et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	Then scrape off the fat, and employ the medicinal poultice with char, and reassemble the two layers of the wound with stitches, and cure until it is healed; and if the patient cries out in pain, it is relieved by its greatness, as with women, if it happens at two ribs below, by two similar incisions. Because one of them should hold the other at the end of one and the other, so that the greater line contains the lesser according to this shape, from this line .b. up to the line .g.; then scrape off the skin between the two layers, and break the fat, and introduce what we have said concerning stitches and powders, and what is necessary for the cure, until it is healed; and if it is not healed, or the incision is not completely made, because the patient does not want to rest, or for the discharge of blood, if it is necessary, fill the wound with moist cotton in corrosive order. And leave it until it has eaten up the remainder and the fat, then cure until it is healed.
des apostemes des asselles	When the abscess bursts, discharge the pus from the wound.</start_of_turn>
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	These abscesses that come from boils are caused by hard scrofula or if there are ribs, and there is only that which contains moisture.</start_of_turn>
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	If there is moisture contained, it must be cut according to this form, from line b to line g.
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When all the hair in the area is shaved off, if the wound is of great size, apply a large piece of cotton wool, and leave it in place until the bleeding stops; then remove the cotton wool and heal the wound as before.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	If the wound resembles carbuncles, as we have said in cuts for carbuncles, and if the wound is deep, if necessary perform cautery as we have said before.</start_of_turn>
de la routure de l’artere	of the root of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme; et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont; et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans; et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	If the artery is severed, and the skin is split which is above, if there are many abscesses many times, and just as much blood escapes from the vein as from the incision; and if the surgeon knows that it is for the artery, if the abscesses are long and burst; and if he feels it at his elbows, if he feels the stretching; and if it is for the vein, if there is a running discharge from the pores; and this is foolish to cover this incision, just as when it is infected with boils and carbuncles and spleen and other ulcers, and is great.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc; puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte; puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples; puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme; puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient; puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit; puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil; et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus; puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez; puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	It is necessary to eschew the cautery treatment, and he who is at the head must eschew also; and as for the swelling of an artery which is made by these sutures, then over the long skin; then remove the size as one has done with the needles, and depart well the artery from the veins, as long as it is uncovered; then take away with an awl, and pierce until the other side, and restrain the artery with a double thread in two layers, as I have taught you in the extraction of the two arteries which are in the temples; then point the place which is between the two links of an interosseous as much as there is without causing damage which is there; and cut away the abscess; then bring back the treatment that was abandoned, as long as it is not bruised; and if the abscess is of the size of a vein, if you can, hold your hand in this way that you can do the abscess to all the skin; then take out the awl which you held in your hand, and pierce, and there must be two double threads, so that you can manage from the other side; and bind the abscess, as I have said, or tie two knots of two threads from the two ends. And if you doubt that the threads will hold, if they rebound a second awl to all the threads from the incision of the first awl, and restrain the threads in three layers; then cut the abscess as much as it is superfluous in issue, then cut away the surplus of the nail and leave what is bound; then put on a moist drape in wine and oil, and bring back treatments of tentes and ointments until it is healed.
des apostemes des ners	From the incisions of the nerves.
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	Likewise, when incisions are made in the arteries and veins, incisions are also made on nerves when they are irritated, or by too great a workload, and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor; et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur; et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction; et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	And thus it often happens with adjutors and those who must do and touch them or where there are joints, for this is the cause of post-traumatic lesions, and its color seems like the color of dark honey, and is in multiple dispositions with pain; and when it is strained, if the patient feels pain, and does not feel it as before, but feels it quite strongly; it swells very much in all parts, neither going forward nor backward, neither upwards nor downwards, and that which is in the joints does not cover itself with iron: by chance there will be contraction; and he who is at the head or the front, breaks the skin at the nipple.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine; et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the post-traumatic lesion is small, if the limb has a tendon, and grasps it at its root; and if it is large, if the tendon is torn from the bone, and is swollen, then the bone and unite the wound at the suture, and cure until it is healed
des grosses boces pendans	The hairs pend down.
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans; et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	Never have I seen such tumors confined to the belly and nowhere else; it is a disease which is called "fungus" because of its resemblance to nails, and its root is subtle, and its head is large; and there are small and large grains in it. I have seen many people who have had two or more tumors in the belly which were more like fungi than anything else, and there was no difference, and they were white, and had thick roots, and were swollen outwards with moisture.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine; si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	I saw them swell to the weight of eighteen ounces in one and six and three in the other, and the work in the incision if you look to see if the patient is moist, and the color of the arteries is pale and moist with subtle roots; if the tumor extends to the large spleen, and you are present, do the fire cautery.</start_of_turn>
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer; et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors; et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	For at the root comes often too great a discharge of blood, and if it does not go away, if you delay, then quickly cauterize; and if you see the patient fainting and gasping from the incision of the flesh, if you take a thread of silk well made, and bind the artery as we have said, and leave it for two days; then restraint, and do not cease to drain the thread of silk until it has closed the artery, and do the work through it; and if the roots are tough, if there is fear at the same time for the bowels, but take care to cover half, then cauterize that it does not return; then cure the wound, and keep that you only cover the head which is of a foul colour and of bad sense and of pus which comes out.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For it is a swollen abscess, and I will come to the treatment of the abscess later.</start_of_turn>
quant li boude ist fuer	when the swelling is fierce</start_of_turn
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit; et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	If the belly appears swollen comes by cauterizing of a wound or fissure of the bladder, and is on the belly and in the flanks, as it happens in other ways, or blood which clots in veins or arteries according to what is before, or swelling; and if it is by the way of the bladder and by the issue of the bowel, if it is the colour of the abscess resembles the colour of corn, and is a light thing which causes pain, and has various issues.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is by the issue of the intestine, then it is more diverse; and when it is pressed with its two thumbs if it returns and then comes back, and by chance if it is strangulated, and grows large at the entrance of the bath and with great work.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit; et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	If it is due to moisture, it is a light matter; open it easily when you press on it with your hand, do not hold me back. If it is due to blood, if it is opened by these signs, the abscess is large and hard, and is fixed according to quantity. If it is due to air, if it is rough at the touch, and the work is that you see if it appears to be due to the blood of an artery or a vein, or air.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	If you think that you can leave the treatment behind.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	For there is doubt and fear, as I have said or as is written in the chapter on abscesses, concerning the artery and the vein
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude; puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine; puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz; puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine; se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre; et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit; et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier; puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi; ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit; et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	If it appears to be due to the intestine or the tumor, command the patient to hold his breath, and let it hang loose, then mark around its circumference; then grasp it firmly between your hands, and pull the limb until you have reached the navel; then hold the lower part of the abscess towards the navel, and join the two edges together; then tie the abscess firmly with a strong thread or a strong silk cord, or both; and if you suspect the artery or vein, make them bleed profusely, then return to your work and take two needles, and pass two strong threads, and pass the two needles through what you have made in the shape of a cross that you think you have pierced; then stretch the abscess three times on the needles. If you see that it is not holding, break the needles and leave the limb as it is until it stops bleeding by itself; or you can clip it when it is small and soft, and cure the abscess as you have said; and drain the blood or moisture that you find, and cure the limb of what is necessary, and suture the limb.
dou chancre	indeed
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	We have said concerning the signs of the chancre, and how one must treat it with medicines, and how one must shun the cautery; and we say that the chancre grows inwards, and great caution is to be used in the treatment, and the old men tell us that when the chancre is in its prime or when one can remove it as when the chancre is in the marrow, in the spleen, and in other places, one must remove it entirely when it is in its beginning; and when it is large and old, if one cannot do more than approach it, for I know of no cure for it; nor have I ever seen any cured before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide .i. boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And in the work, when it is in its prime or when one can remove it, as we have said, one must never purge the black bile of the col; then make it healthy when it has shown repletion, then withdraw the disease, i.e. drink plenty of liquid to make the work; then remove your nails or the chancre, and the head of all parts, and the bone of all parts without leaving anything; and let the blood flow freely, and hope that the bleeding stops by itself, and if the cautery has stained as much as it has not, then burn from another burn until it is healed.
de ydropisie	of dropsy.
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer: lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	We have said above concerning the signs of dropsy, and that the gathering of water is made in this way, and the signs of spleen resemble this, and the cure which is made by medicine, and that which is cured by iron: if only the lightning is alight; and one must not touch iron in these two signs: that is to say, typhus and hydrophobia, for it is a deadly thing. Therefore when medicine has cured this semblance of dropsy which is called "lightning" of medicine, and the cure does not profit, if you see that the patient is weak, or if there is another disease besides dropsy, as with vomiting and other things; if you do not touch iron, for there is doubt; and if you see the patient of great virtue, and he has only dropsy, and he is neither too young nor too old, then you must do this: take hold of the patient's hand with your right hand and press the belly downwards towards the lower part of the water-bag, then take the bone spur in this fashion:
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	And let the incisions be from two parts.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier; puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu; puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	And let the incisions be from two parts. The point is that they should not be made too deep, for the intestines may come too close to the wound. Then look to see if the bile is drained downwards into the intestines: if so, make three sutures to the right of the navel; if the bile is caused by the disease of the liver, make the suture to the left of the navel; if it is caused by the spleen, make it to the right, and do not make the sutures too tight. Then pierce all the skin with the instrument, and draw out the gut, and keep your hand over the wound as wide as from the nail to the elbow, as when carrying the amount of an nail or an inch of thread; then pierce the skin as far as the thumb comes to the bone, and that is the cause of the pain. Then draw out the gut, and keep this instrument for the form:
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus; et II d’autre part, et I d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	And it is like a silver needle, or an arrow or an arching limb, and has at the upper part a little hole; and where it costs one side, three holes; and two on the other side, and one on the other; and the head of the shoulder is cut off like a pin, and this is the form of the incision which the writers make for the pin.
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort; mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit; fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	The head of the instrument should be placed on the edge of the wound, so that when the instrument comes into the water, if it is now resting on the instrument, empty out half or a third part of the water; for if you empty out more than that, by chance the patient will die from the resolution of his spirit of the weapon, or he will bleed, or he will approach death; but empty out according to the quantity of his virtue, and according to what the instructions of the virtue for the patient signify, and his pulses; then take out the instrument and retain the water, which is now retained by the nail that is stamping the hole that is above the socket, as I have said; that you pierce according to this manner; then repeat the instrument the other way, if you see the patient suffering from this, and take out a small quantity of water; do this neither way, and keep it until it no longer moves but a little drop of water.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	And if thou doubtest of the patient, and thou see him mouthing with pain, if the surgeon hath closed the wound with sepulture or sand cautery, and by mouthing with sweat or bath and sun, and take care to drink; and the surgeon of drying medicines until he is cured, and cauterize on the stomach and on the liver and on the spleen after the extraction of the poison, as I have said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	Do nothing rash, and guard against using too much force until it stops bleeding. And if you doubt the patient, and you put your mouth over the wound, if the physician closes the wound with sutures or powdered charcoal, and by spitting or bathing and in the sun, and if you take medicine; and let the physician give desiccative medicines until he is healed, and cauterize on the stomach and liver and spleen after the extraction of the blood, as I have said before.
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	Never are children born without a mark on the belly, or the mark is small, or it is not in its place.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	If the child cries too much and has not percepved at all in his spasms, according to this form:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	Then put or prick the blue spleen with blunt instruments, and bind and hold for three days or four, and when he wants to urinate, if he persists with the closing, let him urinate and then reset him; and by chance it will not be of any use, for the urine that comes out will not leave him closed
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	If the pupil is small, if it is treated with drops of lead, as we have said, and it swells up.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	If the pupil does not have its natural opening in its place, they are blind, for none are born with the pupil at the top of the iris, for it does not open before it raises its edge; and it does not dilate because the matter cannot come down to the margin, and this is a bad disease.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the patient lies still on his back, the head of the penis and the testicles are as big as a bean; if the opening is small, if it is medicine by clomp of plum, as we have said, if it expands. And the manner of this work is that when the patient has a great discharge of blood many times, and when the swelling of this that swells blood, and heals the wound as long as it is sound.
des pustules de la verge	puses from the beard.
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a .i. oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many times cometh this ailment to the verge, and is an evil sign of foulness; and there are malignant and non-malignant ones. If it be that thou takest them at their root, then thou must cut and grind them all, and then put upon moist cotton in Egyptian fashion; and cure it with diafinicon until it be healed.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	And if the eye is white, malicious, of black colour and pus-filled, you must bring cautery to it.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	When you have closed it, and if the white is in the middle of the iris, and has part in the pupil and part outside, you must fix the white which is inside first; and when it is healed, if the cure is outside
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	For when you have cured it whole, if it is not firmly secured, the head of the shoulder will be perceived [as loose]; there will be blackness and corruption in its marrow and bone; if you must remove all that is black and corrupt, then apply over the place honey and flour made from the peel of pomegranates and sometimes, then treat it with other cures until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	And if blood flows away, if you must use lunar cautery, do so in this form:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars; et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	The cautery has two uses: for bleeding and for corruption. If the head of the shoulder is corrupted and retracted, if you are to bite or draw out the hair for a span of plum flesh, and urinate the patient among them; and when the hair has fallen out around the head of the shoulder which had not been previously circumcised, or if there is a wound or incision, if you must then burn it with the instrument which chews, until the hair is loosened and delivered from all parts. And if this is inconvenient, if you must burn it with a sponge without a wick, then sprinkle a little coarse linen cloth over it, wet with cold water, so that it does not stick.
de la circoncision	And if circumcision is distressing you, if you fear it, do not hesitate to apply a sponge wet with cold water to the genitals and perineum; then gently wipe between the genitals with a fine towel soaked in cold water, without causing discomfort.
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Circumcision is not merely a matter of continuing as with other wounds; however, when we perform this work, it is from our own will, and properly performed, if we can, as gently as possible for the patient's health.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the old doctors do not tell me of circumcision of their children, for they do not use it in their law, and we have only what we have learned through experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor .i. dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a .ij. toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	For I have seen the greatest part of masters and physicians who performed circumcision without cause, with force, and with all their skill; but if the testicles escaped because there were two layers, and by chance if one pierced through and remained there, the other escaped.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	Or the recovery is painful, and the pain is doubled, and there is swelling which is not firmly secured at the tip of the limb; and there is swelling of the testicles by chance escapes the wound, corrects the work, and many times comes out until it has no need for swelling and I have seen it.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	From the modification which is made with force throughout the thread I have found the benefit of the experiment, for the forces tear just as well downwards as upwards.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien; et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge; puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	When you press your hand, if it is equal in all directions, but the thread is well stretched around the leather; and if the manner of the first movement is such that it makes the child think, if he understands, do not force him to tighten the thread around the limb only lightly, and then make him rejoice in every way that you can; then make it straight between your hands or take away your nails that the child does not see them, neither any instruments; then hold your hand at the limb and breathe out or cough, and pull the limb up as high as the head of the limb is; then firmly knead the ordure that is gathered, then tie the limb with a double thread, then tie it again just as high as the other thread; and hold it for two hours by the second loop and the musty finger, and press between the two threads, then release the cough from below the breastbone and pull the chief of the limb; then leave the blood to flow back as much as it wants, for that is the treatment; and put powder on and around the powder a gauze drape that is glued with a piece of egg yolk that has been boiled in rosewater, confirmed with rose oil and fresh, and leave it on until the other wound has healed.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	When the limb is formed with stiffness, if this is the case: two fingers should be tense and hooked, and the fingers should be as great as the thumb equally:
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	The error of stiffness is when the nails are forced at the incision; therefore it is necessary that you stretch it out to your nail, even if it causes bleeding; and close it evenly, and if you do not manage to hold your nail, if you hold it firmly, and then close it
Et s’il trespassent .iij. jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	And if they trespass for two days, and what is below the navel is inflamed, if you leave them as long as the afterpains subside, and the swelling is slight; if you touch them as you wish, and keep hold of the navel, that will do them no harm.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And thus cure the wound of dusty things, which we have said or treated with powders; and if you touch it too much, it will go away, if it does not matter; cure it as we have said until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
dou retenement de l’urine	of urine retention</start_of_turn>
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division; et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e; et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	The retention of urine is from the obstruction of a stone, or blood clot, or a bowel movement, or a worm, or other things which we have mentioned in the previous division; and if the urine is not freed, and you see that the obstruction is caused by the stone which is in the kidney or the neck of the bladder, if you believe that the patient is crooked on his knees; and if so, put the thumbs of both hands on the patient’s back, extend his abdomen from the part below his back, and restrain the patient so that he cannot move; and then grasp the neck of the bladder towards the expression of the stone above, so that the urine is freed; and if it does not come, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, if you believe that there is need, administer extraction with all the instruments which are called “siringues”; thus is the form: either of silver or lead shot, like the head of a bird; or of the caine of a long and half palm, or subtle at the chief.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede; puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine; et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	And thus it is done with the issue of the urine: if you take one thread double, and bind one end to the head of the bladder or belly, and pass the thread through the syringe; and clip the surplus of the thread and pass it up to the head of the syringe, then join the syringe with oil or butter and egg-white, and make the patient sit on the seat, and raise the bladder and the belly with oil moist and oily and warm water; then put the syringe gently into the belly, until it reaches the root of the belly, then double the belly from under the buttock; then pull the syringe forward until it reaches the bladder, and let the patient feel that it is coming out until it reaches the empty state; and this must not be done except for the reason that it is leading or going awry. Then draw back the thread throughout the belly and the belly, and the urine follows the thread, and then draw out the thread, and correct the urine; and start the syringe again until the bladder is empty, and make the patient well-aligned.
des maladies de la vessie	Des maladies de la vessie.
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When urine or blood comes into the bladder, or if pus is gathered there, and you see urine and medicines distilled, if you do everything that is called the «clepsedre», which is its shape:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus: II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est; et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	She is closed, and if there are three punctures: two from one side, and one from the other, as you see; and the head of the shoulder is grasped so that the medicine can be placed as well as possible on the rib, if we can remove the moisture, and push when necessary; and when you see the medicines flowing in the bladder, put the head of the shoulder in the moisture, and draw out the one who is in front; if you draw out the moisture from the shoulder, and then push strongly the one in front; if the moisture enters the shoulder, and comes to the bladder now, so that the patient will feel it; and this is the form of the subtle blister from which the bladder is blistered.
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie; et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	It is of silver or gold, and the head is higher; and from one side or the other; then take a bladder of mutton and put the moisture in which you see blistering the bladder, and tie between the two breasts a double bow, and boil one of those moistures on the fire; then hold the head of the blister in the rib, and stretch your hand over the bladder until the patient feels that the moisture has come to the bladder; and if you do not have the bladder, if you take a piece of parchment, and make a circle, and pierce it round the edges; then pull the thread firmly through these punctures, and assemble the circle as if you were assembling a ball, and put inside what you see of oil, moisture, and water, and tie it up with the instrument; and do as you would with a bladder, pressing your hand until the moisture comes to the bladder.
de la piere	De la piere.
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have already mentioned in the previous chapter the methods of piercing and the extraction of arrows, along with medicines; and we mentioned the difference between a closed wound and a wound that has burst open, and the signs of each; and when a wound should be opened, as in the case of the bladder and the intestines; and I will tell you openly and briefly about them.</start_of_turn>
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont .iiij. ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I say that the wound which is closed in the bladder is often more painful; and this is a sign that the urine is bursting from the bladder like a sharp wound in its subtlety; and there is open discharge of gravel, and the patient suffers great pain in his groin, and he experiences many such attacks, and then becomes swollen; and with these attacks the foundations become loosened; and it is easy to heal the wound until it is three years old, but it is very painful in old age, and is as dangerous for those who are between adolescence and old age; and the cure is easier for those who have a large wound than for those who have a small one.</start_of_turn
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	And when we come to the treatment, if it is necessary first to purify the patient by vomiting, to drive out all the bile that is in the intestines.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	For it never fails to inquire the stone.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche dedens; se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	Then take the patient by the limbs, and loosen and move downwards, so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder; and it does not go out through the mouth; then make him sit between your hands visible, and his hands are loosened from his buttocks, so that the bladder is fully relaxed below; then inquire and touch inwards; if you feel the stone in the space, hurry now to cut above the stone.</start_of_turn>
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	And if it does not yield to the toucher with all, if more you must indicate with the index finger of your left hand, if the patient is elderly, or your middle finger, if the patient is young and robust; and hold it firm in its foundation, inquire the stone, and when you feel it with your middle finger, if the spleen is against the collar of the bladder; then press above your middle finger, and the stone will come out spontaneously or you will see it cut.</start_of_turn>
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	And instruct the minister to press the bladder with his hand, and command him to extend with his right hand the hairs above, and with his left hand to grasp the skin that is between the hairs in the part where the size is made; then he should cover the testicles with the palm of his hand, as is their form.
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans; par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	And enter between that which is between the buttocks and the navel, do not go into the middle but on the left side; and be straight upon the stone, and your two thighs be either adducted or flexed, and be the size that it may pass easily through, and narrow within, according to the quantity of the stone, do not make it too large; for if it must go through the belly or the buttocks, that it leap forward in its work; and pieces that are in the belly or at the angles, and margins: if it is grasped to sit; and if it is in the armpit, it is like a gland, rounded, from which issue is slight.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole; et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	And if there are angles and margins at the buttocks or armpits, make the size greater; and if it does not leap, it is certain that you must pull on the teeth which are as sharp as a file at the head, because muscle is required to pull out the stone if it does not escape; or you may grasp it with a subtle curve at the head; and if you do not succeed in engaging it, if the stone is large, and if it does not slip out, if it is like vitriol; and if there are several stones, you must first pull out the largest at the belly, then put on the stone, then pull out the main one, and the small ones afterwards if there are more of them.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	And if it is swollen greatly, if you cover it with silk, it will make a greater wound.
Car II choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces; et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	And if it is swollen greatly, if you cover it with silk, it will make a greater wound. For in this matter two things happen to the patient: either he dies, or his urine comes out again by reason of the swelling that his limbs cannot be bound together; but whatever you do to stop it, or to remove the splinters, as long as you tear it piece by piece; and when you have completed your work, if you cover the wound with incense, aloe, and dragon's blood, and bind it, and put above it a damp cloth soaked in oil and wine, or in oil and rose water and cold water, to soothe the burn; then raise the patient up on his heel, and do not loosen the bandage until the third joint.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have detached it, if the moisture is well drained from the limb with oil and water, then treat with the salve dyafinicon and the salve basilicon until it is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit; puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	And if pus comes into the wound and corrupts, and congeals blood in the bladder, and either because of that the urine is retained, which is known in part as without passing with the urine: break off then your bone in the wound, and draw out that blood, for if it remains, if it corrupts the bladder, and brings it forth; then raise the wound quickly and easily and cautiously, and give it aid in every way you can, while it is still sane; and know that whenever you cure it, bind up the two edges together and assemble the medicines above the limb.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	And if the stone is small, and it is either a piece of the kidney or a tube of the bladder, and is fixed in place, and the urine cannot pass; if you cure this as I have said above, then you must listen many times, for we have heard of the size for this cure.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	I have already proven this.
Pren .i. foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a .iij. angles fichiees en .i. tison:	Take hold of the iron according to this form and be at a right angle, with two handles fixed in a basin:
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	I have already proved this. Take a thread and loop it around the testicles of the penis, so that it cannot go back into the bladder; then pull the testicles lightly until they reach the penis; and turn the testicles towards the thumb and little finger, as long as you can pierce the penis from the other side; if the urine comes, then press your thumb on what remains of the penis which is in the testicles.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides; et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is broken, and he jumps up with the urine, and if the patient is lying there; and if you cannot do this for any reason, if you take a thread from the testicles and another from above, then pull the penis towards the testicles between the two lines, then pull it out forcefully, remove the thread, and massage the blood clot which is in the wound; and cure it until it is healed
de la piere des femmes	If you are unable to do this, grasp the limb by the bone above and below, and place your hand between the two bones, then draw it out forcefully, release the ligament, and massage the blood clot which is in the wound; and cure it until it is healed.
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por .iij. choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	When the woman's limb is inflamed, and this does not happen often, the cure is quick; this is defended by two things: firstly, because in many cases the woman is a virgin; and secondly, because one cannot find a woman who knows how to manage her passions as well as she does, even though she is chaste.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere; et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	And the third method if it is that by chance one cannot find a woman who knows this art of hands; and the fourth method if the woman’s stone is more blunt than the man’s, for it can make a deeper size, and great fear has it. And if you need to do so, if you take a wise maiden knowing this, and with her touch we strike the stone, and if you do not find it, no more can I do; and I present you with a maiden of good sense in the life of women, or a woman who knows a part of the art, and I command her to do what I command of the inquiry of the stone; and look well if the woman is a virgin: for if she is, she must push out her buttocks or the foundation and query the stone; and if she finds it, if she confines her buttocks, she must command her to hold her buttocks or with the patient, and wants and presses her left hand upon the bladder.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite; puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	If this be true, then command her to move from the groin to the heel of the bladder, as far as she comes to the root of the thigh; then place your hand on the hip at the root of the thigh and grasp the middle of the bone, where it is usually apparent, and feel the thigh in that part; and do not move the thigh above the hip or below the heel, and make the incision small at first. Then draw the flesh together to the normal size, if you feel the thigh is still painful as much as before the incision, and that many times of piercing have been done: for indeed, there are many kinds of nails, some small and large, some thin and sharp, some long and round, and of every kind.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	if the nails resemble these, know that they are the cause of the issue.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre; et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	If it does not go well, if you put on the glass vial and break it, keep it there for an hour until it has dried; then return to your work, until the hole is healed, and have the instruments that I have told you about for extracting the arrow as a helper in your work; and if it does not go well, and it is the artery that is severed, if you put the powder on the wound and strain out the threads and bandages, do not attempt it again, and leave the hole alone, except by chance the patient dies; then cure the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	When the color of blood is calmed and the wound has closed, if you return to your work, until the stone is forced out.
de hernie carnouse	De hernie carnouse.
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit .i. autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	Ramice aquouse is nothing else but an assembly of moisture or white sap, which is as soft as the kernels of corn, that contains the egg; and it is called "sap" and never properly exists in the yolk of the egg, if we take care that this is not another work; and this is the skin of the kernel between the white sap that we have mentioned.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the generation of this radish is weak, and comes from the kernels, and is spread out in that matter.</start_of_turn>
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus; et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	Under no circumstances should percussion be applied to the bones, for this moisture has many colors: or it is pale yellow, or without red, or black, or pale blue, and this is more; and these are the signs of gangrene in this assembly, for if it is white or soft as we have said, if the abscess is round like an egg, and it does not open the bones, because there is moisture all around.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef; et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	And if there is moisture in the flesh itself, if the abscess bursts with a portion of the yolk, it is thought to be another disease; and if the moisture is between the skin of the groin and the white fat, if he feels well; then when you see the color of the moisture, if you suspect that it has all been discharged, since its form is as before.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to that which comes after the introducer, judge that which is within.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz; puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions; puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir; puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue; et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when we draw the carbuncles with fire, if we think the patient is cured according to some poor people and the filling of his flesh; then we bind him on his back, on something high, and put a basin under him; then we sit on his left side, and command the minister to sit on his right side, and stretch out his arm to the second rib below the groin; then we take the sponge soaked in vinegar, and cut the skin of the groin among his thighs as far as the white fat; and we tear the skin straight down to the white fat, and we burn it secretly as before; then we pierce the white fat with a needle at a large hole, and drain all the liquid, and then put on our sponges, and stretch out the white fat upwards; and do not touch the groin bone, but only the white fat; cut off all or in pieces immediately the cost of him secretly, if you do not cut it well he will return the liquid; and if the yolk spurts from your wound, keep it in its place until you have completed the work of the white fat; then assemble the two bones of the groin at a joint, and cure him as the others.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	If you find the yellow bile corrupted by another disease, then you must tie up the veins that are suspended, doubting the discharge of blood; then cut off the limb at all the suspension, drain the bile, and cure as we have said.</start_of_turn
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset; et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	And if the wound is gathered in two parts together, its edges that are two branches; if you cut the other part as you did the first equally, then wipe the blood away and put in the wound a layer of soft linen soaked in rose oil; and put upon it another layer of linen soaked in wine and oil, and put upon the two edges two nails, and put under it doubled cloths, and bind it up according to this form.
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier; et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers; si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	Then take two cloths and use coarse wool yarn in this manner and sew them together at the waist of the braies; and one of the nails grasps on the foundation up to the back, and the other at the painful part; and the other two nails on the two angles, and when they are all assembled, the restriction is in the loop of the brazier; and never is medicine applied for this burn except for the size of a needle; and take only one needle with a fine point, and cut the leather of the nails, and when it is done as we have said, if the white substance which contains the blood is discovered; if you take the burn in this manner, and pierce that membrane as we have commanded, and burn with this fine needle.
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille; et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	And so it must be done in every way possible, until you have achieved your goal; and keep that the fire does not touch the egg; and see that this work is more soothing; and keep guard of the discharge of blood, more than the works of size; and if anything opposes you, or incisions or discharges of blood or anything else that contradicts, cure that which contradicts you, as it is said above.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit; pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer; puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee; et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	And if the patient is pale and does not wish to wait for this work because of its horror, if you deem it necessary, as I have said, and when you are certain by the signs that we have mentioned that the aquous solution is sufficient, if you make the patient sit on a low chair; then pierce the abscess at the lower part with a large needle, and make the perforation through to the bone; and let the wound be large enough that all the pus comes out; then put cotton on the wound and bind it, and leave to drain the remaining fluid, and cure until the wound is healed; and if the cloth does not stop the bleeding from the wound, it is necessary to drink a penny or the instrument with which the hydropic liquid is treated, as it is formed before; and enlarge the wound and see that the bleeding returns, and reassemble after six months or when it is convenient, and when it is reassembled as before, the patient will recover his health.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the buttocks
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse; et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	Hair that is in the root of this twig has doubt and fear in many places, for I believe that it is worth leaving alone; and I shall tell you the work and the signs of the abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	Therefore, abscesses often come about by swelling or foreign bodies, and it is mostly by chance.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion; et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief; et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	It is known by superfluous swelling and pain, which is spread as with wounds; and it is the color of an abscess according to the color of the flesh; and it causes no pain, and is an abscess of grief; and by chance it is a wound that is painful, bloody and purulent, and of dark color, and never comes from a vein, or from an inflamed vein.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois; et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	When it is not from a vein, if it is known by the arrangement of the abscess that it is painful, when you touch it; and I do not know anything other than that you must not touch it
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars; et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	He who makes an embolism of a vein is known by his disposition to the expression of pain in the two thighs; and he can make as well of this semblance as of the others; and it is only that you must take caution like the owners of coions, then the egg is up, and the thread is out of the white substance, and release the suspender from all parts of the egg.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope; et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	If the egg is already clotted with these veins, then you must only draw out the egg, and take hold; and if it is in the white or in what is in the vessels, you must draw out all that is in there, and take hold roundly
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if it is at the jaw or in the bones behind, you must remove all that is tense, and pull out the tooth, as we have said.</start_of_turn>
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	When your work is done, if you apply a bandage of fine wool soaked in rose oil and wine, then cure it with other remedies until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the buttocks
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait; et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	This is an abscess covered with a covering resembling a barrel, with the softening of the bones, and the patient groans loudly when he walks; and the cure for this disease is just as painful as this one that I have mentioned before, and all that we say about it is the work of an old man, according to what he does.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment; puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples; puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief; puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues; puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions; car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz; si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	You must make the patient sit on the edge of the seat, and then suspend the clothes from the waist down to the groin, and grasp them firmly, and extend them forward; then cut through the scrotum with a wide incision to uncover the testicles, and then draw out the testicles, as we have said in the extraction of arteries from the temples; then insert an awl or double thread and tie it to the first testicle or to the root where the thread has come, and tie the other end to the other testicle; then cut around them squarely, according to the length of the cords, and remove the corrupted humors; then cure the wound as usual or apply a bandage, so that no vessel is torn except for those which have already bled; for by this means there will be no harm, and if all the vessels are bled, you must draw out the testicles from all the vessels; so that they do not lose their nourishment from the incision of the vessels, and dry and do not suffer.
de la routure dou syfac	From the root of the wound.
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions; et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses; et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement; et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	The coming of this root is by section that comes or by swelling above the belly in the part of the spleen, for the intestines descend from that route to one of the kidneys; and this route is either by swelling or by extension of the liver, and these two methods are of two causes: by percussion, or by jumping, or by pressure, or by the elevation of grief fear, and by similar things; and the sign when it is by swelling of the spleen is that there is swelling and swelling in length, and does not come immediately; and the swelling is equal throughout, for the spleen presses the intestine.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the sign is when the jaw is fractured, that it causes sudden pain in the cheek, and the abscesses are various in appearance, such as skin swelling, and it is because of the discharge of the intestine and the tension of the jaw.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And never are the bones displaced with the intestine, and is retained when pressure is put on it, and causes great pain to the patient, even when it is pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these fiery cures with fear, for it is known that they are dangerous.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir; puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes; puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc; puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir; puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars; puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille; et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement; et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz; puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz; puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars; puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne; et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi; et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant; puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	If you command or the patient recommends that the intestine be held in his hand within the wound, if it can be returned; then either saw on his collar between your hands, and keep the thighs; then extend the thumb upwards, and cut all the skin of the kidneys along; then enter from the belly of the size of an olive according to what you must master to open the wound, and be such that the intestines do not escape; then pull out the spleen that is outside the skin of the kidneys, until the white spleen is uncovered from all sides; then bring your index finger into that which teaches the kidney, in that which is between the white spleen which is outside the skin of the egg, and between the second spleen, and depart that which is behind the egg, and between the second spleen; and then move the thumb to the right hand inside the kidney, and bring the white spleen to the top of your left hand, and keep the egg to the whole of the spleen towards the size; and command the minister to extend the egg upwards, and unhook that which is behind the ligament; and inquire at your shoulders if there is any intestine or white spleen hardened, and if you find nothing, if it goes to the belly outside; then take a needle or there is a thick thread made of X threads, and pass it in the back part of the spleen, which is after the skin of the kidneys; after the size, then cut the threads that appear from the threads, until there are three threads; and assemble them one on top of the other in the form of a cross, and bind the spleen, of which we have said that it is outside the skin of the kidneys, with a strong thread of two parts; and cover the threads with the threads, and bind them in two parts, so that no vessel that supports them can enter into the wound, except in the case of an embolism that does not arise; and put the thread back in place according to the first thread along two shoulders; and after these two threads leave the spleen that is outside the kidney the greatest of a thumb; and after all the rest according to the roundness that the egg carries; then cut in the part that is outside the skin of the kidneys, as much as it does without repair, and bow; as we have said before; then mix wool soaked in oil, and put them in the wound, and mix the thread that we have said.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And never cauterize the flesh except as we have said, after the incision, in case of doubt of bloodletting.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece; puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	For in this matter there are often evacuations of blood, and the limb remains hanging there as long as it aches; and if it lingers too long, even if it arises from a hot bath, put on that which we have said, until it aches; then treat the wound with another treatment, until it is perfectly healed.
de hernie carnouse	De hernie carnouse.
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this chapter I have never seen anyone cure by the iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz; puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the old people say that it is made just like the twig which binds the nut, in part as you tie up the blood vessels, after the size above lightly downwards; then take hold of me, and treat the abscess of that which causes it, until the blood vessels cease to bleed; and treat as we have said, until it is perfectly healed.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres; et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent; et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert; et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere: et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois; et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac; et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre; puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines; puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	Never comes a rupture of the spleen, as we have said, and open the belly; and do not touch any intestines as they are connected, and if you do touch them, that is enough, and repair at once; and whatever remains if it lingers too long in this place, if you believe the wound or the spleen, until the intestines are detached; and this comes from the extension of the spleen which is in the abdomen, as we have said, because it is swollen, then is softened and relaxed and open; and treat as we have said, and never treat with iron in this manner: and let the patient lie still on his back between your hands, and then grasp the belly of the rupture and stretch it out to a width of three fingers; and then remove the spleen which is outside the skin that covers it, then take hold of the needle and remove the part of the spleen that appears; and press at the bottom of the belly, and cut the two ends of the spleen that appear on the top of the needle, and cut one and the other; and then remove the head of the needle, and do not touch the spleen or extend the belly or do anything else, as I have told you in the treatment of the root of the intestines; and then treat with the treatment for wounds.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when you cauterize the hair, if the pus boils and heals the wound, as long as it is healed.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The swelling is constrained, and shows no sign on the surface, and the cautery is mute in this limb, and the more proximate to health.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	of the softening of the skin of the joints.
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a .iij. costures ou .iiij. fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Many times the skin of the joints is softened in sick persons, because the marrow which is within is softened, and it is seen; and it is necessary, when one sees it cured, to make the patient sit up on his back, and to cut the softened skin over the natural skin; then join the two layers of the skin with sutures, and if you see, close the superfluous softened skin with two or three stitches firmly; then press between the sutures, and cure like the other wounds, until it is healed, and cut the thread.
dou chastrement	Dou chastrement.
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	Saiches that are deemed useless in our laws, and for this reason I do not wish to speak of them in this book; and it is not necessary to force anyone to do so. For one, the patient’s eye responds when asked. And the other, we often mix up the cautery of various beasts with our assistants, as with a goat, sheep, cat, and other beasts.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	I say therefore that cautery is done in two ways: by traction or by incision.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	In the traction method, we make the limb lie in hot water, until the bone softens and swells; then we grasp the limb with our hand until it is reset and no longer painful
Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	From the armpit: command that you hold the arm firmly, and press the skin of the armpits to your left hand, then bind the dressing, and support each limb with a support, when you have well secured them; and leave no trace of sweat or visible sweat which is on the blood vessels; and this method of cautery is milder than that which is made by attraction, because by attraction remains by chance no hair, for which the best desire is luxury; then cure the wound until it is healed.
des hermofrodites	des hermofrodites.
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	Hermaphroditism is according to two manners as in the home: one if between the two testicles there appears as much as the nature of a woman, or if there are hairs, and sometimes in court it urinates.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	And the other manner is in women, and has on the navel as much as a boy and two testicles
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	And the treatment for the bite of an animal is that you cauterize the hairs all around; and you treat it like other wounds. In the second method, of those whose urine spurts through the pores of the skin, if there is no remedy.
de la tentigene	Hermaphrodism is in two ways as in women: one if between the two testes opens as with the figure of the nature of a woman, or if there is hair, and sometimes in the urine is retained. And the other way if it is in women, and has on the navel as a beard and two testes. And the cure of the womb and fame if it is that you crush the testicles completely, and the cure is like other wounds; in the second way, of those homes whose urine leaps through the skin of the testes, if there is no cure.
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	Tenacity is a bite that is too violent for the natural part, as women often have as much pain as a hand; and this is the cure.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	It is necessary that you hold the excess of the bite of your hand or genitals firmly; and touch it lightly; and do not go too deep, for blood does not come from there; then treat with other medicines until it is healed; and for another bite that comes from the mouth of the marrow, and the spleen, and by chance spurts out, and is like a wound, and for this reason it is called the old "coward's disease".
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If you think you have cured it, as we have said before, continue the treatment until it is healed.
de erratique	De erratique.
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	If it is uncertain whether the woman is well or poorly conceived, or if the rupture is small; or if it is by birth or by disease that comes from it; or if it is by a clot of blood or a thick or thin blood-vessel, and is made in the marrow, or the ribs, or the spleen, or any other place; then it must be suspected, and the conception must be known by observing the woman's behavior.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	If swelling appears nearby, either on the side or on the other, it is nearby
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	If it is a thick blood-vessel, and it is nearby as two fingers, if you are in a hurry, and it has burst: put your two index fingers together, and the woman lying on her back, spreading out her legs; then the two fingers push, as long as the thick blood-vessel is round, and is over the swelling; then take a cloth, soak it in oil, and put it on the wound, and keep the woman still at rest, until it has healed.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	And if the scapula is hard and thick, it is good that you grasp it with a sponge resembling a laurel leaf.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is stamped with charcoal, if you suspend it on the incision and grasp it; and have the medicines that are staying still, such as acaice, dragon's blood, incense, and lots of eggs; then mix in a plaster of lead wide, so that the wound does not stick; and let it be long, and mix in a lint of hemp. Then do other cures until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	And when charcoal comes to the marrow, if you cover it as this method suggests, this is not for abscesses.</start_of_turn
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	For the abscess in the marrow, do not touch fire.</start_of_turn
des emorroides	of hemorrhoids.
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	Emorroydes are open veins which do not usually heal without treatment; and when old, they become thick and tough. We have already mentioned the signs and symptoms of such wounds; here I will tell you those which are most frequent and which usually lead to recovery.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	I say that when emorroids and the tough parts [blood clots] are buried in the marrow and are not felt, they must be treated with iron to achieve a cure
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	Those which are in the mouth of the marrow can be felt, and these can be cured.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	It is necessary therefore that you put the woman in a cold house, then hold the elbow firmly, grasp the joint at its roots, and sprinkle over it restraining medicines such as chamomile and dragon’s blood and incense, and similar things; then bind the limb when it shows signs of healing, then immerse it in cold water; and if blood comes, let it flow into a decoction of sumac and pomegranate peel, and meadowsweet and other things, and then give her barley flour, and mix it with honey and rue, and make a poultice of it and apply it to her back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	And if it [the hair] sticks, that is good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	If this does not happen, if it makes air bubbles at the back and has worms [meaning boils] that will cause pain; then take lint, and moisten it with the juice of plantain or with the juice of marigold with old wine, and make air to the wound.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the abscess is cured, if you see blood dripping from the wound as long as it is healthy; and the one called "albather" is red, and is similar to a blackhead, if you cover it as I have said previously; then cure until it is healthy again
des apostemes de la marris	Emoroids are openings of veins which without restraint are usually harmless; and when they are old they become tough. And we have already said in the division the signs and symptoms, and I shall now tell you those which are most useful for the cure. I say that emorroids and the tough ones, when they are pressed into the marrow, are not felt, except by the physician. For those which are at the entrance of the marrow, we can feel them, and these we can cure. It is therefore necessary that you put the woman in a cold house, then stretch the heel as much as possible, and press on its root, then sprinkle on restraining medicines such as acacia and dragon’s blood and incense, and similar things; then withdraw the piece an hour later, and put it in cold water; and if there is still pain, if she has taken a decoction of sumac and pomegranate seeds and barley and similar things, and then swallow barley flour, and mix with honey and fennel, and make one application on her back. And if it has stopped bleeding, that is good. If this is not the case, make her lie down with a bandage on her back and apply pressure with a finger; then take a cloth and wet it with the juice of plantain or with the juice of elderberry with wine vinegar, and make her lie down. And when the abscess has subsided, if it is yellow, it is like a rough chief, if it is red, it is like a scab which has been left too long; and in both cases it must be covered as I have said the tough one. And then it must be cured as long as it is sane. And when the abscess has subsided, if it is yellow, it is like a rough chief, if it is red, it is like a scab which has been left too long; and in both cases it must be covered as I have said the tough one.
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	Many ways of abscesses come about in the body, such as carbuncles and pyretic abscesses and herpes and hemorrhoids and fistulas and varicose veins and burned abscesses, and many other diseases that I have mentioned in the previous section
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	It is proper that I should say that I depart from this treatment when the burn comes into the marrow, which is not a burn but which collects pus; and if you know the work of iron, look if the burn is still red at the outset of its coming, and full of heat and fever, and if it becomes red, you shall see it.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	Do not be in a hurry, but make me wait until the pain is eased; then make the patient sit on a chair, and put two small cushions or he will recline, and support his back and unite his limbs so that his thighs are spread apart, and put his arms across his knees, and bind them firmly with a bandage; then gently push the bail towards the breastbone, and bring the instrument from which we remove the pus from the marrow, so that this will take its form; and know that when you bring this instrument in, make sure you first ascertain the depth of the marrow, so that what enters with the instrument does not go deeper than it should, and does not hurt the patient; and if the instrument is too large, cover the depth of the marrow with a cloth so that the instrument does not hurt it; and make sure that you put the horn of the instrument on the underside, and hold the instrument.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.	And when the abscess opens, and we put a finger to the root, if it covers the head and the armpit, and when the wound is emptied, if you wish, put in the wound some soft wool soaked in rose oil or dry green oil; put the dressing firmly over the wound and over the dressing put on a layer of linen wool soaked in warm or cold water; then cure it after two days of dressing has elapsed from that time, until it is healed; and never remove the dressing and wound with a clip of water and honey, and then with water or licorice root and alum.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	And if the wound has healed in the wound, if you wish, take care not to burn it, but cure it as we have said before in the division.
de l’enfantement	Many are the causes of inflammation in the marrow, as in chancre and perforated abscess, herpes, swelling, fistula, hemorrhoids, and charred bone, and many other diseases which I mentioned in the division. It is therefore necessary that I speak in this treatment of charred bone that comes in the marrow, which is not an abscess that collects pus only; and if you know the work of iron, look if the abscess is still in its beginning, and full of heat and fever, and if it becomes red, tell me when you saw it. Do not therefore pierce it immediately, but make me measure the pain until it is appeased; then make the patient sit on a chair, and give him three small stools or make him recline, and support his back and join his limbs as far as the limb is deformed; let his thighs be spread out, and put his arms across his knees, and bind them securely with a strong bandage; then hold the bail towards the lower costal margin, and bring the instrument from which we take the mouth of the marrow, so that this comes after; and know that when you bring this instrument, that you must first feel the depth of the marrow to ensure that what enters does not go deeper than it should and does not harm the patient; and if the instrument is too large, know that you must cover the depth of the marrow with a drape so that the instrument does not touch it; and know that you must put the trumpet of the instrument at its base and hold the instrument. And when the abscess bursts, and we have the hand in, if you know the cover must be applied to the chief and the surrounding area; and when the pus is evacuated, know that you must put in the wound a few soft sponges soaked in rose oil or in dry green oil; put the sponge firmly against the depth of the wound, and put over it and on the wound a clean gauze pad soaked in water or mallow, which must be cooked; then cure after three days following this. And if the wound is closed in the marrow, know that you must be careful not to burn with iron, but cure it as we have said in the division.
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	The master first of all must know the figure of natural infancy, and the signs are when you see the woman pressing down on the belly, and desire to smell the breast; then the child hastens to rise; then withdraw the breast that the infant's feeding is according to the natural figure, and comes out from his head, and supports him with his hand; and when you see these signs, if you press slightly on his belly, so that the child comes out headfirst; for when he descends from his head, if he is supported with his hand, and is made whole by his superfluousness.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	For it never comes except from the feet, or from the arm or hand, or from the belly, or from the side, and is converted by chance from his collar, and by other vicious figures; if the master is at the dance that he is wise and discreet in these matters, and avoids error and deception, and I will show you all the figures how we must help him.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	When the fetus comes down naturally through the head and the woman gives birth fiercely, and her strength is weak, if you make her sit on a chair, or the women hold her; and arise her nature from oil or rue or rue oil, and then continue the play between her thighs the small cushion which is her shape:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.	And split the secondine, and bind to its nail as long as the moisture that is in its core is fierce; and press the woman’s belly until the fetus descends, and if it does not descend, if you must, clench the woman with muscle of fenugrec with oil of assa; then let her take and expel a condition, and keep her mouth and nose closed for an hour: if it is now delivered.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	And if two hands come out violently, if you must, gently hold them down; and if they will not enter, put the woman on a seat, and keep her feet high; then withdraw the seat from the earth, and hold her, that she does not cry out; and if the hands still will not enter, and the fetus is dead, if you grasp the hands at the shoulder which is in front, and pull out the child, and restore equally.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	From the issue of the child on his feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut; et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz; puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	When the child comes onto his feet, if you can push up; and then twist to and fro, until they are even; then take hold of the feet and stretch to and fro.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi; si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	If he jumps up to his hips, if the master commands him to take hold, and makes him cough up the phlegm; if he jumps too high, God help him
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if he does not jump up as we have said, if the lord commands and commands, as long as it is in accordance with the natural figure.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For thus is it rightly done.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier; et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz; et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre; puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	And if he does not jump so high as we have seen, say that you take muscle from the shoulder, oil of alum, gum mastic, and broth, and grind them all together in a mortar; and put on the nature of the woman inside and take away this swelling, then make her sit in hot water until the ribs are soft; and when she is softened from the water, give her a collar of myrrh, and put on her clothes, and leave her for an hour; then make her sit on her seat, then make her cough and strain her mouth and nose, and take hold of her belly slightly, for the child jumps now.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	Then he sits on the edge of the bed, and makes him cough and strain his mouth and his nose, and grasps his belly lightly, for the fetus now leaps from his genitals
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc; puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit; et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval; et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains; et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	When the child comes in this form, if he puts his hands on his face and head; then either he is struck on the neck, and the piece of the jaw is hanging down, or he is without support; and he bends his hands on his face and head, and then he grasps his hands under his belly, and he forces the cushions outwards until they appear in the throat; and if the child does not jump, if he grasps his piece and moves it, then he moves his belly upwards, and he lets go of his hands; and the child will be saved and saved; and command the woman to take care of him as long as the child remains.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	because the child’s hand has just gone limp.
I covient engignier a ramener la main: s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler; s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment; puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit; et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main; et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	I can teach you to restore the limb: if it cannot be restored, if you make the woman rise up and call for help; if she cannot call for help, if you make her lie down and put her legs out; then mix the medicine that I have told you about; and if she does not improve, if you make her sit on the chair, then study to restore the limb; and when the limb is restored according to its natural shape, make her spit, and command her to take care of him as long as the child remains strong
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	From the issue of the limb from its socket, and has expanded her hands, and her face turned towards her mother’s back.</start_of_turn>
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement; et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc; et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	I command that you grasp his hand firmly, then twist it a little to and fro, and move it lightly; and when it is even, put upon the oily substance of alum and oil, as we have said before, and then command that it move a little to and fro; and when you have done this, seat him upon a chair and command him to grasp; and he will vomit.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	in this way throughout the second period of time.
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie; et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes; puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois: adonques si istra legierement.	When he comes with force in this manner throughout the secondine, if you seize the secondine at his nail, while the moisture is evacuated; and if it swells up on his face and neck, if you seize it of the abscess, that it be not retained, and the child will die; then take the child out, as you have put it, and command the woman not to move again: thus it will be light.</start_of_turn>
de l’issue des gemelz	of the issue of the twins.
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent .iij. ou .iiij.; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	Hairs that grow together often do not grow at the same time; two or three do not grow simultaneously. This is not an unusual occurrence, and it often happens.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom; je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude; et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	What is strange is that they live without a name; I know well that they are multiplied, and they are driven out by the syfac which is linked to the gut; and never has anything escaped as naturally as all of them, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait; et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	If they escape roughly, if the treatment is as we have said, and if the spirit is tame, and make haste and lightly what she makes; and do as much as you can for your health.</start_of_turn>
de plusors enfans	to drain what is causing it.</start_of_turn>
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient; si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	Never are they formed in the first, second, third, fourth, fifth, sixth or seventh month, or more than fifteen; and they are all formed like a child by the measure of their glorious age, and it is fitting that the spirit be pure because by chance many things happen; do as it is fitting.</start_of_turn
de l’enfant mort	of a dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains; si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort; si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees; et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant; puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges; puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief; si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes; et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide; et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	When you cure a woman of a dead child or an empty womb, if there is no urgency and you are constrained by the workload of your hands; if you suspect that the woman is of sound health, and has no accident or fear of death; if you suspect that the woman is in labor, and her shoulders are clinched, her arms raised and her legs lifted; then touch her navel with two fingers, or bind her to the bed if she is not being treated in the delivery of the child; then smear her mouth with a mixture of mustard, alum, and flaxseed and linseed seeds; then anoint her hands with these oils and these powders; then place them in the womb lightly; then command her to bear down or let her bear down naturally as she is able; and take care that the child does not appear to descend from her head; if she forces the medicines into her eyes or nose or mouth or in her palace or on her beard or in her forceps or close to her ribs, and if the descent is on a piece of bone, if she grasps or cries out and has pale lips; and you must hold the medicine in her right hand, and put the thumb between her two fingers of her left hand, and hold her firmly with her entire hand, and insert the medicine into none of the places we have mentioned, until it comes out naturally; and this is the form of the medicine:
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz; et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	Then the hook finds another bone, or the third if you are in charge, if so the extraction must be even; and then extend them evenly by moving from side to side, for movement itself is sufficient, and the teeth of the hook may be held by hand.
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie; et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	And if some remains, if one sees a little of its oil, and keeps it in that part, and treats the other part; and if there is no more to remove, if you put this hook or higher up again, and do this until it comes out whole.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote; puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	And if one hand comes in front of the other, and it cannot be pulled back due to tension, you must cover above the drape, until it is whole; then pull the thumb at the joint of the wrist or the elbow, and you must do the same with the other hand, and there will be two thumbs.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue; ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui; et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment; et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer; et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues; et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	And if the head of the shoulder is large and swollen at the outlet, or if there is an assembled chief's head, if you must join the spinous process between your two thumbs, and grasp the chief and pull out the swelling; or you can roll it with the instrument called "almidach," with which the swelling comes with the abscess or chapter that follows this; and so make the swelling swell naturally; and then treat the bones as tenacious, and when the head of the shoulder leaps up and strains at the forcele, if it is fractured, until the moisture that is or has come out leaps out; and if it cannot be extruded, if the bone breaks in pieces at the muscle that you must break; and if it is inflamed in the belly or along the ribs, if you must break as many ribs as the moisture corrects.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	If it is swollen on the side, if the attraction is strong, and the approach to the root of the marrow is easier.</start_of_turn>
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main; et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre; et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris; puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer; et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses; et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	And if it is swollen in the belly or the arm, it is best to remove the swelling with a drape wrapped around the hand; and hold the belly or the arm until the moisture that is causing it disappears. And if another limb is affected and the bone is displaced, if the limb is pulled from its socket by the force of the hand, treat it until the socket is closed by the callous that has come; for if it cannot be passed through, it must be brought up and out by force. And if the opening of the socket is narrowed by the callous that has come, if it cannot be passed through, it must be dilated with moist and fatty things; and it must be plastered with soft and moist substances.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif; et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	And if the limb is on its cost, and you must set it straight, if you must do what we have said of the living child; and if it does not take hold, if you must force it out piecemeal, and leave nothing of the second.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris; et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	When you have done this, if there is blood in the wound as we have said above, and if it comes out into the water, if there is need, put in a retracting agent.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut .i. autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman whose belly had two children, and they were both dying. Then she consulted with another, and cured the other.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time, there came a boil in the house, and it grew so big that it opened, and it began to swell greatly.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I cried out for help, and I thought for a long time, and could not stop the bleeding.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I saw a thick clot of blood coming out, and after a while another bone, and afterwards several days another
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I was amazed, for this belly has no bones
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	I thought that these were the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point; et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu; et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	When you have done this, if there is blood in the wound as we have said above, and if it comes out into the water, if there is need, put in a retracting agent. I have not known of this chapter except for the fact that when the master finds a strange thing, he must ask for help.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	to bring the marrow back to its place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a .ij. tornans as .ij. chiés des .ij. liiens.	After that comes the form of pressure, when one has closed the books; and for .ij. returns there are .ij. tears of .ij. lines.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux; et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi; et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus; et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	However, the corners must be more subtle than the retractor, or be made of ebony or boxwood; and the mouth of the wound must be wide open, and the margin of the trees must be long, and long half a palm; and between the two limbs there must be two joint-spacings of the same measure, which must be fixed in one and the other, half a palm long or more; and these two joint-spacings must be stretched in the mouth of the wound when the two corners are turned
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles; et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large; et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes; puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	Another form, more subtle and lighter in appearance, may be made from ebony or boxwood, according to the shape of the nails; and it has two chisels two awls, as you see, of a palm of a long size, and two of a broad size; and when you see opening the mouth of the instrument, make the woman sit I let, the pieces between and the legs over, then join the two awls together in the mouth, and hold the head of the instrument between her thighs; then hold your hand over the instrument, as if you had made the nails even, according to the quantity that you see opening the mouth of the instrument, until the bail makes what it wants.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	These instruments are all very slippery, and their resemblance is multiplied in their appearance; and when you see them appear, the more haste there is to open them, and the higher your home is for their quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	If you do not desire the instrument except that you do not see it, for its necessity is not excused.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis; et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	When the second [tooth] is retained in infancy, if you command the patient to retain the milk tooth, and then make her spit it out of her mouth, and hold your hands over her mouth and nose; and if she spits out for this reason, well done.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire; toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	If this be not so, take I pot and make I hole or cut; and I put herbs therein that can open the mouth of the mare, as camomile, rue, anis, chamomile, cassia and centaury; all these herbs, or some of them, let them be boiled or put in water over the fire; then put in a slug or hole in the pot, and the other head in the mouth of the mare, and bind them until the vapor comes out of the mare; then make her vomit, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If the secondine has pricked at its base, hold the eyes steady until they grow
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction; mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	And if she remains after this cure, and is not better, as I command at the dance, let her moisten her left hand with oil of sesame or with almond paste, and then put it in the nature, and call for the second time; and when she has found it, if she grasps it and stretches it forward and backward, so that the mare does not cry out at the extraction; but it is necessary to move her slightly to the left and right, and then treat her. If she comes and becomes quiet again.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes; et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire; mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon; si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	If the mouth of the marrow is swollen, we have said the cure is to cauterize and fumigate with herbs; and if it is not from all that we have said, if you do not use anything else, keep that which is at the mouth of the marrow bound to the hip of the woman, then clench it with oil of tetrafarmaçon; if she bites and relaxes, she will come out whole; but nevertheless, when she comes out, if there is a bad odor from the stomach and head, and she vomits, the patient is cured.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	If it is suspected that such fumigations are useful in this case: neither of the ancients has proved the use of fumigation with rue or dried figs.</start_of_turn>
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The shape of the instrument with which we fumigate the woman at her retention of flowers and seconds if this is the case:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu; et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	It is like seeing a fox, put the head of the sufferer over the fire; and either fumigate with charcoal, or apply a poultice until it is consumed, and start again.</start_of_turn>
de percier lou fondement	Or let the fumigations be over the charcoal, and the smoke until it is consumed, and begin again.
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac: si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche; puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many children are born who do not have the firm basis perceptible, for they have been stamped upon by a subtle syfat: if you command her to dance that she pierce that syfat at her will, and do not let her prick with any sharp object, and keep the dressing that she does not touch; then put on coarse cloth soaked in wine and oil, and cure her with oil until she is healed.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it will heal, if put in or pulls out a splinter of wood, and let the hands stay still, and be stiff as when the beast has seen the fever in the chamber.</start_of_turn>
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	And never comes this stumblement of a wound or abscess; if you cover that stumblement: if it is cured, as we have said of the splinter of wood.</start_of_turn
de la fistule dou fondement	of fistula from the root.
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	Fistulas that come from the foundation are nodules, and those that come from below the foundation deviate, or in the space of two parts, if there is a fistula or several; and when that nodule is old, if it persists, and is accompanied by moisture, white or soft pus, and never are these fistulas permanent; they are known by the fact that there is blood, evacuation or wind during evacuation when the patient defecates, and by chance in a leap.</start_of_turn>
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	If there are fistulas that reach the bladder, and half way up the thigh; and they reach the hip joint, and even the coccyx.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant: et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	And thus it is known on the fistula persisting at the base, and does not go away: that you must bite your thumb index or base, and insert a fine needle of spider or iron into the fistula when there is no swelling.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit; et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit: saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	And if there is swelling, if you insert a sponge or horsehair, as long as you feel the swelling or pressure on your thumb; and if you do not feel it, and there is no discharge of blood or wind, as we have said: evacuate the swelling that does not burst; if you delay in curing.</start_of_turn>
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	When the fistula persists until the bladder or urinary tract, if in a leap the urine escapes and cannot be stopped by medicines.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu; s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement; et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	If it is perceived up to the armpit, if the vein is still there; if there is no swelling and the pain subsides, if it has been properly positioned, and there is no medicine or support by ointment; and in these persistent fistulas there is no cure except work, and the vanities of the fools who interfere.</start_of_turn
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre; puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	In that one which is neither new nor old, hope for health by fire, as I have seen; and that the patient lies between your hands on his back; and he holds his legs up to his hips, and has his hips inclined towards his belly; then make an attempt to pull or plunge if there is pain, until you feel or the attempt comes.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans; si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	If the patient feels pain at the root of the limb, if you think that you have grasped the bone, if you feel that the attempt has been perceived; either uncover or feel between your thumb and index finger the cartilage or bone, then pull out that which is personal; if this does not suffice, it will not be healed.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc; et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit; et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil; et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	One can easily heal almost all ailments, but this is not always the case; and the help which one does make, if one severs the fine cautery according to the size of the fistula, as it is said before; and one fills all around the fistula, until it goes beyond the root; and do this twice or thrice, until you feel that these hairs which are similar to a nail of oil must be burned; and then treat with soft compresses until the hair has fallen out, then treat with oil that binds the hair and closes the wound
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If he is sane, that is well.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez; et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur; si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente; et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	If he is sane, that is well; for if he attempts between and does not pierce until he reaches the root which is or should be, and between his thumb and the attempt a thick covering of hair or sificate, and you will see the fistula at that which is under the covering as blood; if the copes of the commencement of the fistula, and hold steadily before the attempt, and then cauterize afterwards, until it reaches the head of the attempt; and the attempt will be delivered, and will cease. Then praise the hairs that were required that seemed like a hen’s foot, and nothing remains of them.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	If he does not go away from you, and if you are between him and the work, if you cauterize with fire or medicine that is strong.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor; puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe; puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	For the fire cautery brings together two things: namely, the burning of these hairs above-mentioned, and the coagulation of blood and the drying of moisture; then the cure of wounds with soft sponges or broken chaff, until the blood flows freely; and then cauterize the hairs which are burned in the flow of blood; then cure the wound of suppuration with dry sponge and these are the dry medicines.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it is restored, if it is healed and does not return.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if an abscess comes up to the root of the bone, and is loosened from the flesh, if the bone or root remains loose, inquire about that.</start_of_turn>
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres: ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit; puis le cure, si com nos avons dit; par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé; puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues; puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	If thou feel the attempt, and between the second and the third there is the thread or the flesh or bone, or it is near to pierce, if there is no greater force than the way of escape and hope, by the administration of one of the three methods: or thou cauterize it as we have said, or thou bind it until the end, or if thou do thus put thy hand to the test and cure as before; and do not fear too much, that thou cover only that which holds the foundation, and let the evacuation go in the natural way; then cure as before; by chance if it be well, or thou drain that covering and the mucus then when it is bound from the foundation, or by attempt or by other pointed instrument; then tie up that which is necessary in the wound, as thou do; then study to restore the wound, and to stop the fistula in the part following the foundation: if it be a lighter thing to the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	And never are fistulas in this manner: when you bite the attempt at the fistula, and it is either cost or extends deeply from the leather below, if you take a bite pierced at the head according to this fashion:
Et i boute .i. fil tort en .ij., et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And there is always a thread torn in two, and the attempt is at the whole thread in the fistula until it is at the head.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement; et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II; et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent; puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	And never are fistulas in this manner: when you bite the attempt at the fistula, and it is either cost or extends deeply from the leather below, if you take a bite pierced at the head according to this fashion: if it is perforated at the root of the foundation, then draw out the thread of that which is perforated, so that you bite your thumb or foundation; and draw out the head of the thread, and reunite the two bones together, and restrain one to the other, and leave it for one or two; and do not restrain it ever again, until the thread has stopped these hairs that are between the two, and that are itching; then cure the wound until it is healed and healthy.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not burst, if you force it to break in all the ways you can, it will not be too much damaged.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it is not right to make the wound wider by force, and then to cure it as we have said, when it is still sound.</start_of_turn>
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans; et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	The form of the spiky nipple from which the fistula is made is moist and thick with one part, but trenchant; and on the other hand not, for in this case we must not grasp that which we must not grasp. If you see this:
des emorroydes	Des emorroydes.
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors; et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz; si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines; et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot; et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere; ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement; cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere; et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors; et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz; si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racine; et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot; et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere; ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement; cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere; et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc; puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose; et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If you agree that you must bring the shoulder close to this manner: take I thread of silk, and pierce it with a needle, and then pass the thread through below and make the needle pierce through the other side, and take II threads of silk from the needle, and if they are thick; tighten the thread forming, then knot the thread, and pull out the needle, and make secure all the others, and leave I to correct the excess of blood; then put on the foundation I bandage slightly damped in rose oil or cerate, and put on the foundation, and command the patient to rest; and then leave it until it aches, and when it is sore, if the cure of oil and other cure, until it is healed.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	while the itching has ceased or the foundation has been secured
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	There are often spasms of the bowels, and by constriction of nature, and when the disease is advanced and medicine is of no avail.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient; et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If you notice at the point of a scab or at your nail the scale below, which does not allow it to moisten; then cure it until it is healed if it is possible; and if it cannot be healed, if you must renew the shaving more strongly than before, until it bleeds, and be scraped away; then cure it until it is healed.
dou fremit	but let him groan.
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont; et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	Formice is a small outgrowth that grows forward from the limb, and goes out towards the edge of the wound; and never does the trueve touch it, and it is felt as though dead from fear, and comes over the whole limb, and more than in any other part.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor; puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	And the cure is that you take a piece of goose quill, or a piece of strong vinegar, and put that salve on the wound, until the circle turns blue around the wound; then turn your hand over the entire wound until you have embraced it all around the wound, and put it out towards the edge, and scrape the wound from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if thou seest, if thou do this with a needle of spider or of iron as it is said, and be subtle and attentive:
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	And if thou seest, if thou do this with a needle of spider or of iron as it is said, and be subtle and attentive, do not perceive [the movement of the eye], for to keep it still, and to press [the eye] lightly. And if thou seest, if thou cauterize the limb, if it is before or alongside the cautery.
de la forme dou clistere	and if thou seest, if thou do this with a needle of spider or of iron as it is said, and be subtle and attentive, do not perceive [the movement of the eye], for to keep it still, and to press [the eye] lightly. And if thou seest, if thou cauterize the limb, if it is before or alongside the cautery, do this of the form of a cluster.
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	Never make a cluster of silver or gold, or of spider’s blood melted or molten; and never make of these small and great things according to these to which they are subject.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Those who suffer from fevers and who are weak and painful are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	Their form is small and great if it is due to a wide belly, or the belly is bound according to this manner:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I; et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre; et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	And if there is a swelling or the belly is tied, if you see, and the shoulder is either pierced or cut; and there are two holes at one side of the breastbone, and one at the other; or if the belly or abdomen has medicine in a bladder of gut or parchment, or is pierced all around with numerous holes, and there is one inch of space between each hole, then put in this hole one strong thread of strong thread twisted in the shape of an X or around the belly, and assemble the belly as if it were a nail; and when the medicine is inside, if there is an instrument in front of a strong thread, then clip it; and this is the shape of a circle.
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement; puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	And let the medicine be neither too hot nor too cold; anoint the head with a cluster of oil or balm of egg, or something like that, then bind it lightly; then grasp the minister with both hands together, until it is fully visible, then draw out the cluster, and leave the patient his legs exposed, and if the medicine sees that it is sufficient, if the patient sleeps all night, that is more effective.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	If he puts it to the test in a case of wound of the belly, and the physician hastens to leave, if he returns as long as he is well.</start_of_turn>
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	And if there is swelling of the limb or wound, or abscess, if the cluster is as subtle as for one child; that is the form of a subtle cluster when the skin is strained:
des plaies	wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	We have already mentioned in this chapter the treatment of wounds; or rather the treatment of hands and medicines, according to their completion.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse depending on how they are made, and depending on the parts of the body or the wounds themselves, and how they are made
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses; ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres; et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	The things that cause wounds are bites of stone, and the size of spear and nail, or lance or fist or sickle, or similar things; or that are made according to the rules of the body, as for a wound that bites on the neck, or on the head, or the shoulder, or the belly, or the liver, and similar limbs; and I will tell you the cure for a wound of the head and I will begin with simple wounds because the memory will come to mind in this chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree; et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	I say that when a simple wound occurs or a dislocation, and the bone is not fractured, take care if it is from a wound or from something else, and the skin is entirely ruptured and the wound is large, and you doubt the depth of the wound: if you do the same thing too often, you will make the patient sicker from the head downwards even if there is blood coming from the wound itself; or let the blood flow in the opposite direction of the part affected; and listen to the patient’s complaint of thirst for wine and meat.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char; et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice; et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés; et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If he does not recover, if he is nourished only with meat, and does not drink wine, does not eat cheese; and take out the wound, if there is pus coming from it, cover the wound loosely with soft cotton or oiled rose ointment, or in styptic wine; and if there is no deeper wound, put on the wound itself, if it is fresh with all its blood, and it is not moved by air, dust, or anything else; and if it has been moved, put on some ointment until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large like a spear and similar, and the limbs do not join together by tension, if you join them with stitches, as I will say, for wounds like those of the belly, with stitches.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	If the wound is exposed by a bone fragment, and it is painful, and only held by a piece of cartilage; then treat the wound with medicine, and restore flesh in place of skin, and command the patient to eat coarse food, such as testicles and bread, as well as poultry, and similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure; et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil; et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	If you find or see a broken piece of bone, if it does not penetrate the bone, if you can move it out whole, and you can drain the swelling, then treat it; and if there is a blood vessel in the wound or vein, which cannot be stopped by medicine, if it is an artery, and if you find it dislocated, if it is held by a thread; and if this does not help, if you must, cauterize it.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if these wounds are small and simple, if it is a light cure: then put in this powder which adheres as soon as it has moved.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon II parties; chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc; et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	The method of the powder is as follows: take incense one part; dragon’s blood two parts; live chalk three parts, and grind them together; and use the powder liberally, and strain the wound, until it is well closed and reunited with all its blood; and then bind it firmly, and leave it until it heals, if it does not swell; for we do not dress the medicine until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And never do we do this charcoal treatment alone, when we have no incense or blood of a dragon, but only when the wound has not moved.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre; mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe; puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound has moved, even in this state, if one does not put on this powder; but put upon some unguents digestible, or poultices of ground barley made of water and honey, until it stops bleeding; then treat with other cures until it is healed.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz; et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	And if a fracture occurs with the wound, and it is small, if you grasp the wound with fine tweezers; and I will tell you about fractures later on.</start_of_turn>
de la plaie dou col	of the collarbone.
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	The wound comes from the collarbone and it is simple, if there is no difference between it and the fracture of the skull, but if the collarbone or the artery is cut.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire; et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres; mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	If the nerve is affected, if there is no other ailment except to leave the cure alone, and do not put anything restraining, because it hinders the nerve and makes it recede; and do not put anything rough on the wound, for the substance of the nerve is cold, and the continuation of the pain is with the marrow, which is the most hollow limb; but if the medicine is soft, like lukewarm water with sweet oil, and honey mixed with rose oil, and vinegar washed in sweet water, and other stones of mine according to this manner, and moist unguents.</start_of_turn>
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, if the bone and sinew are bent, then treat it until it is healed.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu; et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est; et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel; et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier; et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue; et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	If wounds are deep and the flesh is swollen and full of boils, if the wound is pierced or lower in the limb; and if an artery is severed, blood flows profusely; if the bone is fractured, and the marrow and the cauterization mingle, if the wisdom tooth is pierced, or the tonsils, and the tongue is retained, because the meat hangs there; if the shoulder blade is pierced, or the ribs, and the gut is held, because the meat goes there, if the rib above the collarbone is broken, do not touch the throat but restore it to its natural position; then stretch it out again, and leave it alone for a while, then cure the wound with gentle pressure until it is healed; and if there is a piece of bone, if the fragments are numerous and you cannot have them all out, leave as much as possible, and let the wound heal and align naturally.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there is bone in the wound and there is fistula, if the wound is treated as I have said in the chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	of from a wound of a lance or knife
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz; et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide; mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor; et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors; si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne; et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	If it be from a lance or a knife, and the wound is deep, if you behold that the wound has burst open violently as if a wound of death; and if it be not deep, and it is fresh throughout its entirety, do not put anything at the first hour the powder, do not bind it up with the blood lest it worsen; remove it, and comfort the patient; but put in an astringent, and bind it twice; if there be no astringent, put into the wound fine cotton to soak up the moisture, and let the patient rest upon the wound for three days, or four, or more; if there be no spasm, do not move or strain the limb. When you see the bones arranged, know that the wound is saved.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	Cure the boils and other cures, as long as they are sane; and if they cannot be cured, and if there is an opening, draw out the pus that there is a fistula; if the cure is as it should be.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant; s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez; et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions; et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	And if the wound is an incision of a spear or knife, and it is simple, or worse at the front or back, if the cure of what is before; if it is great, with sutures; and if it is small, with powder, and if it is stuck in the bone, and it has broken pieces, if you want the wound, and the threads will burst if they are taut; and if they are not taut, if you leave the wound open, if it aligns with the extractions; and for other wounds, as for other members, the judgment is as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	indeed
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis; de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus; et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut; por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres: les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies; et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	The belly is greatly and moderately swollen; from a great wound never does the intestine go out, neither does it come out of the intestines; for the intestines are driven inwards by the tumors; and the pain is greater in the large wounds than in the small, because they cause the intestines to go out more; so that the intestines swell up so much that they feel the fruit; when they go out more, the great wound is more painful; for the intestines must be drawn back to their place as before. The intestines are twisted in three ways: the two common costures arise in the belly costure, and the other two costures are common with other wounds; all of them are greater with the belly costure.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres: ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	I say that when the wound is small, and nothing of the intestines is protruding, and there is pain, this is to be remedied in one of two ways: either by the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestines are swollen from the fruit.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere: moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee; et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	And when it is cold, soak the limb in a mild part: moisten a sponge or I put a drape in lukewarm water only, or you shall burn in lukewarm water squealing and spitting and pricking, and raise the intestine as long as the swelling is bony; and do not make this wine restrictive, and be quiet that awe soul for deflating.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose; et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes; et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait; et c’est li estrumens por le fendre: si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	And when you see swelling depart, if moisten the intestine with water or raise and burn them slightly, because by this is the entrance to things; and if it cannot enter, if make an opening at the instrument of cutting off the hemorrhoids; and the first cure is quiet that the size, that we must not cut without great necessity, and that is the instrument for cutting: if it tears from within the curve and does not come out, and see to this shape:
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	And when the wound is swollen, and the intestines are protruding, if you stop the bleeding according to its natural form in its own place, you will have done well, for this is worth doing.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief; et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre; et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	And when the wound is large, and it is in the lower part of the belly, if you must manage the patient on his back, and raise his legs higher than his head; and if it is in the lower part of the belly, if you put the head and the heel higher than the lower parts, and if the pain of the belly is in one of the two lower parts, if you put the upper part higher than the lower one; then you must understand what I say in great and small wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres; et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort; et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble; puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille; puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte; et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer: por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes; et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure; et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee; et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien; et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras; et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi; ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	In small wounds, put these things that appear between your hands I apply pity which holds all the wound to its hand, and gather the lips; and this is the common manner of stitching, and that you take a needle or more, according to the quantity of the wound, then leave a space at the head of the wound I must, and I pierce the two holes of the skin with the two holes of the needle, which is from the inside of the skin, as long as you make it pierce through that part, and gather the two heads of the needle together; then I strain a double thread around the needle at two parts, then gather the two holes of the wound together, and then leave a space, and I pierce another needle; then I bind the thread as you did the first needle, and do not cease doing this until all the wound is restrained; and let the needles be neither too thick nor too thin, for the thick needles will clog all the flesh, and the too thin will not be able to enter well; for this reason you must make them neither too thick nor too thin; and do not push the needles too far from the flesh and from the skin, that they clog and open the wound before the suture; and then close the holes of the needles, that they do not bleed the patient at night, and put patches or bandages over the holes of the needles for to hold them, and leave them until the wound is healed; and this method of stitching with needles is more convenient in small wounds, for there is only one needle or two at most for the second suture, and that you gather the two holes of the skin and the two holes of the needle together with a needle or there is one strong thread medium; and when you have pierced these things together, three in total, gather the needle at the part or where you began, in the manner in which you cut the threads. And leave space between each stitch the thickness of a small fist; this stitch will suffice for the home, and I stitched a wound once upon a time for a wound which was navel-born from a knife, and the wound was more than a palm of great, and there were intestines well two palms of great, and the wound was in the middle of the belly.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	I will return the intestines when they have been out for twenty-four hours, and the wound will be closed after fifteen days, and the treatment will be completed, and he will be healed.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle; et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines; et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	And he saw that he was going to die, and this was a miracle; and I did not treat him with any medicine, for I was in India where there is no doctor, no medicines; and I put on more ointment on the wound twice a day, and I gave him honey until he was healed.</start_of_turn>
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture: pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens; quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer; et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	Or you will tell me two ways to suture: take the needle and pass it through the back part until you reach the underside; when it has pierced the right knuckle to the right, if the thread slips or breaks or you have passed the needle, and you must pierce again from the underside until you reach the back; and you understand this stitching if you sew like a leatherworker and leave one thread on one side and take it up again on the other, until the stitching is complete.</start_of_turn
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere: fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac; puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac; puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit; et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	The second method of stitching, which Galiens does with great care, if it is so with anyone else, who assemble the two parts naturally, and apply one of the chief ends to the other chief, in part: pierce a needle or chief of the neighbouring area, and make it pierce only that which is below, and leave the two chief ends; then turn the needle, and make it pierce from the lower part until it reaches this far side, with two chief ends; then make it pierce one and the other from the lower part until it reaches this far side, in two other chief ends that are on the other side; and this is the wisest method of stitching and the most common.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune; et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies; et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	Galiens says this by word, and no one testifies to it, we must sew the belly with two needles, or there is yarn in the bobbin; and we must push one needle from one side, and the other from the other, in the manner of those who sew wounds; and stitches that when the wound is turned it is inside the belly, if the stitching is greater than others on the belly.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies: et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe; et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach; puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	The judge of the wound is like the judge of other wounds: that when you find the wound fresh with all its blood, even if it has moved, if you stop the intestines and the gut; then put on the healing powder and char, and if it has moved, do not put on any ointment that is present, until the wound has healed; then close the wound, and be sure to ligate the vessels and nerves, and the muscle; then cure the wound like the others, until it is healed. And if you have no medicines, just put on, as soon as it begins to ooze blood, cotton wool, and move it twice the number of times that it is healed.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples; et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles; et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine; et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	You need no other medicine in many cases except for simple wounds; and if you doubt that the wound will not heal properly, moisten coarse linen with warm oil of poppies or rose oil, and apply it to the wound, and bandage the edges; and if there is pain or putrefaction in the belly, and it happens many times, if you give it clusters of black vinegar, and in the same way if the putrefaction comes up to the intestines; and prick through, and drain that when the large intestine is full, it is easier to heal than the small intestine.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	The intestines which are called "jeuns" cannot heal when they are swollen, because of the stretching of the veins, and for the subtlety of the whole body, and the proximity of its nature to nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres; et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres; puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	And if there is a burst wound, if you return it back as soon as the intestine, while it is fresh; and if it is black and becometh towards or black, if you tie the black part, do not remove the blood, for there are veins and arteries there; then close what is between the layers, and hang the two shoulders down from the part below the wound until the burst has fled, in order to align the extraction when the wound bursts, and the wound will bow
de la routure dou boueil	because of the route of the boil.
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance; et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez; je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	When the intestine is round, and the wound is small, if you can restore it in a quiet place, because I have seen that one bone has been swollen or pierced by a lance; and the wound was at the stomach, and became filled and became a fistula, and in this there was egestion and wind; I treated it as I thought best, and did not cease to subtilize until it was healed, and the wound closed
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre; et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans; et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere: pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus; et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise; et cout la plaie.	And when I see it soldered, I doubt that the patient has anything wrong in his belly; and there is no point of harm, but many good arrangements, food and drink; and they say that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it must be ligatured in parts: take tweezers and grasp the edges of the wound, and when the tweezers have passed over the opening, if you put two fingers on the edges, if it bites its lip above; then close the wound, and this is kept if it does not slip, and put in another tweezers afterwards in the same way as before, until the wound is whole; and ligate the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere: pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure; et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance; et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	If the chief [of the intestine] bursts within, and there is no other nuisance to the patient, and it can be ligated with a fine thread that is cut from the intestine itself, in parts: take the chief of this thread of intestine that is coming out, and then ligate to the chief of this thread one thread of linen twisted, then pass the thread through the needle, and ligate the intestine, and keep it in place; and this method of stitching with tweezers is not fierce but according to the way of fashion and hope; and if the wound is great and wide, just as it is in one of the greater intestines, if there is no other remedy, except for subtility.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	or that it should be excised.
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	Wounds that open or burst from any wound or incision, when they swell, are called universally 'fistules', and even when they are sewn up and drawn tight.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil; et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse; aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez; et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes: c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors; ou por sa malice; ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char; ou il i a trop de bowe; ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit; ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure; ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence; ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature; ou il i a voinnes ou os: et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	A fistula is a swelling that occurs due to a prolonged and painful wound or incision. It is just as if a bird's quill has been driven through the wound; sometimes it is clear and tight, sometimes it is thick and loose. Sometimes it is shallow, sometimes deep; sometimes it is loose, sometimes tight; and I have already mentioned it in the division of wounds, that every wound that is not healed must have one of these seven causes: that is to say, by the smallness of the wound or the hardness of the tissue; or by its malice; or because there is hard matter inside, and on the skin, that does not allow new matter to grow; or there is too much swelling; or the blood vessels are ruptured, and the matter is of poor quality; or the medicine is not good at curing; or because the corruption is like pestilence; or because the property of the region is late in digestion and in healing, and escapes by nature; or there is a vein or bone involved. And I have already mentioned all these causes and their signs and treatments in the division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	Or you must know that I will tell you the cure for fistula, which is done by the work of hands.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors; car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez; et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	Wounds that occur in all limbs due to corrosion; for there are wounds that arise from great veins, and arteries, and nerves, or at the jaw, or the intestine, or the bladder, or on some of the ribs, or on the spine, or on any joint of the hands or feet; and if part comes to the property of the main limb, and the rest remain.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance; et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier; et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit; et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie; puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent; et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens; et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons; et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	All wounds of this kind are of grievous healing, and there is nothing but toil and ignorance; and if there is no wound that does not reach the very marrow except as I have said, you must have recourse to an attempt to drain or burn it out, if the wound is straight; and if the wound is festering, if you can pluck out the spur with a subtle attempt, for it swells inwards toward the curvature; and if the wound is compound and you do not well bind it, if the moisture is too coarse from one perforation to another, and inflates; then when you know certainly the depth of the wound, whether there is bone or nerve, and that it is firmly grasped, and ask the patient of the pain he feels at the pressure of your hand, and the location; and when you know truly the depth or location, and if it is far from a joint or nerve, or artery or vein, or in any of the things I have said, if the bandage fits according to what I have said, and if the bone is fractured, and the corruptions that are within; then cure as long as necessary, and if the wound is deeply straight, if you can well bandage it, then put in soft packs until the medicine consumes the superfluous matter that remains; and then apply oily unguents to the surrounding area until it is healed; and if it is not healed by this, if you must cauterize as I have said, and if the bone is fractured by the wound, if it is necessary.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit; et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font: si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu; et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If the vein or major arteries are not congested, and if the bone is discovered to have corruption and blackness, if the latter extends as far as the whole bone, then cure the surrounding matters while they are sound; and if they are not sound, and return as before, extract the diseased parts until you reach the marrow; and if you reach the marrow and find it sound, then you have cured the disease.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir; si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature; et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un; et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	If the disease is too deep to reach, do not attempt to cure it; if there is no other remedy except to leave it as it is; and if there is a small bone that is corrupted, and you attempt to extract it with instruments, if the extraction is made with a suitable instrument, and if there is any remaining bone, do not leave even a fragment; and if moisture opposes you, and there is no doubt or fear, then grasp and moisten and burn, and deliver the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os; et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie; et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os; si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez; et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	If thou dost not well stop them at an hour, put upon the wound something which doth restrain corruption, and leave it until the blood hath clotted round the bones; then it will have less pain. And if it be a great bone, as a leg or thigh, thou must so soon as possible reduce the corruption until the marrow be altogether ossified; then restore the wound. And if there be a great part of the bone corrupted, and blood comes down to the marrow; if thou canst cover it with silk and cover all until the corruption is over, and then cure it until it be healed; and I will tell thee of a fistula which happened to me in my leg, that thou mayest take example and help in thy work.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir; mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors; et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors; et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	When I was a youth of about thirty years, I had a pain in my leg from a cause which came from within the bone, until the matters came to the leg, and I had a great abscess which did not have any cause to open; but I left it by my folly to open more than necessary, and it corrupted a great deal of matter, and became a fistula, and there came out so much pus that all the bones were swollen and moist with pus; and I left it like that for two years, and there was no skill in my hands, as I was told, until I was called away, and I saw my leg and the medicines which were being given, and what was causing the pain through the pores of the bone; and it became red all over the leg, and had the color of citrine.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	I bound a loop in one of these holes, and then encompassed all the holes, and found that one followed the other throughout the limb.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens; je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai; et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder; et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu; mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	I thereupon bound one of the holes and found a part of the bone; it was corrupted and black, and the corruption spread to the innermost part of the bone; I removed what appeared to be corrupt bone and thought there was no further corruption, except for what I had seen; and having begun to restore the wound with soothing medicines for a long time, I was unable to bind it; then I began again, and again found the corruption continuing in the bone, and so I removed it, and then I bound it, and I thought I would bind it firmly; but I could not do more than I had bound around a palm of the bone, and I had to remove it entirely, and I restored it with medicines; and it healed and was bound soundly, and did not suffer any further from the weakness of the patient, who could not endure it, or from fear of death which I had avoided for him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	For often is there bloodletting in the treatment of these cases, but they remain whole; and from the bone there grows a hard scale, and it is in a good state and causes no pain or discomfort in any way, neither to the patient nor to anyone else.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere: pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut; et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char; et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue; et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	If the bone is fractured in no part of the limb, if you wish to bind it in this manner: take one thread and stretch it at the head of the bone which is open; command no one to extend it upwards; and put another thread of linen thicker than the first, and bind it above the scale that is coming away from the bone, and extend the head, so that you may tear out the corrupt scale at the bottom, and uncover the scale above the limb or where you see it bound; that the thread does not stain the scale; and put a pledget or a piece of sponge beneath the bone to cover the corrupt scale; and bind as much as you can see and feel the corruption, and bind once more.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute; puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit; et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part; et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper; et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert; et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire; et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce; et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument; et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies; si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	And if the bone is corrupted, and is not seen, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part, if you uncover the flesh entirely; then put on a pair of gloves and join together the corruption from one part to the other, and be sure to join for the length of the corruption as we have said; and if the corruption is in the joint, if you join the corrupted joint and join the bone or that which it contains from the other side; and if the corruption is in the continuation of the two joints, if there is no other vessel except for the covering; and if the corruption is in the wrist or the elbow, if it is strong in that thing, but always enquire about the corrosion, how it appeared to you; and moderate it in every way that you can, but that the vein or nerve does not hinder you; and that the incision and the sutures cover these bones many times, according to the size of the bones and the appearance of inflammation, and their thickness and thinness, and their greatness and smallness, and their hardness. And for this reason it is necessary to perceive a similar resemblance of work in this instrument; and that the work will show you the instrument of which you have need, according to the knowledge of this art, and the testimony of the methods of diseases; if you suspect the instrument of which you have need according to this.
dou feu	If you think of the instrument which you must use in accordance with what it is intended for, do so with fire.
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer; et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre; et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	The head of the shoulder suffers from swelling or by injury, or by fever; and when you have treated the cause of the swelling with medical means, it does not suffice, if you do not cover that limb up until the swelling subsides; for if the patient escapes by this means of death, or by malice, which is greater, from the fault of the limb; and the sign is that the limb becomes black, as if it were burnt by fire, and afterwards the blackening spreads throughout the limb, taking hold of all the flesh; if you delay covering it, and if it is from the bite of venomous creatures such as scorpions of the sea and vipers and the like, if the infection is at the head of the bone, if you do not give it space to come down to the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras; et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut; et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe; et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet; et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil; et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort; et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers; puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	And if it comes down to the hand, if the swelling is at the joint, if the infection does not reach the forearm; and if it comes to the forearm, if the swelling is at the elbow; and if it passes the elbow, it is death, and there is no remedy stronger than the quantity of its virtue; and do all that you can when the infection comes or departs: if it comes in the first joint, if you cope afterwards the other joint; and if it comes or departs, if you cope all the way through; and if it comes to the thigh, if you cope at the knee; and if it comes below the knee, if there is nothing else to do but let the patient die; and you should cover or bandage the limb if you tie it up from below and above, and spread one minister over the lower limb and another minister over the upper limb, and you should drain the wound which is between the two limbs at one spatulate wide, until the bone is exposed; then you should cope or drain, and put a bandage part of the way over the drape, so that the infection does not touch the sound limb, and cause the patient further damage and incision.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet: il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet; et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez; et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions; et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere; et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez; et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	If blood flows from a wound while working, if you cauterize the flesh excessively, or put on restraining powders; then return to your medicine until it is complete, and then bind the limb firmly with a secure ligature and treat it until it is healed. And I will tell you a story from my home: there was a blackness which seemed to burn with fire, and that corrosion began in the center of the hand, until it consumed the whole hand; and when we saw the corrosion, if we did not cover the hand, it was healed; and long after the corrosion had vanished, it returned again, and I had to amputate the hand. I did not wish to amputate it, for the virtue of the body was weak; and he awoke, returned to his home, and covered his hand, and was healed; and I have never heard of such a thing happening except in this case.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe; et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz; et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»; mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»; et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz; et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	Never comes the abscess in the flesh of the charnut and stays as long as it makes great swelling of the belly; then it bursts and breaks, and in the leap of the belly, it bursts the bowels, just like a vessel; and the skin that is under is just as thin as a veil of thread, and does not reach the bone, neither the nerve, and such an ailment is called "sain," and is not called "fistula"; but if it is so prolonged that it comes down to the bone marrow, it is called "fistula"; and the skin is that if you grasp that skin all around, and even when it is thin, just like a veil; and it does not matter for its corruption.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi: regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite: prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel; et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus; et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant; fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor; et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez; et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet; ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain; et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin; ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens; et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez; et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	If you see that the skin is swollen and the corruption is not in the marrow, and the skin is thick like flesh, if the surgeon suspects a fistula: look if the swelling is great, and the belly is of a foul odor, then make a clister of Egyptian medicine which is made like this: take alum, oil, and alum stone, equally, and put the skin in a vessel on the fire, until the medicine is red and as thick as honey; then take of this according to your need, and do so hot and cold, and put the medicine on the wound, and hold the opening; leave the medicine in for two hours, then take it out expressing; do this several times, until the swelling is gone and the pain is gone; and never give clister of vinegar, except when this medicine is not present, and take vinegar of figs, and vomit, and then give clister again, until you are sure that the swelling is well healed; and if the patient cannot bear it, neither the Egyptian medicine nor the vinegar of vinegar, if the clister is of vinegar and honey or there is a little alum stone broiled; or you give clister of honey and wine mixed, that the honey has the property of soothing and washing, and the wine makes the wound dry; and when you have done this, and you are sure that the swelling is well healed, if the fistula has been cured by this, and you take plaster of Paris, and do so with oil of rose and wine; or you give clister of some medicines and unguents, of which I have spoken of the properties or treating of unguents; and if the opening of the wound is small, and the pain of the fistula will not enter, if you widen with a needle a little, and put in a little unguent of Egyptian or basilicon, as much as it is widened; and if the wound is too wide, if the cuff and the fistula can enter, and if the discharge from the wound is below the level, if the fistula is above or lower than it is.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char; et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe; et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain; puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois; et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste; et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez; et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	For when the bow is in parforce, if you do not leave it to hang loose; and if you do not cover its skin as you see, if it appears in such a manner that the bow goes lower than it should, for when the bow is in parforce, if you do not leave it to hang loose and if you do not cover its skin as you see, if it appears in part: that the bow goes lightly forward, and leaves nothing of the bow; and take solidifying medicines to bring out the blood, and extend over a drape of linen that covers the whole blood; then cover the force of the wound further than before, for there are often sparks on the other drape in proportion to the quantity of the wound, and put it on the wound of the blood to align the bow, and do not remove the great drape except after maintaining for once; and that which comes out of the wound often returns to restore the bow, and its strings that correct the bow, whether from poison or blood or enough, or digested or indigested; and take care if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is swelling or not, and when your medicine is in part manner extended and you see the nature that spurts out of the wound, if its strings have already gone slack, and approach the safety; and then loosen in the morning, or the third day, and when you loosen the wound, if you change the other drape, and renew the spark.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	If the limb hangs limply downwards after the joint has been dislocated, the veins swell up and the blood does not flow properly.</start_of_turn>
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	And if subtle poison comes in a long drawn-out way, if you do not rouse yourself from sickness, for sickness is approaching.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire; et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie; et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine; pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance; puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu; et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire; et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use; et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens; si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	And if subtle poison comes in a long drawn-out way, if you do not rouse yourself from sickness, for sickness is approaching. For there are some who delay their ailments in their wounds, and others do the opposite; and if it persists insatiably, after much time has passed, the veins that are not healed do not swell; and if the veins are delayed in healing, and are stretched, if there is a sudden medicine of drying substances and moist substances, as with diaphoresis, for there is a great part of vitriol in it, which is the last medicine; take diaphoresis and mix it with rose oil and the juice of a vine equal in substance; then confirm and use it. This will cause honey to adhere more firmly, when diaphoresis is not present, or take myrrh, aloes, and incense, grind them, and sprinkle them on honey when it comes out of the fire; and then apply a bandage. And do not administer a long-lasting antidote, such as aristolochia longifolia or celestial root, which is like flour sometimes and sometimes like cumin; and use either simple or compound remedies: grind them, make powder, and sprinkle it on honey as I have said, and use it. And if the cure is prolonged, and is not cured by this treatment, then the veins that have been corrupted are blackened, and leave an imprint on the bone, or make the limb stiff, or cause the spleen to swell; if the cure for fistula is as I have said before.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	from the incision of the vein.
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois; et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute; et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	Panarice is an abscess that arises from the swelling of the pouch of the hand, or the heel, or by chance originates in other two places; and when it is inflamed, and care is not taken, if it comes to an abscess of the thumb, it swells and boils until it reaches the root of the thumb, and by chance it swells all the way; and comes the corrosion until the bone, so that there is sharp pain, and the head of the thumb is loosened, and the colour is pale.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	When you have treated it as we have said in the division, and the cure does not benefit, if you must do something, then you must take away all the superfluous matter that remains from the thumb, and then cauterize the wound afterwards.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne; et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	The cautery is a great help when the bone is sound, and the thumb is flexible; but if the thumb presses on the flesh and starts to swell, and the wound is bleeding, if you must take away some of the flesh from the thumb so that the bone does not appear at all, then you must remove the dead flesh from around the bone, and put on some medicines that are arden and corrosive to consume all; then let the wound heal until it is healed completely
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner; et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier; puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor; et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	If the bone is corroded, if it breaks, and if force is applied, for as much as the corrupted bone is concerned, it cannot be healed; and if you see the bone cracking, if it breaks from the front as it is said above, then treat it until it is healed; and if it is inflamed and bleeding, and if it causes great pain, you must first staunch it; then break the bone cleanly at the tip of the callous, and guard that the cut does not go deeper than the head of the callous, because the patient would feel too much pain; and if this happens, put something over which will ease the pain.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	the pain of the hand must be great.
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	The two joints that naturally grow together in some people by chance are always fleshy, and by chance there is a part where there are bones, and never nails, and none are born in the root of the joint, or they are born from our bodies in other parts.</start_of_turn>
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet; la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere: taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	He who is born without any wound does not move; he who is born at the joint of the wound, by chance moves; the size of him who is fleshed is slight, in a small part: size like that of a large mustard seed at its root.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	its size if fleshy is slight, in part almost invisible, if it be tough enough to cure: if you keep it covered.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	He who is born or must later without a wound, if you must, first close the flesh completely round until the bone, then close the bone to a suitable width for this, then treat until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The wounds which come to be must be assembled come by birth, or by wound, or by burn, or by like things.</start_of_turn>
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz; puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent; ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	If you must close the wound, if it must be renewed according to its natural form; then put between two layers of cloth or bandages soaked in rose oil, so that they do not stick; or you put between two pieces of soft sponge, until the wound is closed, as it must.</start_of_turn
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	When it comes to the two palms together, if the wound sticks, if necessary.</start_of_turn
des vils	Des vils.
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors; et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	The veins are full of black humours which come in greater numbers to the limbs that are bent and move, than to those that are straight.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	You must therefore never give any purgatives, and then the rest of the balsam.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir; et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	The treatment of iron is in two ways: one is with the forceps, and one is to compress the black blood; or the other method is to ligate the vein and force it out.</start_of_turn>
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil; puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir; et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire; et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	The size is as follows: first stretch the limb strongly with lukewarm water, until the great bone is not felt to tremble; then strain the limb of the patient from under the hip joint down to the heel; then ligate the vein in one, or two, or three places, of a large size; then cut and force out the black blood from hand to hand, until as much blood as the patient can tolerate has escaped; and then ligate and command that he abstain from meat eating black bile; and repeat the evacuation and bleeding when the veins are full, and do not do harm to the patient.</start_of_turn
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes; et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville; puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent; et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche; puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers; puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope; et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse; et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide; et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The ailment of this is as follows: open the limb of the patient, if there be hair, then put or bathe it in warm water, and raise the limb until it turns red; and if you have no bath, if the fire is lit, and then place a cover over the vein from the groin to the knee, or from the ankle to the knee; then tighten the leather around the belly, and support the vein from the inside, until it bursts when you feel it; and you will see it red and black, and when it comes out or the leather seems like a white thread; then withdraw the needle from the groin, until it is freed from the leather, and then put a little pressure on it, and put it in another place in the same way; and do this again, or several times if you must; and when you have finished, bring the limb back to its original position, and put another cover on it, just as you did before; then put on another size, or more if necessary; and leave it, and put the thumb on the toe, and keep it there until the second size; and then take out the needle from size to size, until it is gone, and then put it on; and if you do not manage to pull it out and lift it, if there be a splinter at the end of the thread, grasp it and pull, and there will be blood; and hold your hand from one side and the other, until there is none left; and keep that it does not tighten, for if it tightens, you will not be able to pull it out or lift it, and that will be to the disadvantage of the patient; and when you have finished with it, take out the foreign body from the wound and cover it with vinegar and rose oil.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	And if the eye is contracted and taut and surrounded together, and it is not straight, as we have said, if you must force it open, do not cover it; and pull it as we have said before.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne; et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	The shape of the iron from which the eye is bound is crooked, and do not pierce it, for it will burst the vein; it is of great curvature, for if it were slight, it would burst the vein, but be large as we have said, and this is the shape.</start_of_turn>
de la voinne civile	of the civil vein.</start_of_turn>
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor; et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	This vein is enclosed in the arm, in hot parts or where there are no herbs or trees, and in the earth or where there is no moisture; and by chance it is found elsewhere except in the arm, and this comes from the corruption that comes from the decay of the skin, as it comes from the inside of the serpent’s body and outwards, enclosed between the skin and flesh.</start_of_turn
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	And if there are signs of the beginning of this vein if there comes to the limb a very great inflammation, then it contracts the muscles and the vein bursts like a plant root.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe; et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue; car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie; por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors; et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	If the vein bursts open, if it is suspected that it has been covered with a piece of sponge from one and a half fists to two and a half, and the thumb, and left for the limb, and every time that there is a point of discharge, if the covering is pulled over the sponge, and the thumb, and if it is too long, if you cut off a part of it and cover the rest, and do not cover the root, until it is entirely expelled; for if you cover it, if it returns to the flesh, it causes embolism and gangrene or death. Therefore, it is necessary that it should be treated immediately and promptly until it is completely cured, without leaving anything or any foreign bodies in it; for in no case has this vein been treated with more than five fingers of sponge, or ten, and one has already seen that it has escaped from ten fingers of length, and when it is covered, there is often one or two cracks or holes, and it bursts to the very bottom; and let out the matter that is within, and bring in healing medicines that will prevent gangrene, then cure it as with an embolism.</start_of_turn>
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	And never has this vein hands rained, even when it opens at the elbow, or at the wrist, and there comes moisture from the opening; cure it therefore as we have said before.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	And never has this vein hands rained, even when it opens at the elbow, or at the wrist, and there comes moisture from the opening; cure it therefore as we have said before.
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer; et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre; et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	This disease is called in our land "buffalo sickness," because it often causes swelling in the buttocks, and is a small vein that grows between skin and flesh, and runs throughout the body, up and down, and is felt quite strongly from limb to limb, until it bursts through the skin or comes out, and spurts blood; and is accompanied by the discharge of various humors, such as bile, worms, and blood clots or pus. And there is doubt of its malice, for when it runs through the body, and ascends to the head, and comes out, by chance it returns and destroys the fat; and this happens often.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait: si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire; et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit; et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer; et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	When you see it cured and treated, if it cannot be forced out except when it goes out: if you must, then bind the limb above and below with a strong ligature that is tightly secured; then grasp above and pull down, and if it does not come out, if you cauterize the fire above, until it dies; and the greatest harm that it does is when it bursts the oil, as we have said; and if you see it coming or close to the oil, grasp below its nail and pull down, and grasp above, and pull down; and you must use the patient of nourishment of solid medicines for the bad humors carried by the bile, and if he consumes fatty foods.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	When you see it cured and treated, if it cannot be forced out except when it goes out: if you must, then bind the limb above and below with a strong ligature that is tightly secured; then grasp above and pull down, and if it does not come out, if you cauterize the fire above, until it dies; and the greatest harm that it does is when it bursts the oil, as we have said; and if you see it coming or close to the oil, grasp below its nail and pull down, and grasp above, and pull down; and you must use the patient of nourishment of solid medicines for the bad humors carried by the bile, and if he consumes fatty foods.
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	This disease is called in our land "vakirir", and is a pain that comes in the limbs one after the other; and I saw that which I tell you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais; et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre; li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais; puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	I went to see a sick woman, and found her arm swollen, and saw a small swelling in the pit of her elbow; and afterwards, it went up as high as a worm on a pear, more swollen than anything, like silver when it comes out of the furnace; the pain went away from that limb, and settled in the elbow, and then went down to the wrist; then she told me that it twisted back in the limb, as I saw.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I marvelled at how it twisted back and forth between the limbs, for I had never seen such a disease according to this manner.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme; et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte; et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	However, I do not know whether it is good to move the limb from place to place, but I do not think so, as I saw in the woman; and I thought that it was because the woman had dry bones and exposed veins, and because of that appeared that constraint; and I do not see according to this reason those who have moist bones and veins repaired
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer; et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	And when you see the cure of this ailment, and the patient feels that pain, if the joint above and below is swollen, and then press upon it as long as the stiffness of the limb is strong; then cauterize the limb. And if you do not see it move at your eyes, if he heals from that which causes the stiffness, as with foul pills and pills of serpin, and similar things.
des saiettes	And when you see the cure of this ailment, and the patient feels that pain, if the joint above and below is swollen, and then press upon it as long as the stiffness of the limb is strong; then cauterize the limb. And if you do not see it move at your eyes, if he heals from that which causes the stiffness, as with foul pills and pills of serpin, and similar things.
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	The bandages are diverse, according to their appearance and according to the nature of the wound or the pain they relieve.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees; et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces; et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	The variety of their forms is such that some have great points, some have small, some have teeth, and some are smooth; and those which have two angles, and those which have tongues, and those which have pieces; and that which breaks in no limb breaks in two ways: or in the principal limb, as with the brain, forearm, liver, kidney, spleen, intestine, bladder, and similar limbs.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent: si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions; et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	When she cries out in no limb of these members, and her sign of death, which I will tell you later, learn: if you delay the extraction of this arrow, for there will follow many other complications; and when this is a bad sign, do not learn from me, for the arrow is not withdrawn, but go and cure the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole; et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix; et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char; et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	And the sign of madness when the arrow cries out and pierces the bone, and leaps the marrow that is above the brain, is when scooping and sooting and vomiting and spitting, and inflammation and redness of the eyes, and spasm and confusion of understanding, and vomiting of bile; and by chance there is no bleeding from the nose or ears; or by chance the speech and voice are lost; and leaps from the wound a white moistor resembling pus, and in leaping also as blood-stained hair; and if this sign teaches you, if you are holding out, take out the arrow if it is not firmly embedded.</start_of_turn>
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide; et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope: saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	When the nipple aches or is pulled, the sign is that it is close to the left breast, and feels as if it were caught in something hard, not soft; and by chance the nipple moves just like a poulp, in dark blood and comes with cold sweat and a cold chill, and fainting: there is doubt that death is imminent.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of an infected wound is that never without plains of pus does it pour forth from the wound; the throat swells, the patient's face turns pale, and he breathes heavily and sighs with aversion.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	And if the arrow comes out through the cover of the wound, if it be small, it causes great pain and great swelling and breathing; and all the limb is moved from side to side
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the arrow comes out or is broken within the wound, by chance that it comes out of the wound without any sign of indigestible meat.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if the arrow comes out or is broken within the wound, and in coming out does not pass any feces through the intestine, if there is no hope of recovery, do not attempt to extract the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	And if the stone is in the bladder, and the urine spurts out and comes out forcefully, and the patient feels great pain: the wound is mortal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other limb, if it is like that with the face, the throat, the chest, the armpit, the groin, the shoulder, the elbow, the wrist, and the leg, and the like, is in great distress according to numerous situations.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the stone is in the nerve or the artery, and it is not venomous, as I have said before, for this reason I say that it has happened to me that...
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis: je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	In my home there was a woman who was vomiting or spitting up phlegm at the root of her ear: I held her hand, and she bled from the other ear, and was cured without any medicine.</start_of_turn>
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	And she bled from an ear during a game of bowls when she choked on oil from the mustard seeds, and the arrow was expelled whole, and did not touch anything except the tip towards the dust, and the arrow was as big as a Turkish bow; and all this happened without any damage to the ear.</start_of_turn
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles: je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	And take out an arrow from the throat to a crestfallen man, and the Arab arrow was in the ear: I grasped the beard and subtilised as much as I could, and the crestfallen man was healed.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit; et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition; je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	And took out an arrow from a wound, which was in the side or belly, and thought he was dead; but after he had been without movement for thirty days, if he did not recover his composure; I cut on the arrow and extracted it, and pulled it out, without any mishap.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus; et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	And if a man has an arrow stuck in the side or back, and the wound is deep; and when I pulled out the arrow from within, I did not bind up his wound, and he did not feel any discomfort in any of his natural works
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie; et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	And thus it happened to another man, that he was pierced by an arrow in his face, and the wound was closed; but he continued to suffer great pain; and there were many other similar things.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	And thus it happened to another man, that he was pierced by an arrow in his face, that it was stuck in the middle of his nose, and was a declining wound to the right side; and the arrow was completely extracted. I was called to treat him after he had been thus for three days.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	If I found the wound very sore.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie; et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	I tried to treat it with all my skill, and did not feel it; and there was no pain or tingling in his right ear
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast; et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	I thought it was the tip of the arrow. I put on the plaster and digestive poultice, so that the wound would not swell; and the arrow came out by itself
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	I put the thumbs in place again, and closed the wound, and held the patient's hand long tense, until he felt the arrow inside his belly; and he told me.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu; puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement; et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir; adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	I put the corrosive medicine on the wound with my thumbs, until it was sufficiently open, and held it, and felt the head of the arrow which was inside the belly; then I closed the wound with the medicine, until the tip of the arrow appeared visibly; and it went well until the third month, and then grew wider so that I had to remove the nails, and I split it in two parts, and could not bear it; for I continued to suspect and tempt it in various ways, until I took away the nails as they were well made, as it is said at the end of this chapter, until I finished with it, and returned the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer: je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	And the doctor judged that the cartilage of the nose could not be restored: I restored it nevertheless, and the wound was sutured, and the patient was completely healed.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre; mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	Or you have spoken of the quality of the extraction of some arrows, if you put your cure on that of which I do not speak, for the books do not teach me that; but you masters know well enough about many great things, and about that which is present and lacking, find nine works, and a new instrument, in descending order of the things which arise in this art.</start_of_turn>
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres: ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part; et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	I say that the arrows do not emerge from limbs or are ficxed falsely, for they can be managed in two ways: either by force or by hook and loop; and that which leaps forth by the loop or enters, is an arrow pierced through flesh, and leaps no more ever.</start_of_turn
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue; et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor; et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	And if it does not move now, let it stay until the chariot is fully borne; and rejoice in its issue; and if it is fixed in the bone and cannot be moved, if you leave it there for some days, and move it every day; then it will move. And if it does not move, if you prick it thoroughly from all around, until the wound is enlarged, and then draw it out.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	And if the splinter is fixed in the bone of the shoulder, and goes up to one of the bellies of the brain, and some of the things I have mentioned above concerning the patient: if you do not draw it out, but leave it as it is until it is even again after some days, for if the splinter comes up to the surface, that is death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	And if the splinter is not firmly fixed in the bone alone, but comes out only as far as the surface of the skin, and remains in the patient for some days without any mishap, even if the pain recurs.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is firmly stuck and cannot be shifted, if you administer tarteris around, as I have said; then cure the limb until it is healed.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente; et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble; et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans; et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire; et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	If the splinter is seen only in the bone and does not come out further than the surface of the skin, and remains in the patient for some days without any mishap, even if the pain returns. If one sees the splinter, and if it can be grasped without any instrument, and if one does not touch the wound excessively, and for the depth of the splinter, and if there is no bone, nerve or vein in the wound, if the pain is great as in the wound itself; then grasp the splinter and if there is anything holding it in place, break or remove the surrounding tissue as much as possible until it can be grasped; and take care not to break the splinter itself, but to grasp it more firmly.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you do not manage at once, if the limb remains limp at the entrance, grasp it firmly, for its extraction brings relief.</start_of_turn>
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre; et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	If blood discharge opposes the remedy, as we have said in this chapter concerning the treatment; then hold off on incision of the nerve and vein. Put in place whatever method you will use to extract the arrow, whether it be toward the heel or the knee, firmly or gently; and keep the patient in the position in which the arrow went in, for that is the greatest aid. If you are unable to do so, follow what the signs tell you.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment: taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	The arrow that comes from another place, or if there is no wound, or the skin is swollen in the place where it is seen or felt: then leave it in place until the nails can hold it, and then extract it: if it comes out now.</start_of_turn>
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is held in the bone, if you round your hand around it until it goes into the bone, and expand the bone, then draw it out.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer; et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust; et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	And if it cannot be grasped, if you leave it in, and then resume the extraction until it comes out; if the wound is deep, if the arrow has all its force, if the wound is broad and you see the tip of the arrow stuck, if you give it time, if the arrow is grasped by the instrument, so that the tip of the arrow is between the teeth of the instrument; and then pull out, and if the arrow is grasped, if the instrument has a pointed handle entering the wound, to ease the extraction.</start_of_turn
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	If the wound is surrounded by hair, then you must remove all the hair around or the venom is there; if you do so, then cure the wound as it should be cured.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope; et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est; et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If the wound is near the hair or on the head or the belly or the bladder or the ribs, and it is close by, and you do see it, then cover over it; and keep the vein and nerve covered, and then extract it, and then close the wound, if necessary; and cure it until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The shape of the tweezers used to grasp the splinters is like a bird's beak, and thus is this shape:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	And there are many ways: great, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	The shape at the end of the bone is like the quill of a bird, to push out the tip of the wound, as it is in this form:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	the shape of nails to push and to grasp is like this:
des voinnes dou cors communes	Of common veins there is pain.
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir: II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»; et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans; et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»; et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis; et les II guindeges qui sont ou col; et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»; et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	There are veins which one must know are within, that is to say: two veins which are behind the ears, which are covered by two «herbs»; and two arteries which are in two temples appearing; and two veins which are in the two armpits, which are covered by «spurs»; and the vein which is in the middle of the forehead; and the vein which is at the top of the nose; and two veins which are either in the collar or in the throat; and two veins which are under the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras: l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»; et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	The veins which we commonly speak of are five in each arm: one is the cephalic, and is on the left side of the costus, and they call it the lazy vein; and the median is called the fasted, and is composed of the cephalic and basilic, and they call it the brachial vein; and the basilic is either on the left or right side of the costus, and they call it the belly vein, and is above the olecranon, and it is the one which we commonly speak of, which appears openly on the pouch.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains; et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei; et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	And the saving vein is the one which is between the ulnar and the annular, and if there are two, and in the leg or foot there are three veins: one which is under the elbow of the left costus, and the second which is at the ankle of the right costus; and the vein which is called the great, which is in the ankle of the other costus; and in the other leg there are three veins under those.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine; et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief: quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche; puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues; puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee; et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	The blood of the veins that are behind the ears helps to expel old blood and evacuate; and the quality of the blood, as I have said, is that you raise the head of the patient and rub the palm of your hand or the veins are of a rough texture; then stretch the patient's neck with a twist, as long as two veins appear behind the ears in two loops depending on the head: if the patient has a feeling of swelling there, it is an indication of infection; then take the lancet and pierce the vein until it reaches the bone, then keep your hand over the whole vein above, and press and the skin and the vein well two must pass through, and make the blood spurt out until you see; then strain and bind, until it is healed; and I have already said the incision and the cautery or the first book.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz; et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis: et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement; et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche; puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit; puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton; et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	The blood of the two arteries that are in the two temples, if it is like an ancient emigration, sode, and obtalmia accustomed, and at the root of the tears of water there are eyes; and the quality of the physician is such as I have said: and that the patient has strained his neck, as the two veins open widely; and he feels the pulse falling down his forearm, and then he signs his mark; then he places his thumb on the vein in the upper part of his forearm, and holds the lancet down, and holds the vein in the upper part, and the cope, as he has done in two other veins, and makes correction of the blood according to his necessity; then he frees the patient, and places his thumb on the vein for an hour, then puts on a bandage; and then the swelling forms, and he leaves it until it is healed; and we have spoken of this and its management and extraction, or the beginning of the book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor; et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere; puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	The blood from the front vein is worth as much as that from the cephalic vein; there are ancient diseases of the face, emigration, and redness; and the quality is that if the patient turns his head while the vein is open, take the instrument which is called the "fosseur", which is like this:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues; puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	The blood from the front vein is worth as much as that from the cephalic vein; there are ancient diseases of the face, emigration, and redness; and the quality is that if the patient turns his head while the vein is open, take the instrument which is called the "fosseur", which is like this. Place the point on the vein, hold with your hand or something else, and let the blood flow as much as you see fit; then loosen the patient’s neck and ligate the vein until it is firm and never again let the work be done with a wide flame.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	However, it is not appropriate for me to suggest that the flame should be too strong; and the same with the passage of time, for the bone is close, and by chance the flame breaks when it is thin.</start_of_turn>
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice; et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant; puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	The blood from the two veins that are two fingers wide helps with the swelling, boils, redness, and yellow spots; there are diseases of the face; and the quality is that if the patient turns his head without restraint, as before, then do the same, and let the blood flow freely for a long time with a wide flame, for there is no char.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if the flame is subtle, by chance if it breaks; then make an incision of blood, as much as you are able, and then bind up above and below, and hold it firmly.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree; et c’est li forme dou flaime:	When blood from a vein does not flow as it should, and is pale, and has fever, or has been affected by migraine and redness of the face, or is old; and when the quality of the blood is that the patient has tightened his collar, then he should grasp his wrist with his left hand, take a long flame and touch it to the space between the two nostrils, for the vein does not open easily, and it will not open without some effort; and do not push too much, but correct the blood according to your need, and leave it bound for a night, for it is easily restored. This is the form of the flame:
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit; et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est; puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	The blood of the two armpits helps to relieve swelling, to initiate mixing, and to cure various diseases, and has the power of antidote against herpes and carbuncles; and the quality of the blood is that when the patient tightens his collar from both sides, as we have said; and whether the master is standing over the patient’s head and the patient sits on one seat, then grasp the vein widely from long, and do the bleeding steadily, or as much as is necessary; then repeat the process in the other arm, then remove the ligature, and gently pull on the middle veins so that the patient is not strangled; and leave it until morning, when the wound is healed.
de la sainie des leivres	From the blood of the leaves.
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The blood of the veins of the arms above helps to cause swelling in the mouth, and corruption of the gums, and wounds of the lips, and pain and throbbing.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit; puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires: cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	When the blood of the leaves is to be taken, command the patient to sit before you, and constrain his neck as I have said; then cut the vein, and observe two veins, one on the right side of the leaf and the other on the left side, and know them by their blackness, and by the fact that they have small black veins running alongside them: cut one and the other, and if you do not know them and are in doubt, if one of the greatest parts of the armpit is cut, and do the same with two veins that are below and above, for this is a safe method.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	And from the blood below the tongue.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche; et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire: saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	The blood of the veins below the tongue helps after the blood of the head; and this is at the widening of the throat, and there are diseases of the eye, and diseases of the mouth; and the quality of the physician is that if the patient sweats between his hands before the sun, and he holds the tongue, and looks below on each rib towards the cost, one black vein: cut both of them, but do not go too deep, for below are the arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres: ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»; et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	The veins which we commonly call healthy are usually sound in two ways: either by puncturing with all the flame of a large fire, or by olive oil if like cuts of trenchers, and is called 'anesil'; and they are large and subtle according to the size and extent of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The flame like a mirror if it is famous, and is wide as you see:
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble; et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	And there is a kind of surgeon who, to open the large veins full of blood that appear, contains great blood and trouble; and this is the form of the olive oil flame
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	It is more subtle and effective, and is useful for smaller veins, or where there is little yellow blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre; et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	The blood of the basilisk, which is one of these veins, helps to cure ailments such as sore throat, and cough, and pain in the belly; and it is useful for the patient that he should remain calm and that he should abstain from the artery that is causing the disease.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit; et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	And if it grasps the bone, and blood flows, if it must remain suspended, as I have said; and must not be plunged into the flame, but cut off as with an anvil.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre; ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement; et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	And if the bleeding does not stop manifestly, if you must extract it, and bind another; or you wish no more blood, or you prefer to leave in its place the belly in the arm: it will stop manifestly; and grasp the flame with an anvil, as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz; puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil; et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	And if you see that the blood vessel is about to burst, if you must therefore extract the limb, touch the flesh until you know the pulse; then mark the place, and then bind the limb, and grasp the vein with the flame anvil; and beware that you do not cut the artery when you see the limb swell, for this is the artery: stop it immediately.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere: haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient; se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	If thou seest it swell high up like the urine of a child, and it is neither red nor yellow, know that it is without an artery: haste then, and place thy thumb upon its length, and keep thy thumb still if it is not stained; for it often happens thus; if thou dost lay thy hand upon it, and leave it still, and move not the patient, and be cautious lest he be mad.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	If he is not firmly grasped and you feel pain, and the physician is not present, if the artery bursts open because the head of the retraction has slipped; grasp firmly without delay.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor; se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc; et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	Take an embolus of pitch, and make it bleed, and take one half and place it upon it until the other half is reached; if it does not bleed, it is well; if not, if the physician has said so, apply powders that stop bleeding; for the clotting of blood is not firmly fixed in many situations by the small size of the wound, and the power of the hand.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit; et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner; et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	The blood of the vein in the middle helps to cure blood clots at the root of the head and the bones below, because it is composed of the basilar and cephalic veins, as we have said; and it is recommended that the patient should cause the nerve below to swell, and if it does not swell too much, and if it finds the nerve, it swells and the blood clots either disappear or are cured; and this nerve opens many times, and if it does not open in some people because of its subtlety, it is recommended that you take the blood from the anesic instrument; and remove the nerve from your sight.
Et se il a voinne entre les .ij. ners, si la fent dou lonc.	If there is a vein between the two nerves, and it is felt to be long
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz; et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	The blood of the cephalic vein helps to cure blood clots at the root of the head, and helps to stop the bleeding; and it is recommended to cauterize with the olive flame or the myrtle flame, for this is the most effective of all veins, because it has neither nerve nor artery
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence; et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	Whatever, one must ask more gently at first, and grieve nothing if it does not succeed the first time; and by chance it swells up again among some people, one must do it the first time, but one grieve nothing.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of the blood is according to your opinion.</start_of_turn>
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir; et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique; et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent; et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	The first thing you must know about health is that when blood is drawn, it must only be for the preservation of health and to ward off future diseases; and it must be taken from one of the three veins which are or should be used: namely, the cephalic, the facial, and the basilar; and it must be done at the beginning of prayer, fasting, and eating, when the sign of repletion appears; and it must be drawn either in the morning or in the evening, after two or three hours.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens; et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	The blood which is drawn for diseases has no fixed time, but whenever there is a need for a cure or treatment at any time and in any condition; and one must not draw blood from children until they are twelve years old, nor from women for more than four months until they are seven months pregnant
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez .lx. ans.	Blood should not be given to those who have passed 60 years.</start_of_turn>
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz; ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques; et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors; puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir; puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit; et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses; et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans; et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on; puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	When anyone feels well, in whatever way, if it comes to his bowels, if there is a slight retention of wind, so that the veins do not draw out the humors from the principal parts; do not let him eat too much flesh, neither too little, for it is better to be moderate; do not give him dropsy, vinegar or urine; and if he vomits after eating, and has a sore belly, and many loose stools, and excessive weeping, and sleeplessness, and this with any other vice, or by some weapon or poison; then subtilize the humors, not when they are large, but by diet and drink and medicine, if you can; and give him either a cold or warm bath, for nothing must be left untended; and let him lie down with his head somewhat higher than his heels, and stroke his arm twice or thrice, then remove the thread from the middle; for if it is too tight or loose, it will not hold; then stroke the limb with your hands, until the veins swell up and you feel them; then moisten the patient with a spoonful of old oil, then place his hand over that vein which is below the elbow, for a moment or two, until he feels well.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus; et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	For there are veins that flee like strings to the physician, and if there are some that are full of windiness, so that when one puts on the flame, it shrinks away from the flame, and cannot open the vein, and thus it is with these; and if it opens the vein, it is too wide, because of this it is that the physician must be advised in these matters.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if the vein swells the first time, that is good; if not, one must repeat the process several times until the swelling subsides.</start_of_turn
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras: par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait; et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement; et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	If the limb is inflamed and the patient hopes for the wound to heal by itself, and leaves it for a year or two, without supporting the arm: by chance there will be abscesses; do not enter or bathe, then restart the bleeding if it stops; if it is a small wound, or without a clear sign that there is less blood than you saw, even if you burn the wound directly; and that work is done without delay, even if the limb is inflamed; for this often happens when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile; et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc; et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	If thou seest the limb inflamed, if thou dost not wish to renew the blood, put upon a little ball of lint soaked in oil, for it doth soften the hard parts of blood; and it doth harden in this limb the lint that is oiled; and thus administer the oiled lint into the wound that thou dost bleed the veins, to stop the course of blood; and this doth cause a tingling and swelling of the parts, when it is put upon the limb; if thou takest it off too soon and it is too great.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre; et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie; et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	And if there comes a great abscess which has often happened, even though it is not sick only at this time or the opening of the vein is little, if thou art hasty, put upon the limb a wet sponge and a little gauze, and strain for an hour; and know that thou shalt do this after the evacuation of blood from the vein, and if it remains in the limb after a few days no black or green mark, if thou dost not see it; and if thou seest, put upon no other thing of aloes or mastic gum dispensed in the juice of calamus, mustard, or similar.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And many times there has been a burst of wind and the appearance of blood from the basilisk: put your hand on it, and if you find the limb soft under the compression of the hand, if that is the bad appearance.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai .i. emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Leave off all that we have said, for in court without an artery; but it makes.i. the wound dry by pressing firmly, then treat with another remedy, until it is healed.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	Treat each wound according to the quantity of its virtue, and the color of the wound.</start_of_turn>
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	For if it is black, leave it to fester as long as it is red; and if you see it large, leave it until it is slight; and if it is too thick, leave it cool.</start_of_turn
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges; et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant; et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	And it is fitting for the one who is blunt and strong, and has the skill of extracting blood, to make the wound larger; and let the flame be large; and for the one who is weak, do the opposite, and make it sounder rather than deeper, and must make it sounder by cutting across, not by piercing. And this method of bleeding saves the blood from decay and damage of nerves, and is worth more than the blood that comes from a long cut.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	And for the one who has a cough that needs bleeding, it is fitting to give soft bread soaked in the juice of green pomegranates; if he is choked, let him spit out blood three times or four. And if he is of a cold complexion, let him chew before the bleeding soft bread soaked in honeyed oil, or in scented honey with spices, such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cloves, and fragrant oil.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	And if he vomits blood after the evacuation of blood, it is certain that he will spit frothy vomit, and fragrant mucus, and use other things that we have said in the division or chapter on syncope, for the evacuation of the stomach.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if it seems to swell up the arm again, and is cured another time, if it is again stained with great blood, it must be bound up and bandaged, according to the quantity of its continuous virtue.</start_of_turn
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine .vij. houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And who seems to swell up the arm after the first bleeding, and has strong pain, if it is bound up .iii. hours after the first bleeding, or after the twelfth hour.</start_of_turn>
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And who appears to be healthier from another side, if he must recover alone in the second hour or the third.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson; puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens; et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus; ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz; mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	For there is blood in the belly which is already swollen, and causes fever; if it is certain to expel a great quantity, and expand the belly until it cries out for help; then that you reward all the conditions of blood, and put your hand on the pulse when it is well, that the blood does not come out instead of the vomit, and this often happens when the patient is negligent; and do not do anything except you see the arm slip, and make the vomit again the second time, and the belly is closed, that you press firmly; if it is crooked, extend the arm as far as possible, for that would be bad; but leave it as it is until the second time; or you touch the tip of the flame, until the one who is frozen at the belly's edge has vomited from the stomach, and put a little water on it, and press lightly.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein has fled, if you leave it and do not bind it tight, as long as the incision is appeased.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if treatment is needed again, if the same vein is in the same place, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein in the arm is healthy in place of the vein of the head because it is composed of this.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges; puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc; et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez; et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit; et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	And if the patient has a wound in the hand with hot water, until the swelling is red; then bind it moderately, so that the wound opens well; then pull out the wound, do not make it wide or long; or make a large opening, and bring the skin close to the wrist joint, and if that is not enough, if you pull the hand out once more, let the blood drain out naturally until you have enough; and if that is the case, do not pull the hand out with the hot water again, for one puts more into it than in the case; the blood of this vein is more precious than all the veins, for there is neither artery nor nerve in it.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere: estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie; et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	The blood of the salivary vein of the right hand is worth for all the diseases of the liver, and this is the method: strain the hand and put it in hot water, until the swelling comes out if one sees it; and if the wound comes out, and if you manage to pull it out whole, do not grieve anything; and do not go too deep, for the nerves are all stripped of flesh, and then pull the hand out in hot water, if it is not frozen in the wound, and cannot be pulled out.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	When you have treated the blood as much as you can, if you put oil on the wound and bandage it firmly, and do so for every wound.</start_of_turn>
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The blood in the left hand is worth the disease of mice; do everything as I have told you about before.</start_of_turn
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	The blood of the sophene is valuable for all diseases that are caused by a weakening of the body, such as diseases of the marrow, retention of flowers, disease of the reins, and of the knees and old legs, and similar diseases.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains; saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	And the quality of its blood is such that when the patient has a cold limb in hot water, and wipes over the belly until it turns pale, and lies down on the joint of the limb; and if the limb is at the ankle, and from under the limb comes out drops of urine; such a wound is either of small or large size, or at the ankle, for the urine is valuable.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you see it on the bone, beware of the nerves that are around it, and handle it just as if you were cutting; and let the flame be calm.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if you cannot move it without pain, if you return the bone to its place in the acute phase, and let the vein drain well.</start_of_turn>
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz; ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	And if the urine must be expressed for the first time, if it begins again later on under a little thrust, for the urine is salty; do not doubt, as we have said, and do the same with the other limb equally
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The flesh of the sciatic vein is at the ankle of the foot, and its blood is worth the pain of the groin, when it is full of blood.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant; et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	And if the patient is sitting or bathing and the wound is strained upwards of the ankle three times, for otherwise it does not open; and if it opens, do so in every way that you can, and through and through; it is better to leave it closed, for the pus is thick and it will be discharged by itself with the hands of a layman.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners; et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	If you do not find any discharge of blood from it which opens or drains downwards, or to the little toe, and you keep it warm; take so much blood from the patient as you see fit, and then ligate the vessel, and put on a bandage and strain; it is now healed.</start_of_turn>
des sainies de ventouse	of the ventouse's bloodletting
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc .ij. manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Vacuum is made of horn, or spider, or gut; and is performed in various ways: either by cutting and drawing out blood, or by cutting alone.</start_of_turn>
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu; et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col; et II autres en II costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton; et li ventouse des II espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies; et les ventouses emmi les II bras; et les ventouses des II jambes; et les ventouses des II chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne; et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	And this bloodletting by ventouse is done in two ways: either it is done with great heat or with cold; and the bloodletting which is done by cutting and extracting blood is done in twelve pulses, of which one is at the top of the head; and the other is at the root; and two at the two costal cartilages; and the ventouse is on the chin; and the ventouse is on the two scapulae; and the ventouse is on the crura; and the ventouses are on the two arms; and the ventouses are on the two legs; and the ventouses are on the two ankles; and the bloodletting does not affect any great veins that are scattered in the belly, for in this case it would be harmful, as we do when we take blood from a vein; and it is not recommended except when it is administered, neither with great heat nor with cold, in any illness which comes from repletion, until all the stones are evacuated.</start_of_turn>
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens; car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief; et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz; et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc; et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	And if need be for illness compels, or through custom, if the attendants come too close at the commencement of the month, or at its end, and make a commotion and every sort of uproar; for there are some who, when they must make a commotion, become very heavy-headed; and there are some who find swelling and redness on their face, head, and neck, and dark circles under their eyes; and there are some who find a drop of blood in their mouth, have lost their tongue, and spit blood; and there are some who dream and see various things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés .iij. houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, and indeed when it is necessary because of great pain, we command that the patient be fanned for two hours after
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors; et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement; et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	The blood of the physician helps with the headache … that comes from these dark circles; and it must not be done until all the humours have been evacuated; for this vomiting is in lieu of the cephalic blood, and must only be used for those who have a cold complexion or who are prone to vomiting, for this causes them great discomfort; and for this reason it must only be used in those who are suffering from severe illnesses.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	and if it becomes obvious, it must be placed further down the throat due to the risk of choking.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion; et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	The wind's action at the collar is in lieu of blood from the head and the brain; therefore it is worth the stretching out of the beard, the splitting of the channel of the tonsils, and everything else, and swelling; and it is likely to burst, because if it stays too firmly, it may cause fainting or vomiting or pain.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	The wind's swelling at the collar is worth as much as the pains of the head, and fainting and vomiting, and strangulation, and toothache; and it is in lieu of the blood of the brain; and it is likely that you must order the patient to express his hand to put it [on the wound], that he does not cut the artery, and does not suffer any discharge of blood.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des .ij. levres.	The winds of the south blow low and mild if there is a disease of the mouth, and corruption of the gums, and similar diseases that are in the mouth; and it is in the blood of the upper teeth.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	The winds of the spaces are worth a disease that comes from heat and swelling.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes; et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	The wind's swelling at the armpits is worth as much as three veins of the arm, because it draws blood from these large veins; and order the patient not to fill them too tightly, because the limb is subject to fat, and knows nerves and arteries.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The swelling which is on the buttocks is worth as many wounds as the roots of the foundation, and has diseases of its own, and it is convenient that the swelling be large and tough, that it has a good hold; and by chance, if it should be small, if it breaks, it makes great wounds.</start_of_turn
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des .ij. sophenes, et des .ij. chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	The wounds of the limbs swell widely open, for they attract blood from every part of the body, and are worth as old pains of rain, mud, and bladder, and cause to swell the flowers; and are in lieu of the groin, and the buttocks, and all of them make the body limp after a long usage, and cause vomiting in various positions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	The way to apply the suction is that you put it on immediately, and with a little temperateness, and put it firmly, and move it equally, and do not cease doing so until you see the flesh red and swollen, and open up the color of blood; then withdraw, and put the suction back on, and take care of the body, for there are some who have very tough veins, and clear pores: if you cut once alone, you must make large wounds, and a wound deep; and do it gently
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir .ij. fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	And if it is not big, if you must cut twice: the first time to soften the large blood vessel.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And if it is not very thick, if you must do it three times; and when our wounds draw blood too much and too little, if we suffer only once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif: se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite; et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	If our veins bleed excessively, if we rejoin them often; if the wound is not expected to heal, if it is severe, and if it persists even when the cause of the wound has vanished, and it befalls one with thick skin and hard, and with many pores, that you order the application of an aperitif and dissolving oil, such as oil of violet, or sweet almond oil, or oil of pumpkin seed; or if it be in the summer, oil of thyme, or sage, or chamomile, or the like.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the swelling is large and cold, if take bitter oil, or balsam, or oil of rue, and the like.</start_of_turn>
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	If the wound has a tender base and large pores, oil must not be applied, but it is permitted to wash after the evacuation of rose water, or cold water, or vinegar of roses, or cucumber water, or porcelain water, or the like.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And he who has moisture in his mouth, if he rises easily, or of hawthorn, and sumac, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans; et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	And those who have excessive superabundance of humours shall rise from wine old, or from seawater, or from decoction of rue or chamomile, or from other similar things; and must not use the ventouse before the bath, but after the bath an hour or two; and must not sleep after the ventosation, but must rise when he is due to rise and when he is risen.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez; si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses; et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	And guard those who grow pale are bilious, and if they are too much so and inflamed; if it is to be known that they should take cold things, as with pomegranate seeds and radishes and lettuce easily, and similar things; and eat barley meal, and broth of chick peas, and moist meats.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons; et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier; et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz; et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	And those who have a cold complexion, if they take honey syrup, and scented wine middle, which is between old and new, and eat barley gruel, and eat barley meal and small oilseeds and herbs; and when he has ventosated, he must drink more than eat; and it is not permitted for anyone to take garlic or mustard before or after the ventosation, to comfort the principal members; and let it be understood that this must be done discreetly, but it must not be omitted that those who drink the most should also give.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre; et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu; et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	The wounds which are made to bleed are those which are made upon the liver, and upon the spleen, and podagre, and upon the belly and the belly-button and the intestines and the hip, for no member suffers wounds upon its bones, and it is done only to draw blood from one member to another, as we do upon the nails when we do not wish to bleed; to remove the viscosity which is in the member, as we do when we put on a dressing upon the belly and the belly-button to soften the member; and to stop the pain, when there is inflammation or a fracture, for it attracts by its attractive power the inflammation, or evacuates the fracture from its place; and so it makes swell when we put it upon the liver and the spleen when there is retained moisture, and these dressings are administered empty without any liquid, and never are they administered together with water, and never are they plain with cold water, as in diseases of the pleura, and in such a manner we fill the dressing with warm water or with water or with herbs which cover this.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The shape of the compress administered with fire is as follows:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre; et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent; car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	And there shall be two large and half palms of barley, or eight costers of lentils, a thousand small holes, as though to pierce an arrow; or from thorns, sulfur before if it does not please the patient to put it on the limb; and in the middle there shall be a twig of thorn or iron, to hold the bandage, and there shall be great and small according to the diseases and the hardness of those who take them; for the blisters of the sick are other than fat, and leaner than fat.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre: empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide; et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse; et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	And must one place this sponge on the limb: grasp the bandage with wax or linen, and put it into the sponge through the twig which is in the sponge, so that it sticks either at the bottom of the sponge that it does not burn the patient; and then put it on the limb, and there must be either on the hole that we have said, so that when we look, if it goes up, we take off the sponge; and grasp the linen as before, and repeat often, if you must.</start_of_turn>
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement; et c’est li forme:	When the pleural dressing is administered in the treatment of pneumonia, at all its sharpness, there is no point of hardness or rupture, and it is only administered when it is firm; and it is placed upon the limb only so slightly. And this is its form.
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus; et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans; et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren; et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres; et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues; et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	They are not administered for any other limb where we cannot put a dressing because of its smallness, such as the liver and the spleen, and the like; and when the skin is stripped of hair, such as on the groin or the armpits, and other like; and the quality of the wound if it is that when you find wounds that are in soft and clean blood without any purulent discharge, if they are taken; and put on a little bandage of soft water, until they are familiar, and have nothing in their belly; and then either drain the abscess and dressing, or wipe the limb until it is red, and put on the dressing; and when they are full, and groan, if it is possible to put on a dressing, put it on, for it is worth more after.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint; et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés; et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez; ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant; et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	If this is not the case, if you lift the limb easily, then later with pain, move it well, and then release it; and if the limb remains too long in the wound, if there is too much blood, put on a cloth of linen in cold water and put it on, until the wound is stretched out; and if the wound is multiplied, put on broken glass or lead, and similar things, until it is stretched out; or take out half of the bones of the limb, and leave them until they burn out, if you have stopped now; and if you have done more mischief, take other bones.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent; et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	If the wound does not take hold, wipe the limb with fresh blood, or pierce it with a needle until the wound stops bleeding, and then put on a bandage, and hold it as tightly as it feels comfortable; and when you see that it bleeds again, sprinkle over some aloes and hempseed, or charcoal, if they will stop now.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	And thus begins the book of bruises.
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and is the restoration of a bruise and its evacuation.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent; et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin; et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie; et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	Hear now, dear son, for in this chapter the learned physician reveals things which no ancient book or lettered work has ever mentioned; and for this reason it is strange in our land, for I have never found anything like it; and I know of nothing save by the wisdom of the old books, or through study and experience, or by the customs of my life; and I have set forth in this chapter what is contained therein, and I have abridged it at the end, and I have made clear the forms of the instruments which are mentioned, as I have done in the two preceding chapters.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	It is therefore necessary that we say or write in the prologue of this book what the words and chapters contain, and that we confirm the truth, so that those who are learned and who are studying this noble art can learn and teach others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars; ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	I say that when a fracture or dislocation or twisting or swelling comes to any limb, if you command the patient to hasten the healing of the ailment from one side and the other, if nothing else hinders, if weakness of the limb, or youth or old age; or if the tension is not very strong, or too cold; and eat cold broth, that is to say, cold broth and broth of oil and herbs, and do not drink wine, do not eat any fatty foods, and do not fill the veins with blood too much, until you are certain that the ailment has ceased to progress.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken bones begin to restore, if you must nourish the patient with foods that cause great swelling, or if there is viscosity, such as barley in water, broth, fish, eggs, cheese, turnips, cabbage, and similar things.</start_of_turn>
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For at the least some relief, the muscles relax and the swelling lessens.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans; mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	And know that bones broken in various parts do not mend well nor unite according to their nature because of the moisture in the limbs; neither those that are too tender, like bones of small children; but there is no cure, so maintain above the broken bone the great tension that has appeared and unite the limb together, as much as it strengthens if it were before; and do not move it from its place, for because of this it is necessary to nourish the large meats, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And know that breaks are of various kinds in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there are fractures that go to the marrow, and others by cutting, as with the size of a pen to write.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if there is a fracture with a wound, and a fracture with a small fissure.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu; et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main; et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure; mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	And sometimes there is its own sign and its own instrument in restoration; according to what is remembered from its place; and it is known that the break of the bone is recognized by its turning, and opens well by pushing, and by the pressure of the hand; and when there is no twisting or pressure, and the patient does not feel great pain, there is no break; but it can well have twisting, or fissure, or a small break.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	If it is only possible for me to move the hand slightly, but put on medicines that come afterwards, and then hold it firmly now.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne; et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez; puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	And the wounds that break through that go downwards, and are the two parts of the joint, it is necessary to put them right equally, even as after amputation; and if the amputation is close to life, if you leave any spur, as long as the amputation is quiet; then put it right alongside the muscle as you can lightly and cautiously, and the wounds that restore the limb are lighter than the restoration of this or that which has pieces. Then tighten, as it is said above.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main; et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor; et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	And if there are broken pieces in the bone, if they extend from two parts, as in the hands or feet, or at the thumb if it is a small limb, or in two strings or in one string and the thumb; and set the limb according to its natural figure, so that when the broken parts of the limb are loosened, if you rejoin them firmly at their place on the muscle that you can, and keep that in your work does not cause the patient pain or injury; and adjust well the two ends of the bone according to the best shapes.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	And if he feels well in the hand, even though it may seem that it is not well: if the swelling is good and does not tighten too much, do not press too hard as some people do when they are working excessively; for in this way many have come to harm.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere; et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	And when the limb is at a joint, if the patient is very sick and does not move it, neither awake nor asleep, neither by day nor by night; keep the limb so secure that it feels no pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor; et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez; et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	For when it feels no pain, if it is not at a joint, and you can put it into use without feeling pain; keep it straight, so that no spasm arises until it is restored; and the quality of the limb is as I have told you
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	His limbs are diverse in small and large sizes and shapes.</start_of_turn
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz; et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche; puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure; et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet; puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus; puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	For there are small members, such as arms and thighs and fingers: if you can wrap them with soft and subtle cloths; and those that are large, such as hips and legs: if you can wrap them with a wide and strong cord, for the large cords embrace the whole great limb, and strain it from all sides equally, so that there is no tension; then I will make light dressings, three turns or four according to the limb, and I will strain the hand once for the whole cord, and I will go up to the break and strain less, than the break then comes out a little; and I will soften the cord a little and a little, as long as I take a large part of the limb back, then I will take another cord, and I will twist the dressing back in place above the break; then I will put on the dressing below the break, and I will strain moderately, not too strong not too weak, as we have said at the first hour above; then I will put in between the cords dressings of linen or cloths, until they are even all around, and then I will tie everything up above with a good knot, and then I will put on your supports well made, if there is no abscess or swelling.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors; puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	And if there is swelling or abscess, if you put on something soothing for the abscess, and which will stop the swelling, and leave it for a few days; then strain over your ribs, and let them be half of a broad cane in size, or of mustard seeds, or of gum resin, and be like this figure.
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres; et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor; puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure; plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol; car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	But it is necessary that the rib which you put on the fracture be thicker and wider than the others; and be as long as it is convenient for the limb in its entirety or in its diminution; then strain over the ribs in the same way as before, and then bind under a thread smoothly, as in the first instance on the fracture; the tighter it is bound, the less; and it is necessary that the thread be neither too thick nor too thin, and be of linen wool. For if the thread is thick, like those fools who make their stitches of linen thread, and it is great error, because the stitch will not be even if it is too fine, and it will not hold firmly.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	If the patient is bruised by the nails after the stretching of the flesh, if you put on them stockings of linen or coarse cloth, so that they do not bleed.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is with a burn, and the bone is fractured, I will speak of the cure of that afterwards.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And as regards those who cannot endure the pain of the stars, they must break their limbs at the first opportunity.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant; et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	When the limb is large, it is not permissible for me to put these stars in place except after five days or seven, or more according to your certainty of the afterbirth of the caulking; and when this is done the method of ancient embalmings is to restore fracture, dislocation, and torsion: take flour that is held against the walls of the mill, and mix it with abundant eggs, and make this confection, not too clear not too thick, and use it. This is the common method of embalmment that restores the fracture in various positions, and the same for women and young children, for it is neither too harsh nor too cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .v. З.; alechil .viiij. З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Another method of dressing that restores the fracture and dislocation and torsion: take three barley grains and linseed and almond and asafoetida and gum arabic and mugwort, in the quantity of x. three; myrrh and aloes, in the quantity of v. three; beeswax . viiij. three; and grind them up, and mix them with plenty of eggs; if the complexion of the patient is hot, use this dressing, for it is of good composition and immediately restores the broken bones, and is worth more than many homes.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.; acaice VI З.; bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Another method of embalmment that is worth for torsion: take mugwort and mastic, mix with X grains of rue; myrrh and aloes, mix with VIIII grains of rue; acacia with VI grains of rue; arnica with X grains of rue, grind them well, and mix with water or abundant eggs, and administer.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	Other methods of restoring joints and bones that have slipped out of place, relieve pain that arises, and reduce swelling of the bone, and the fracture: take fresh linen, moisten it in oil and put it on the area.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	These methods do not restore them immediately, but they are good for relieving after-pain and restoring bones properly, relieving pain.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another method of supporting the displaced bone is to take dried fig leaves and terrestrial pavol leaves, and grind them together, and make plaster.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	Other methods of restoring the fracture and reducing the remaining after-pain.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Take root of viper’s bane, chamomile, violets, fennel seeds, and rue a few parts; grind them up, and mix with wine, and if the limb is swollen, mix with vinegar of coriander or plain vinegar, and use it
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	Other methods of replacement are more forceful than the first, when a hard abscess comes to the restoration of the limb.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Take root of chamomile, flaxseed, balsam, melilot, and chamomile, of all an equal part; and bruise, and confit with salt water, or sweet water, or with wine, according to the heat of the limb and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Ypocras says in his book that there is no need to put anything on the broken limb to restore it except some wax and oil, and nothing else, and that it should be between soft and hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems Galen would have you put something warm upon the broken limb, to restore, such as mustard, aloes, incense and other things, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another method of dressing that is worth for pain and swelling: take mugwort and chopped onions, or poppy seeds, and vinegar, and mix them evenly, and grind them, and make a poultice of it and bind it.</start_of_turn>
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor; puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut; et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then loosen a little afterwards, and take care that the patient feels no pain, that the bone is not displaced from its place; if you do not loosen by hand for a while. And if pain comes to the limb, or swelling, order rest or inflammation, if you hurry, and loosen, and support the displacement now; and take a light bandage, and a wet sponge, and immerse in water, and lift the limb, until the swelling stops, and the pain is calmed; then leave the limb rest for an hour, then put on dry linen, soaked in water or oil of rose, and bind up with a nut, until you are sure of the abscess being cured; and rest the inflammation of the limb, and be sure the pain is gone, then repeat the binding, and a little displacement, and do not strain it so much as before; and be discreet until it is healed.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that swelling, redness, pain and swelling are present throughout the bone, and that you must place and bind, if it starts again, as you did the first time.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII; et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus; adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir; arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure; par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	If it does not come from the limb nothing of what we have said; if it does not slip from the third day or the fourth or the fifth or the seventh; do not leave it for twenty days, as we see, until the swelling has subsided and the limb has become flexible; then tighten the restraint more than before, and swell the flesh, as I have said previously; and if you see the limb drying out more than usual, the stitches will not hold; then rise up the warm water and loosen the limb every third hour, cutting a little piece of the ligature; by this means the swelling will gradually subside from the limb and restore the limb naturally: that is bad, and if it is a dangerous thing, I do not see anything better than to leave it alone and do it directly.
des diverses manieres de brisure	from various methods of fracture
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees; car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	Many kinds of fractures are known, and various figures, and their causes are diverse; for there are fractures caused by percussion of a spear, and the collarbone broken right up to the syphus which is split by the bone, as is often done by a hack or thrust; and for this reason this kind of fracture is called a «hack fracture».
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces .ij. brisures grans ou petite.	For the spear pierces the bone in an opposite direction to that of percussion, and this kind of fracture is called an «absolue»; and there are wounds of these two kinds of fractures, great or small.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is an embedded percussion, or fracture or fracture of the bone, or dislocation of the shoulder or fracture of the bone, or other similar things.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	If there is a fracture with the bone protruding through the skin, which approaches the socket which is below the bone, or it is on the bone itself, and is this wound, large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»; et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	And if a wound that has penetrated the bone is as slight as a nail, and the fracture is small, this is called a «capillary fracture»; and if the wound is made by a wound of stone, or by thorn, or by anything similar, and causes the bone to split inwards, and the bone is bowed as when coals are placed over a cauldron; if between the fragments.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant; et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	And in these cases there are more bones that are soft or moist, as in the case of a child; and in all these kinds of fractures, small pieces are loosened if these bones are flexible; and I will speak of them later.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And we know of all kinds of breaks by the swelling above them, by inquiry, and by corrupt flesh above.</start_of_turn>
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The capillary mark is known by this that when one discovers the bone and rubs it in grease, if the fracture is black.</start_of_turn
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of fracture, take heed of any sudden accidents with the patient, and if you see no other mishap, if vomiting of bile, loss of consciousness, extension, swelling, palmation, and fever arise, and the eyes are itchy and flushed, and other similar things besides, do not proceed without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see any impending mishap, and you hope for recovery, if so, begin the treatment.</start_of_turn>
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the limb comes first to you, and it is in fever, if so, you must remove the bone before the fourteenth hour of the day before sunset.</start_of_turn
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is in this state, if you hasten to open the bone before the seventh hour, even though the marrow is corrupted, there will come the accident we mentioned.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset; et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	And if a bone breaks and reaches the edge of the skull that covers the brain, if you know how, you must split the fractured part in two: take hold of the patient’s head and uncover the bone in every way you can, and on the figure of the wound more so; and if blood vessels break out from uncovering the bone, or an abscess, if you can, use what is necessary, and fill the cavity with soaked linen cloths soaked in rose oil; and rest the wound until the abscesses have subsided, and be sure to check for blood vessel damage; then begin to bind up the bone, which is done in two ways: one way if the fracture is close to the tail end, and the other way if the fracture is close to the head end.
Et puis i boute .i. autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then the other cut is larger than the first one.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	And the second method is that if you have different sizes of nails, some narrow and others wide, and they are pointed and of iron; and in order to work lightly, do not split the head
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou .i. cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des .iij. manieres de tareres:	And if the bone is tough and hard, if you must pierce through, even if you administer a large dose of medicine, do not make a hole wider than the diameter of the bone; and must have above the tip a margin or circle, which must not pass beyond the bone; and you must have several of these margins, so that the bone comes out from under the thickness of the bone, as with a large dose of medicine; and this is the form of the two methods of administering medicine:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes .i. tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	If the bone is tough and hard, if you must pierce through, even if you administer a large dose of medicine, do not make a hole wider than the diameter of the bone; and must have above the tip a margin or circle, which must not pass beyond the bone; and you must have several of these margins, so that the bone comes out from under the thickness of the bone, as with a large dose of medicine.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire; et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	And when you have set the bone, and treated it, if you can, reset the fragment that remains detached from the bone with any instrument resembling a chisel, but it must be more rigid and subtle than the other chisel; and if nothing remains of the small bones, do not remove the fragments, even if they are loosely attached to other instruments; then cure the wound with sutures and ointments as we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And another method of work is that which the Greeks teach, which is more numerous; and the load is very great, and that is its word.</start_of_turn>
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is necessary first to uncover a part of the bone, either the socket or the fracture edge, so that when you have uncovered that part, if you put some oil on the tip of this incisor lens, from which this is the form:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz; s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	And do not grasp from one side, but take hold of the limb at two costs; if you grasp from the bone, then immediately release your hold from above, and take hold with a slight mallet from below, so that you can easily move the bone without injuring the surrounding tissue; if it is near the bone, grasp it lightly, for it is easily bruised, because it is well known that it is painful.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	If the bone breaks without piercing the skin, and the bone is only slightly fractured by its base, and there are small pieces, if it is possible to return the asperity, and to remove the scales with a scraper of various sizes, in order to fill each cavity as completely as possible, according to the work and the figure of the fracture.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If there is still before great pain, and afterwards more subtle, and does not cease to do so until it is well done.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	In some other surgical procedures and incisions, it is necessary to cause a wound according to the situation; and this is something that is not easily learned by anyone who has not studied this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie; puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement; et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication; et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	If the swelling is discovered, then you must take hold of one drape of linen, according to the size of the wound, and soak it in oil rose and place it on the wound; then take another drape of linen doubled in two or three, and soak it in wine and oil rose, and place it on the first drape; and do this more gently than you would like, that you do not damage the swelling, and then administer above it another linen, and do not bind it more tightly than is necessary to hold the wound only; and leave it in place for one or two days, until the swelling has subsided, then remove it, and administer medicines such as radish root, flour of times, and incense powder, and an astringent; and from these things make a powder and apply it to the wound, and administer appropriate medicines without biting; and keep the wound clean, do not leave it bloody, do not leave it bound up tightly, for when it is bound up tightly on the swelling, it contracts and causes pain, and this brings great harm to the patient; for when anything biting is placed on the swelling, if it is not done cautiously.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Therefore take heed, if no other misfortune comes to the patient, as we have said, if there is any doubt with regard to it.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac; puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If black bile does not depart violently except by the medicine we have placed, that some virtue has, if you take a part of honey, and three parts of rose oil and in glue one drape, and you put it on the surface; then you will cure in the manner of cures that it is possible, until it is healed.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les .ij. parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont .ij. os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	Never break the three upper parts or one alone, for these are three bones; and since these are cartilaginous and do not break, except by excessive bowing or twisting, they will heal quickly.</start_of_turn>
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil; et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	If one of the two parts is broken, if you can swallow your little toe or pierce the knot of pain that you do not want, and put the same break inside your index finger, and at the knuckle by force, until the pain disappears according to its natural figure; and do this gently, and beware that the patient does not feel pain from your work.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the fracture is in the upper part and cannot be brought down, if you can, put it equal to the chief of a strong bone
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues; se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	If the break is of two parts, do it again; and hurry to restore the first joint if you can; if not, after the seventh or eighth day, when the inflammation of the wound has subsided, then bathe the head of the pain where you attempt to bandage it, if the break is in a part.
Ou tu boutes .i. autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	If not, after the seventh or eighth hour, when the swelling of the wound has subsided, then pourtre at the head of the wound a drape of linen, if the break has occurred in a part. Or you may bite [the wound] once more elsewhere, if the break has happened there; and let the stitches be so large that they fill the hole at the wound's head.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	And they say no restorer must keep the tents moist in the burrow, and die each day.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	I do not see that it is good, but it is necessary that they be moist in the making of an egg and flour powder; then leave the tent until the bone is firm, and the cartilages hardened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a .i. souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And never must one or the other pluck a goose feather in place of stitches, and if indeed there is a soft drape over, and the pincer is held, and the patient is blown among; do whatever you like.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en .i. poc de dyaquilon.	And if the patient sweats profusely while working, if one puts some cerote or cotton soaked in rose oil, or in some vinegar.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis; et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu; et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound does not bleed, if you put on a plaster of alum, of hempseed flour, and of incense powder, confirmed with egg yolk, then put on soft dressings, and do not bind tightly; and if the break is small and is broken into small pieces, if you have suitable instruments, then close the wound, and cure the things that are surrounding it with char, and solder, as with plasters and ointments that are suitable for this; and if there is no wound in the inside, if you cure the tents, and put on bandages of wool, until it is healed
de la routure de la mandibule	of the jawbone.
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jaw is dislocated forward, and there is no wound, the fracture is only superficial, and is not broken in depth, except for spurs within, if one knows it lightly.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	It is necessary, if the fracture is on the outer part, to bite down firmly with the index finger of the affected hand; and if the fracture is on the left jaw, take hold of the index finger of the right hand, and grasp the fracture lightly, and hold it steady with the other hand outwards, and keep it even.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en .ij., si covient que tu aministres extension de .ij. pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the fracture of the jaw is displaced inwards, if it is necessary, to administer extension inwards, as much as it is even.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus .i. drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	If movement of the jaw comes loose, or if it is strained by a thread of gold or silver or silk, then put on a broken jaw-bone cerate and put on an i. double drape; and put on the drape a large staple well made, or a piece of leather equal in length and width to the jaw, and bind it on to the tooth that you put, and command the patient to rest, and eat soft food.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en .iij. semainnes.	If you see that the figure is stiff, if it is dislocated from the jaw, and then reset it to its place; and put on a plaster, of powdered mulberry with abundance of eggs or flour of alum, after this has ossified the cerate; and put on the plaster linen legier, and if the plaster has hardened, and the patient’s figure does not stiffen, leave it as it is until it is healed; many times it is healed in two weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if post-partum vomiting comes, if we remember what we have said many times.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is a fracture and wound together, heal without damaging any part of the bone; if subtle from the bone, cover with suitable instruments.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	If the wound is tight, if it has flared up according to your need.</start_of_turn>
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus .i. des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When you have sutured all these pieces, and there is no longer any pain, if the wound is large, put on suitable bandages to protect the wound, as long as it is healing.</start_of_turn>
de la forcele	forcefully
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc .iij. manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en .ij., et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	The forcele breaks several times before, over the shoulder, and breaks if done in two manners: when it is broken and loosened in three pieces, and there are fragments, and it is the lightest to restore; or when there is a break with injury.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies .ij. ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And if the break is in the direction of the wound, you must have two assistants, one to hold the shoulder that feels the forcele broken; and the other extends the neck towards the part; then put the break even with the shoulder, so that the form is as it should be, and there is neither appearance nor tremor.</start_of_turn>
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And if you must extend more, if put on the shoulder of the patient a round ball of beeswax, or linen, and be large as you need; and extend and hold the forcele, and strain the sphere in your hand, so that you put the break even, as it should be.</start_of_turn>
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule .i. oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you are unable to manage the head of the shoulder when it comes out of its place, because it is coming out with force, you must know that the patient lies prone upon his bed, and place an elbow support, that is, an elbow resting on the middle of the forearm, and hold the minister of the elbow below, until the bone of the shoulder is raised up.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	Then address the fracture to your side, and if you find debris, if you know it, make an incision there; and force out the pieces gently, and if the bone does not unite by any means, if the socket is at one of the incisors you have; but that you place an elbow support upon the shoulder, to hold the blood clot.</start_of_turn>
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os; et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	And it seems like a scoop, but it is not quite so, and let it be as wide as it seems convenient, according to the size of the bone and the nature of the work; and there shall be two nails, as you see, and one shall be large, and the other small, as is the curve of the wound that you made when you treated the bone; and when you are assured of the postulation, if the wound is slight, or if you doubt the postulation, if you employ the wound with patches and sutures, according to its quantity.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille .i. drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if the abscess comes again, if it is moist, then apply oil of roses, rue and wine, and put on top.</start_of_turn>
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier; puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant; et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint; et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors; puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	The stripping of the bone, when it is sensible to wounds and to the saw, is that you put upon the bone the plaster of fine powder and egg-white, and put on soft bandages; and put a ball of lead beside the hip if you are able to do so; then take a great band of palm width, and put on two layers of gauze over the bandages, and plaster; then take a thin splint of three fingers wide and long, and encircle that bundle, so that the head of the bundle is pendant; and put the splint on the trochanter, and turn the bundle over the collar, and take away the ball of lead from the hip, and from the painful hip; and leave the chest part alone, and when you see that the bandage holds the trochanter steadily, and that you clearly see that the splint does not move from the fractured bone, if the limb is properly immobilized, and when the limb is flexed, if the restraint is released; and manage the patient on his back, and put under his hip one small pillow beside the hip, to raise the limb up; if you align the fracture by aligning the shoulder blade, or you bind the arm to the collar, and do not release it until it is badly necessary.
de la brisure de l’espaule	Then resume the manipulation, if you see that it requires it, and hold and keep it still until it is restored; and it is usually restored in about twenty-six days, and in less time for most people.
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en xxv, Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	When the scapula is broken or fractured, do not move it except by touch; if it appears according to the figure of the fracture, and is reset according to its natural form, in every way that you can; then put on the limb powder with abundant eggshell, and bandage lightly, and put on a double drape; then put on a broad and firm splint, wider than the scapula, and if the splint is not firmly secured in any part of the scapula, use the dressing of flaxseed, so that the splint rests evenly; and then strain it with a great firm bend, so that the splint does not move from its place, and look at the mark of each joint; and every time it relaxes, if you strain it, and put back the splint if it has gone out of place, and let the patient rest on his side; and the scapula is restored in XX days or in XXV, And when this number is completed, if the pain ceases, and so be cured, for it is not a bone that is easily broken.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	If a piece of the bone sticks out beforehand, and not a little, if it remains there, and the bone, do as we have said in the loosening of the forcele to appease the abscess.
de la brisure dou pis	If a piece of the bone sticks out beforehand, and not a little, if it remains there, and the bone, do as we have said in the loosening of the forcele to appease the abscess.
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer.	The body is never entirely broken in a thousand pieces, but this happens often; but it breaks often with a sudden movement.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	When it is broken in pieces, if it is downhill, and the patient experiences great pain, and weakness, vomiting blood, and opening the wound in the fractured bone, and feeling well again.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met .i. cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des .ij. costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en .i. drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the patient lies supine on his back, place one cushion between the scapulae and press them together. Assemble the ribs with your hands, and with subtle force restore the bones to their normal position, ensuring that the bone is properly aligned. Then place on plaster bandages and stamp with fine salt, or other soft powder, and cover with a single bandage, and bind firmly over the fracture. Keep the patient still for an hour after reduction, and if it comes loose again, either through corrosion or inflammation, or pain or swelling, grasp and re-extend immediately, and if necessary remove the plaster. Wipe off the plaster, address the underlying cause of the fracture, and reapply the plaster.
de la brisure des costes	When the bones of the ribs are fractured.
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	The fractures of the ribs only come from a great fall from the back or from the head downwards, and they do not bruise except for this that they are slippery; and the patient feels well at the inquiry as two.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	The restoration is if you put the fracture back in its place, as it should be done
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	And then put on a bandage and bind it with a splint if necessary
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And if the fracture of the ribs is displaced downwards, if the patient feels great pain and tingling, like with pleurisy, because the bone is pressing on the gut; then there are vomiting and diarrhea with great loss of blood, which is a serious illness, and that often happens.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if you are told that it is necessary to administer nourishing foods that will swell the belly, to push out the fracture
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not do this, except when the boil has burst, and only then.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if it has burst, if it is well.</start_of_turn>
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	They say that no one puts a bandage on the limb for its swelling, for it is like reason; however, there is doubt that the bandage will not draw out the superfluous matter from the limb by the force of weakness.</start_of_turn>
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	They say that no one should cover the limb with coarse cloth in oil, and put on tight bands between the ribs to measure equally the swelling between the ribs, then either cure with the poultice of pleurisin, of meat and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient experiences great pain that he cannot endure from the bone that points towards the navel, and there is doubt in the patient, if it is possible to cut above the fractured bone, and to put on a bandage to hold it in place; and then the bone must be cut, and treated lightly, and then the two layers of the wound must be sutured, if it is large, and it must be dressed with bandages until it has healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if pus comes from the wound, put on moist cloths soaked in rose oil, and put on a bandage; and cure while the limb coves with the wound, and do not leave the edge of the wound open, as long as it is healthy.
de la brisure dou col	And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot bear from the bone that points to the navel, and there is doubt in the patient, if it is commanded to cut above the broken rib, and to put in [a foreign object] as a support; then one must cut the bone and remove it gently, and then suture the two layers of the wound, if it is large, and cure it with bandages, until it is healed. And if an abscess comes out, if put on moist cloths soaked in rose oil, and put on the wound; and cure while the bone that was cut is at rest, and do not move the ribs or it must, until it is healed. And if there is a fracture of the collarbone...
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	Never comes a fracture of the collarbone as a sudden blow; and thus also with a thorn in the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	And when this happens to no avail, and you know if it will be healed or not, take care if you see his hands softened and limp and dead, and cannot move or extend, and when you prick them with a needle, if there is no sensation
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	The wound that is deadly in many situations, if you move it and feel well when you strain and prick it, the wound will be saved, and the patient will be cured, if you put on treatment.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	And if any other thing comes to the spine from behind, and you must know whether there is blood or not; if it is taken care of, if the wound is softened, and if the accident is on the hands or on the back, there should be an immediate suspension of the wind and vomiting with the will; and when it has been soothed on the belly, there should be an immediate vomiting with the will.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	And when it has been soothed on the back and it vomits, it must not be allowed to leave the bed.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	The patient must not work in his wound
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	If this accident does not happen, if the thing is less serious.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the remedy is that if there is a wound at the base of the hair, put upon the spine oil of rose or oil of rue egg, until it is calmed; then put on one of the comforting and drying plasters, and bind it with a thread, and command the patient to rest; and do not sleep on that part where there is pain, until it is healed.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if a bone breaks, if you can cover over the limb; and bind the bone, then assemble the two ends of the wound, if it is great, with a splint, and hold it in place with a bandage, until it is healed; and if the bone is fractured, which is called the "fracture of the heel", if you have to move your left pocket of your hand, and put it equal to the right hand, then put on the plaster and the splint, if you need them; and strain it, and if there are bones that are loosened, if you leave it on, and bind the bone, and cure the wound until it is healed.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	of the fracture of the heel bone
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	When the thigh bone is fractured, and if there is no sign of a fracture of the head of the femur, keep the limb still and quiet; and it brings pain to the patient, swelling, and bending of the limb that breaks.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And if the restoration is that you place your hand above, as long as you are above the fracture; and stretch out the limb which is fractured and deformed; and if the fracture is at the head only, if you make it equal to the other side, until it is naturally positioned.</start_of_turn>
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the fracture is at the thigh, or it declines downwards, if you make the patient sit on his belly, until the restoration of this fracture is apparent.</start_of_turn>
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	And when the hair is even, if you put it on the wound, then put on a stool or a knee, and hold the bristle steady, so that it does not move; and keep the hand relaxed, as long as the hair is even.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And instruct the patient to sleep on his side, or on his back.</start_of_turn>
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	And if the abscess bursts, do not touch it, until the abscess has calmed; and put on what we have said before; and then return to the wound and hold it as it should be held, if there is no further mishap; and this is the proper method.</start_of_turn>
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	De la brisure de l’ajutoire.
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren .i. fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	From the dislocation of the shoulder
Et lie as .ij. chiés .ij. liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus .i. siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	And thus take two fingers of the arm, and bend them upwards, and hold the patient above; then gently stretch the arm towards the armpit, and take hold of the fist with one hand, and support it with the other hand; then put the thumbs of both hands together, until the dislocation returns as it should
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a .ij. ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout .i. liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And the other method is that you support the patient on his chest, and bind his hand to his collar, and command the attendants to hold what is above the dislocation at their hands, and the others to hold down all the bones, and stretch the skin to its part.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	If you see that the extraction is too strong, restrain the limb with the elbow bent over the table and the wrists stretched towards the minister
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	If the shoulder blade is near the head of the shoulder, then you must place one finger in the middle of the scapula and the other towards the shoulder, below the fracture; and if the fracture is towards the shoulder, then you must place one finger lightly, with effort, until the fracture is level on both the shoulder and the scapula; then set the fracture, if possible, and hold it steady, because the sockets do not come together.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a .vij. jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	And if it comes away again, do not strain too much for thirteen days, put on soft linen and rose oil, until the swelling has subsided; then strain, and do as you put the support on the briseure; then assemble the limb on the shoulder and put your hand on the shoulder or on the breast; put on the bandage, and strain on the shoulder and the limb, so that the limb is steady, without any hindrance, or without breaking the bone.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele .i. doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure .iij. dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	And if you doubt that the bone is not moving, use sticks, and put on the break a stick wider and stronger than the others, and put between two sticks the distance of two fingers; then strain on the sticks, as I said at the beginning of this chapter, stronger and less straining.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	If you see the swelling of the bones, and the stretching, as we have said, when you restore the limb after the fracture, if you doubt the completeness of the reduction, if you leave it joined until the seventh day, as we have said; then look for three days that the swelling does not increase or that the discoloration does not reach the limb, or that the bruising does not come to the limb because it is too tight.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	If the case is urgent, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	If no such accidents occur, if he does not vomit for at least three days, the patient should lie on his back and place his hands on his stomach; and give the patient a cataplasm of one egg with an equal amount of wool, and observe for an hour or two whether the limb is stiff or the sinews are relaxed; if the case is urgent by the power of medicine, and do the treatment which we have before mentioned, in part as the meat is at its first warmth; and when he begins to recover, if it is severe.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	It is customary that the attendants and limbs must be taken in at forty days; and then one must remove the dressing and administer warm baths and medicines for the part affected
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	And if the fracture is severe and embedded, it must be allowed to heal for a period of at least one month or two.
de la brisure du bras	...and if the fracture of the arm.
Li bras est compos de .ij. os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm is composed of three bones, which are called the "humerus" and the "ulna." One is small and is like a nail that holds the pouch; the other is large and is like a socket, towards the little finger. By chance the large bone only breaks, or the small, and by chance they are both broken together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	When the small bones are fractured, restoration is easy and quick; but when the large bones are fractured, healing is difficult and more painful than when they are fractured together.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	If only a small bone is fractured, if the limb is slightly extended and kept even
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	When the large bone is fractured, if the limb must be more strongly constrained; and extend over one cushion, and hold the hand higher than the other, and the small bone lower than the others, and let the patient cross his arms over himself, and the cushion should be placed in front of him higher than the patient; then extend the limb from the elbow to the wrist, or to the shoulder, and support the other limb on the other side
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And then he sets the eye equal, according to its better form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	If in fracture the pieces have separated, if you put something into its place, and if there is no perceptible displacement that pricks the bone as before, you shall not be able to restore it to its place; leave it there and support the bone as we have said above.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	If with the fracture there is a wound, as I have already mentioned in this chapter; take the cure.</start_of_turn>
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	And if in the beginning of the restoration blood spurts out from the incisions, if the glue I drape over it is too thick or too thin, I drape it over subtly, until the blood spurting from the incisions is calmed.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	And then I put on the cerate and put in the plug of powdered meal with abundance of eggs, because I put in the nails, and let the nail of the awl be more solid and a little wider than the others; and there must be six nails or arms in more or less positions: either that the awl is in one of the bones, or in two; and it is more strained above the awl than elsewhere, and the more you loosen it the less pain there is, as I said at the beginning of this chapter; and let the cloths that are on the awl be soft and moist, and not too hard or too rough; and let the thread that is being strained be of linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And warm the limb and the joint afterwards every day.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	And if any other bad event comes to the limb, as if there is itching that comes to the limb, then you must raise the limb with warm water, until the itching is appeased; and let the limb rest still.</start_of_turn>
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And then start the treatment again, and if the ligaments are softened and the bones loosen, and similar things, if necessary.</start_of_turn
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses .i. poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	If you take care that the swelling does not happen again to the limb, because it is too tight, you must soften it somewhat, and leave it alone for some days, until the swelling goes down, and then restrain it.</start_of_turn>
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	And if none of these things that we have said come to the patient, if not loosening for twenty days.</start_of_turn
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	or perhaps he must hold his hands to his collar, and keep his collar even, and guard against movement and vomiting, and sleep on his back; and change the dressing every thirty days or every fifty, or sometimes every twenty days, according to the composition and temperament of the virtues.</start_of_turn
de la brisure de la main	From the breaking of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	From the breaking of the hand: Indeed, at the back of the hand we often find fractures, and it does not cease but to rain many times.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin.	And when the hand is broken or wet, if it is necessary, the patient should sit still and look straight ahead; then put his hand on the extended cloth and stretch the fractured bones, and put them back in place; and put on the plaster and bandages, if they do not bleed; and put on a splint according to the degree of displacement; and be wrapped in one layer of linen cloth.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	And if the fracture is at the elbow towards the belly of the limb, make a loop of cloth, and command the patient to stretch it over his fractured limb; and then strain from a long cloth, and the splint should be as large as the limb, and strain, if it is necessary.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the break is at the top, then it is right that you put a splint above and one below, so that the thumb is overextended and straight, then bind it all around the thumb, and keep it closed between the two.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en .i. tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	If the fracture does not come from either side, if it is the pouch [of the thumb], if you make it even, as it should be; and strain with the bandage, and if you see that you must put a small splint to lift the fracture, and it does not move; and if the fracture is elsewhere, as in the index or one of the others, if you make it even, and bind it with the two fingers that follow; or you bind them all together, holding the thumb firmly, or you put on a splint, as for a pouch; take care in restoring and arranging the fracture, and secure whatever comes out, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	of the broken limb
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie .i. liien desus la briseure, et .i. autre desoz.	The bones of the thigh are often fractured, and one can see it when they twist before and behind; and the restoration is when one binds them under the fracture and the other above.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And the patient lies on his face, then stretches outwards his limbs equally; and this is when the fracture is embedded in the bone
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	If the fracture is close to the root of the thigh bone, if one of the ligaments above the socket and the other below the fracture.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	If also it is close to the knee, and then either the ligament above the knee and the other below the fracture; then put the hand over the bone until it is in its natural position, and then put on the dressing and the bandage, for no other support comes.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	And if there is a burn on the edge, if you leave it calm and return to your work and your cure; the binding is made in part as before.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	It is necessary to wrap around the fracture with a strong bandage doubled twice or thrice, and to drain the excess; then bend the limb until the nails reach the root of the nail; and pass a thread long between the thigh and the limb from below the knee, and pass the thread over the top of the limb and the thigh; then wrap over the limb and the thigh the strong bandage, and put on the dressing, and put a staple on the bone of the limb; then place seven stitches between the limb and the thigh of coarse cloth to make an even tension; and when more is added to the fracture, and less the tension; then take out two threads that you passed between the limb and the thigh, and put on three staples which are below, and leave at the top the thread as long as you see below the bone; and the tension, if it does not move from its place, then leave it as it is, and do not put on any dressing or swelling or other similar thing.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	And if there is swelling, if it comes loose, and if you address what comes, as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of bone that prick, it is necessary to cauterize, if possible; and if that is not possible, it is necessary to cut the limb open, and drain; and cure as we have said, so that it is healthy again.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	And never is the bone broken in this way that it will keep these stars, as in the shoulder and arm; however, in restoring this way that is made, I do not cause any pain to the patient.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en .l. jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And the swelling of the bone is restored in a day, or less or more, according to the variations of complexions.
de la ruelle dou genoil	of the groin area.
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	Hairs that in the groin district are found broken, but they fall out often.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	If they break, if it is not merely a split or rupture, and there is bleeding, pain, and discomfort in that place.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the restoration is to be made, it is to put that which is round back into its place, as long as it is assembled firmly with muscle; then put the dressing in place, and put a round cushion in, if you have need of it, and strain it as it should be strained, then reward all the instructions that we have said before, as in incision and other things; if you put in charge of each accident that it should be cured, as long as it is healthy.
de la brisure de la jambe	And if the restoration is to be made, it is to put that which is round back into its place, as long as it is assembled firmly with muscle; then put the dressing in place, and put a round cushion in, if you have need of it, and strain it as it should be strained, then reward all the instructions that we have said before, as in incision and other things; if you put in charge of each accident that it should be cured, as long as it is healthy. And finish the fracture of the limb.
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	Hairs that in the leg have two bones, of which one is called the «muscle» and the other the «fleshy part»; and they all break together like the arm, and for this reason the restoration is just like that of the arm, and the work is done entirely in this way. And if both bones are fractured together, if the limb is twisted from all sides
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	If a bone is fractured in two, twist the limb forward.</start_of_turn>
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz.	And if the great bone is fractured, there is great pain, and it is seen well; and the swelling is great
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	When it is thus brought to light, extend the limb fully, and set it straight; but know this, if it breaks at this point, there are many fragments, so that the extension is less painful and lighter; and adjust it according to your skill.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren .ij. faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en .ij. leus .i. bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent .i. bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have finished your work, if you take two strips of cheesecloth that will embrace the limb from one side to the other, and be as long as the limb from the knee to the toes; then wrap in two layers of cloth, that is bandage above and below, and bind firmly in the middle, and with this binding the limb will not deviate to the right or to the left, and that is good; and no one should be given anything to drink that is long the limb, and there is much swelling, and one should put on the limb in order to prevent movement, and this must be done at the fracture or in the wound; and move the limb slightly to see if there is any displacement or other accident; if there is, cure until it is healed.</start_of_turn
de la brisure des os dou piet	From the breaking of bones to the hardness of the marrow.
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle, there is no fracture, but in the bones of marrow there is never a fracture and two must suffice, and there is no reason for more arrangements.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a .ij. chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	And if there is a fracture in the bones of marrow, and you see these bones pressing against each other, if you put the limb so that it is lower than the earth, as if it were falling, and then put your limb back in its place, where the bones are lifted, then press the limb until it returns to its place; then put on the dressing and bandage the wound, and put on a small bandage under the bone a little more than half an inch thick, and bind the limb steadily, and cover it with cloth or other things as you deem necessary.
Et quant .iij. jors ou .iiij. seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when two or three days have passed, if the limb is loose, because you will find the bones equal, whether fractured or loosened.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a .ij. ou .iij., ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	If there are two fractures, when they are restored as we have said, put a bandage around the fracture according to its length; and make a dressing wider, and put salt on the wound that I have mentioned, and strain it gently. And if there are three or more, fracture them, and put on each fracture a bandage according to its quantity, enveloped in a layer of linen, and strain the wound from the salt. Keep the dressing above the fracture head over the wound of the fracture.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	Remember also the other things that I have said about other fractures, since we have said them; and treat each case as it should be treated.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	The fracture of the clavicle bone.
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the limb is fractured, if you set it out, then incline the back part downwards, and support it behind; then fill the limb with wool, and put on as much as you can; then draw out the limb, leaving the back and front parts together; and then pull out the wool from the entrance of the limb until the bone returns to its place. If she sees blood, if the bone has been pulled out, and when she has urinated, if she has bled, let her rest for seven days or until the fracture is restored. If it is restored, take a bladder of herbs and bind the area with a bandage, and keep it bound up until the bladder is expelled: the limb will then return to its normal position; then fill with wool and leave it for a few days until it is healed.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	And when the bone of a man or a woman is fractured, if you restore it just as we have said concerning the thigh bone; these fractures are not usually hidden from the one who put his study and his care into it, and they are mentioned in my book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	For these fractures signify in many ways the right way of restoration: therefore take heed.</start_of_turn>
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse .iij. jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	In the limb, when it is fractured, take a goose-neck and bind the limb; then wrap it in bandages, and leave it for two days or until it is healed. It will be completely healed without fail.</start_of_turn>
de brisure avec plaie	From break with wound.
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is proper for one with a broken bone with wound, even if it is large, as with the bones of the thigh or shoulder or the like, to be sound at present, as the signs which we have mentioned testify.</start_of_turn>
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound is healed, if the breaking of the vitriol remains, if you have nothing else, then restore the break in the same place an hour or two later, or later, if the abscess does not come.</start_of_turn
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if an abscess comes, if you leave the restoration until new moon, as long as the abscess is calmed, and do not touch either the third nor the fourth part, for you will risk coming to a bad accident.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	If the bone is fractured and is discovered in its place, know that you must hold it firmly in your hands with a slight extension.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a .vij. dois ou .viij. de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne .iii. ou iiij., selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	If the extension does not appear, take hold of the instrument of iron, which is about twelve or thirteen inches long, and its width should be according to the size of the wound; for this reason it is necessary that it grasp three or four fingers, according to how much is necessary in the case of a broken bone; and let it be round and thick, so that it does not press upon the limb during your work.
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	And it is called "palainche" because it must be taken that the bent limb be placed upon the head of the visible bone; and once it has returned, it must be even so that one side meets the other.</start_of_turn
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And if the fracture is subtle, and the instruments cannot well grasp the bone, if you must take hold of the head of the bone, as long as the instruments have possession of it.</start_of_turn
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	If you are unable to restore the bone, as we have said, and if you grasp with a curable instrument, such as an tweezers or scissors, at your pleasure; then remove what remains embedded in the bone by scraping and scraping off the rough and bony fragments.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	When the bone is reset, and the patient feels great pain afterwards, the limb is not in its natural position.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	If you do so much as to place it in its place, then moisten it with black vinegar, and do so cautiously; and do not place any cerate or other thing upon the wound, for it will cause putrefaction and corruption; then administer stars when you have restored the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and bind the covering all around, according to the quantity of the wound, and take care that the wound is not strained with the fracture; for many times this has been done foolishly, and it has caused the patient to die or become lame or rotten on numerous occasions; or let the swelling be milder and softer than the other fractures.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	And if the wound is small or large, and you doubt that the bad blood does not go away, as we have said, and you feel pain in the limb, if it is not possible for me to put on the steles; but cover with a coarse cloth instead of the steles, and bind them.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And when you see after one or two days blood seeping from the wound, if the one you put on all around has become soft, and there is healing of wounds, as with ointment of four herbs and similar things.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre .ij. fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And it must be that you bind the limb three times a day, in the morning and evening, until it is healed and sound.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And it must be that the limb be held in a gentle position as it naturally bends slightly forward
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	If it persists, and it cannot be fixed but returns to its original position, with slight fractures of bones, because it must be that you wish to close the wound with force, and all these fractured pieces must be removed which cause this pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	And if there is a fistula in the limb, or other form of corruption, if it is possible to cure it, according to what is said in the chapter above
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	And when the bone is broken, and is opened on the limb, as the bone of the thigh or the shoulder, and other large bones, if I do not treat it, for many times death comes from this; but I leave it as long as it is bleeding; by chance it will heal by itself after twenty days or thirty, and then I will cure the wound, if you wish; but if you do not wish, I will leave it
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	The bristles that come out of the sodure
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	The bristles that come out of the sodure often follow the saintliness of the breeze, especially when it is near the joint, and it is a good thing to see how the limb is formed; and by chance it cannot make the limb do its natural work.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Therefore take care that we are warned: if he gives us astringents, such as aloes, incense, and myrrh, and sarcocoll, acacia, and others, that you take none of these things, or all together, and mix them with a strict wine or with a great amount of egg or with oil; and put them on the wound in bandages, and strain it well, and do not remove it from the hands for days; and then remove the dislocation, and start another one until the nodulations are bony; or you strain on a well-made piece of lead; for the property of lead is that it ossifies all the swellings under the limb; and if the nodulation has already become hardened as much as stone, and it is necessary to break it, if the swelling above has been burst, and to make the excess apparent; or you leave it without a drain, as long as it is bony, and cure it until it is healed.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	Weak limb after the bandage.
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the bone is restored, and the limb is weak and limp, if there is any cause for it: because it was too tightly bound and was not properly bound; or because there are too many bands, and it cannot move smoothly; or because of numerous wounds; or because of excessive movements, not even in its place; or because there is too much blood in the limb, if it is weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the cure is that you make the patient walk, and tighten the limb, as long as the swelling is multiplied in him; and give him baths, and make him cheerful and relaxed; then put on a poultice over the limb, so that the poultice attracts to the great restoration, and the blood flows steadily, until the restoration comes to the limb; and return to its natural figure.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	The limb is twisted after the suffering.
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai .i. emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	When the limb is twisted after restoration, and the bones are broken open, and the limb is deformed, although it does not lose its natural function: if one does not believe the fools who say that the limb must be broken anew, and many have had this done in our land; this work is blamed, and there comes great harm, and by chance the patient; although if the swelling and torture are fresh, if one can raise them from warm water, or soften them with soft herbs, such as balm leaves, and roots, and meadowsweet, and the like; and it makes one apply a soft dressing, like aquaint well done, and take the nourishment of balm, and confit it with grease of gelline or oil of sesame, and apply the dressing again; or one takes fat figs, and pounds them with horse dung, and similar medicines that alleviate the vomiting.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	And never is the bone loosened by continuous rubbing and length of time with moist hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And make no movement to the limb at rest hour
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if the dislocation is filled with swelling and hardened, like a stone, and requires iron to be applied, if you cover it up to the bone, make a slight incision; and put sponges and sutures in the wound.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	And thus begins the book of dislocations.
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation comes about, if it is now to be remedied.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors; toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	For if you wait too long, if by chance you set it, you will have pain in the limb; for this reason you must not move the limb while it is swollen: many times it causes swelling and other pains; however, when this happens, if you make the patient comfortable, then leave him, until the swelling subsides; then raise the limb with heat and oil, and then gently massage it, and cure each limb as it comes to its place
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have commanded the chapters on dislocations from the shoulder to the foot.
des mandibules	Des mandibules
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	The jaws are loosened and the dislocation of both limbs is frequent: thus, when the teeth are loosened from their sockets and softened by moisture; or when they are entirely loosened and hang downwards, towards the chin, and the tongue is swollen so that it cannot be held back, cannot be closed, and is enveloped by speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is small, it returns by itself in various positions.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie; et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	And if it is whole and complete, if you must move it, do not grasp it; and in such a way that the attendants hold the patient’s head and put their thumbs at the root of the dislocation of the jaw in the mouth, if the dislocation is two parts; and the other two thumbs must be pushed back, to make them even; and command the patient to soften his jaw, his teeth, and move them in every way
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And look at the mark equal, until it returns to its place
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les .ij. mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And if it returns grasped, even if the two mandibles are together, if they arise with hot water and oil, so that they remain lightly; do not order me to return, as we have said
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens; et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules; et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	When they are brought back even, and the patient’s mouth is gently closed, if you put on wet cloths bound in butter and rose oil, then bind them firmly with linen; and let the patient rest on his back, and his arms either resting between two cushions, so that he does not move forward or backward, neither to the right nor to the left, nor to exert himself in any way, but take a moderate diet, until the pain is gone; and do not open the mouth too wide while eating or drinking, until the jaw is well healed and sound.
Et se les .ij. mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two jaws do not readily resume their place at an hour, and are not firmly converted at their leisure, fever and sweating will ensue, and sometimes vomiting of pure bile.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en .viiij. jors.	When you see this, know that it is a loss; and often death follows in eight days.</start_of_turn>
de la forcelle	of the forceps.
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The forceps cannot remove the bone from its socket without causing damage, and is useless once the swelling has gone down.</start_of_turn>
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint; et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez; et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	When the patient lies still on his back, and extends his arms; then press on the shoulder joint until it returns; then put on the bandage and bind it, and strain it; the limb which is beside the thumb cannot be loosened. If this does not happen, and if it should loosen once, if the dislocation has come out of its place as we have said; then put on the bandage and the bind, and strain it, and command the patient to rest until he is healed; and in the meantime bring back the dislocation when it is loosened from its place
de la dislocation de l’espaule	De la dislocation de l’espaule.
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc; et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	Hairs that are not loosened from the armpit except in three ways: first, that they are loosened at the armpit downwards; and the second, at the root; and by chance loosened at the upper part, and this is enough; do not loosen further by the armpit, and do not loosen further from the nerves; and often loosen from the downwards towards the armpit, even though there is hair there, for at these jumps there is a great tendency; in those who have sufficient hair, the jump is painful, and returns painful.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And by chance there comes to some houses percussion or fracture, and engulfs the space of an abscess with a hot brand, and care that it is loosened by that.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	It is necessary therefore that you be certain, until you are sure; and then you may begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste; et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens; et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier; et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	It is known that dislocation occurs when the arm is bent towards the armpit, and that it differentiates between the affected arm and the healthy one; and you will find between their diversity a gap. And at the head of the arm you will find a pit, and the armpit touches the head of the arm, as if it were a bone; and the patient cannot move their hand back to its place, or make any movement; and in the same way, if it has been loosened above, if it is not hidden, because you will find it clearly at the touch. And this manner of dislocation is not sufficient to restore it, when it is new, or when the patient is sick.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	And the manner is that you take hold of the painful limb upwards, then put your thumbs under the armpit, and grasp the joint forcefully upwards to the bone; and grasp the limb and stretch it upwards, because of that it comes out.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree; puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide; et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere: et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar; et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	And if it does not come as we have said above, if you know that the patient is suffering from pain, you must bathe the patient in warm water; and give them a soft and soothing medicine, such as a decoction of alum, fennel and melilot in water, or give them directly; then put the patient on their back, and put under their buttocks a cushion of linen equal in size, neither too soft nor too hard, and put their hand on the cushion, and keep their shoulder joint in its proper position, and treat the hand of the patient; and another attendant holds the patient’s shoulder, so that it does not move backwards; when the shoulder joint returns to its normal position, and you see that it remains thus: that you make the greater part of the household present who is more learned than the patient; and be two beside the patient’s shoulder, and keep the shoulder joint from the patient’s buttocks, and keep the buttocks raised, so that the patient hangs down; and another attendant treats the patient’s hand from behind the patient’s belly.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	If the patient is too light, if he can hold nothing heavy, the dislocation will come back again.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile; puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment; et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	And so it is often done: if the head of the shoulder is long and relaxed in the earth, with the arm hanging limp, not too thick and not too thin; then put some weight on the patient’s hand, but keep a cloth over it, and let the patient rest with the arm long and loose; then extend the hand forward from the other side and the joint will return to its place steadily. If it does not return by these things that we have said, do this: take two fists of great strength and three fingers wide, and put the thumb back into the armpit, as in this fashion:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus .i. eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	Then lie upon the head of the sufferer the folds of his clothes which he has around his waist, that he does not move the sufferer, and put his hands on the sufferer's ass; and extend your arms over the sufferer's long body, and hold the sufferer's arm on the body, and his arm at the wrist, and put the arm on the wrist of a span of a span, and extend his hands backwards, or leave his forearm hanging down on the other side: the dislocation is now healed.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is healed, in whatever manner, if you put your hands on the sufferer’s ass a span wide, then put a cushion of powdered meal, with incense and balm of egg, over the whole shoulder and around, then strain out the hands immediately, and return the limb to the cushion, and embrace his hand at his collar, and keep his hands still.</start_of_turn>
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés .v. jors ou .vij., et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And it is to be known that he must rest, as long as the limb is comfortable, because it will heal more quickly; and then rest for five or six days, and move it; and if it is firm and is not softened, if it is healed.</start_of_turn>
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	If the joint is forced out of place by moisture or for some other reason, if you must, administer cauteries three times over, whether they are placed before or behind the abscess.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés .vij. jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	If you do all this, and if after seventeen days the dislocation does not remain stable and the arm cannot be raised, then it is clear that the nerves of the shoulder have been damaged, either by compression, stretching or softening; and that the dislocation will never be fully healed in its place.</start_of_turn>
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The dislocation that is towards the elbow, or the armpit, if it is caused by an impulse, extension of the limbs, and if another bandage is administered; and it must be treated until it is completely healed.</start_of_turn>
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after healing comes pain in the limb, and later movement, if the patient uses it many times, until the pain is gone and returns to its former state.
de la dislocation dou coute	And if after healing comes pain in the limb, and later movement, if the patient uses it many times, until the pain is gone and returns to its former state.
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	And if after healing comes pain in the limb, and later movement, if the patient uses it many times, until the pain is gone and returns to its former state.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	And when you join the patient with the staff, if he can see it openly.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	For the joint is stiff, and cannot bend the arm, touch his shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes .ij. mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And it must be remembered that if it is possible to restore it again as before, when it comes to an apostemes which was the cause of grief, do not hesitate to do so; for it will not be possible to restore it in its entirety even if it is at the back. It is better that the others be restored, for it is of greater pain and there is also a risk of death.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	If the dislocation is at the front, when it returns, place the thumb of the same hand over the root of the thumb and pull the limb toward the navel, stretching the limb from the shoulder blades to the wrists, and hold the joint together with the thumbs of both hands until it returns to its place.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large; et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne; et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	And if he does not see it return to its place, if you administer strong extension; and if two ministers extend the arm and hold it, so that it does not move during extension; then turn the arm from the elbow downwards, and when you have wrapped a double-length and wide bandage around it; and when you look at the joint with the hand, if there is any oil on the joint to soften it, then restore the joint when it has recovered; and when it is in place, put on dry plaster with egg white, and the strain will form, and bend the arm to the patient’s chest, and leave it there for some days, then remove it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	If the joint is firmly in its place, if you suspect it is loose, leave it be; and if you see that the joint does not hold firmly, repeat the reduction and rejoin, and leave it for several days until it is firmly set; then you can remove it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain; et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	If he feels pain after the joint is reset, and it moves, bathe and rub gently, and press until it is eased; or put upon the joint a fat mutton nail, then leave it for a day and a night, then extract the nail, and make an entrance or bathe; and when it sweats, gently wipe the joint, then put the nail back, and then enter or bathe; do this twice or thrice until it is healed. If you see that it returns to its place, put upon it ointment of moist lard with burr, and strain it; if it returns to its place.
li dislocation de la main	The dislocation of the hand.
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	The dislocation of the hand has loosened, and its return is laborious, more so than that of other joints throughout the body. It is necessary to restore it to its place immediately, even if it has been displaced, and even if there is swelling or if there is an abscess.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	If you put the affected hand on a table and extend the limb, and you look at it, so that he puts his palm on the appearance of the joint and grasps it until it returns whole, it is necessary that you watch to see if it is well placed; then put the hand back on the table at extension and reduction.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	If the dislocation is at the back of the hand, let the patient place the back of his hand on the table, and I will look put his hand on that appearance of the joint.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If it returns now, that is well. If not, if the straining of the surrounding soft tissues is appeased after the incisions, and you let it remain in its natural position, it will recover
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte; et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	If it cannot bear it, and you do not put it back after a few days, the limb will become stiff; and it does no harm to the patient to leave it relaxed, and it can neither be stretched nor strained in any way. Except that when the nerves are severed, or the arteries; if there is no other cause for straining except to stretch it out with fire, in this case it is worth nothing.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse .v. jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hand is at rest, if you put on the dressing that we have mentioned, then strain and leave it for three days, then remove it and leave it be.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it cannot move well, and if there is no pain, if there is warm liquid, and you rub it until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
de la dislocation des dois de la main	of dislocation of the shoulder of the hand.
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre; adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins; et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	Never are the thumbs desoiled at the wrist part, never at the back of the palm or the belly; therefore are they loosened, and the dislocation is corrected in their pouches until it returns, then support the head of the thumb, and turn it toward the part where it is joined; and leave it there for two days, and then set it equal to that before; and do not tie it, as we have said, and loosen and tighten, and tie it again; and do this often, until it is tight, and do the same if it is desoiled at the belly of the thumb, and do as before, until it is healed; and do the same if it is desoiled from another part.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	Because of the loosening of the scapula from the shoulder.
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the scapula of the shoulder or the neck is loosened, or if there are several such loosenings, if there is no remedy, for the patient’s death is imminent.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»: li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	And the sign that it is that the blood egestions flow in an unnatural direction, one cannot hold it, and many times are the limbs softened, or the two thighs or two arms or one leg; and many times does the marrow change at three parts; that which changes at the back is called "gilbosite": it is cured if it is known that the gilbosite has come from childhood: if there is no cure or healing for the whole.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit; mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	And that which comes from sitting or from blows or from similar things, they say that the old methods of treatment with great words have no great benefit; but I have abridged it according to my intention, and I have formed instruments in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit; et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis; et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece; puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles; et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons; et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	I say that in the swelling that comes before the pain, there is no healing; and that which comes directly at two costs, one cannot cure it except for that which comes from behind, as I have said; and that the patient should be stretched out on his face in one equal inch, and should be strained somewhat, that it does not swell; then I put a bandage on the chief in the earth forms, and another has piez, and I bind up the patient’s knees and the other has hainches, and has genous, and has ankles; and two assistants know the bands, one at the chief and the other at the piez, among the two cushions; and be them well closed, the cushion as we have said, and the patient puts his palms on the spine forms, until it returns.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee; et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	If it does not return by this treatment, take a cube of three fingers' length, and clamp the area below the navel, and let the patient lie on their side; place the head of the cube below the navel, then put the middle of the cube on the spine; and place the thumbs of both hands on the other head of the cube, and press firmly, until it returns to its place. If you see that it is not returning, do it at the point that is turning at the hand.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc; et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet; et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	If two fingers grasp the head of the patient at the arm's end, and two others support the parts, and between each finger there are sowers and nails, one palm's length; and there is in each finger one hole, or the nail is twisted, and the fingers must be firmly fixed in place so that they do not move; and between two fingers there is one turning, so that the line that is between the shoulder blades and the turning point of the elbow must be returned to the turning point by two little fingers of one palm's length; and then join the line which is among the buttocks to the turning point towards the head, and the other line towards the parts towards the other turning point, and the minister grasps their turning point at all the line, and the master puts the spine even as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	And when they are even, if you put on a dry dressing with much yolk, and then press it, and then support it with a tablet of three fingers’ length, that will cause the swelling of the belly and the upper part of the spine to recede, and bind it with a thread as we have said; and use the patient with gentle nourishment until they are well; and if no other symptom appears at the end of the well-being, if it is necessary to administer soothing and calming medicines, with the support that we have said above; and in no case give a piece of lead, and in no case does the appearance come from behind the shoulder blade towards the loin, and take care that this is not a dislocation; for it is the bone that has opened, for which we must have no presumption: by chance comes death.
des dislocations de la hainche	hip dislocations
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc .iiij. parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	The hip joint and the shoulder joint only dislocate; this does not happen with other joints; and the hip joint is damaged in three parts: front and back, and top and bottom; the more damaged it is at the front and back.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu; et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	And if you know of a dislocation, when you join the painful limb with the belt, if it is longer and the patient’s knee is wider than the normal, and he cannot double his knee at the fire; and it is the cause of the elevation of the abscess to the buttock.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And thus knowing of his dislocation is this, that when one unites the afflicted limb with the flesh, if it is longer, and if the patient’s knee is greater than the fellow limb, and cannot bend his knee as before, this is a sign that this accident is contrary to the former ones.</start_of_turn>
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the sign of the one who has it in front, if it is well his limb according to completion; nevertheless, do not double the knee joint because of pain, and if you see him do so, if you cannot prevent it beforehand, retain his urine, swell his ankle, and when he walks, let it pass over the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the sign of the one who has it behind, if he cannot extend his knee, do not double it, and that leg is shorter than the other, his ankle is soft, and his thigh bone is dislocated from its socket
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	We must return this semblance of dislocation if it is an old one, and it endures according to its setting, if there is no cure; and one must not presume otherwise.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des .iiij. manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	And in this case where the dislocation is fresh, and there are three ways of dislocation, if you are hasty you will tear the joint apart and stretch it inwards and outwards, and move it to the right and left; by chance if it returns, there is no need for any other cure.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil; et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien; et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	And if it does not return in this manner, if you must know, that you must place two strong ministers, and put the limb firmly with two hands, or with one that is linked above the knee; and another minister extends his hand upwards as far as he can stretch his hands downwards towards his buttocks, and then grasp it with a loop of thread above the hip; and another holds the head of the limb; and extend upwards and downwards at the same time, until the patient is lifted from the earth at once, and remains suspended.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as .iiij. semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This method of extension is common in three out of four cases; and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is well.</start_of_turn>
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele; puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	If not, if you can put the cure in its place; when the dislocation is in the armpit, you can hold the patient over his side, then put the limb on the root of the bone, and the bone which is above the knuckle, then stretch the limb upwards towards the armpit and towards the forcele; then grasp another assistant with his arms and embrace the great bone of the painful limb, and stretch it outwards: if it returns to its place now; this method is more gentle than the others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres; puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc; puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	And if you do not manage to secure it in this manner as we have said, if you can tie the two feet of the patient together with a strong rope around the two toes and the two knees, and let the painful limb be extended twice as much as the others; then let it hang suspended from the head of a staff or from the ground with two long arms; then command one minister to embrace the head of the limb, and let another minister hang alongside the patient, who embraces the limb, for the joint will return naturally.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi; puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme; et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	And when the dislocation is displaced, if the patient is conscious, as we have said in the one with hydrops, grasp the limb firmly with one hand at the upper part and the other at the lower part; then place two thumbs, one at the shoulder and the other at the heel, and insert the thumb between the thighs of the patient in the shape of an arrow; and cover with moist cloths, that it does not burn the patient, then extend the thumbs ministering to him, and the physician places his hand equal to his hand at the dislocation.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	If it returns, that is good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If not, put on the table, and press on it as we have said in hydrops, and keep the patient on the cost of the table.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And when the dislocation is forward, if you must, extend the limb gently, as I have said; and look with your eye where I have said; and put your hand on the painful area of the limb, and press with the other hand, and extend from the knee towards the groin.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches; et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table; et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve; et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And if the dislocation is displaced, if it does not succeed in extending the limb backwards, do not lift it from the ground, but know that it must be as it was before the displacement, as we have said concerning the two finger-nails; and be above the face, and the link must be extended as we have said before, and must press on the joint at the table; and it will be finished when the patient extends his limb, and they will be equal; then join the thighs and put on the dressing, and put on a bandage, so that the limb does not move; and leave it for three days or four, then remove it, and put on the dressing again; and if you see that they are equal, if the strain, as before, and leave it for three days; then remove it, and make the patient comfortable, as much as possible, until the limb is comfortable
de la dislocation dou genoil	As for the dislocation of the shoulder joint...
Li genous est desaluez selonc .iij. manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	The head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture in two ways: frontally and laterally; and do not strain it forward.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez; et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez; puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement; et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And if you command the patient to bend his limb at the knee, and he does not feel it at the knee, then he is emptied; restore him if you make the patient sit upright, and extend his limb if he can, and place your hand behind his face, and put his heel on your toes; then grasp his knee with your palms, and pull between your thumbs, bending the two costal bones together; and another attendant extends his heel, as long as the knee returns to its place, and the sign is that he has regained his limb at the knee lightly; then apply the bandage, and make the limb firm at the knee, and keep them bound together for three days or four, and then remove it. And do not worry about the patient, as long as the limb is comfortable.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	And if the limb is not displaced, if an extension is administered strongly, as we have said in the treatment of the hernia, until it is healed.
de la dislocation dou talon	Until it is healed.
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The shoulder joint is never fully rigid and is never fully relaxed, but is always somewhat tense and painful.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee: li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	And if the limb is not displaced, if an extension is administered strongly, as we have said in the treatment of the hernia, until it is healed. If the foot is fleeing, and it has been injured beforehand at the part where it is loosened: bring it back if it is slight, and extend it slightly with the hands when it is slightly painful only.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville; puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut; et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient; et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide; puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet; puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent; puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	And when it is completely dry, if you make the patient sit upright, and hold his foot firmly by the ankle; then bring the thumb to your right hand, then to the left hand twice, then extend it upwards, and keep it well stretched out; do this twice as we have said, at the end and while pulling the thumb; if it comes back, that is good; if not, repeat the work, for it will come back; and if it cannot come back, make the patient sit on his heels on the ground, and put his heel firmly on the ground between his thighs, and cover him with a blanket, so that he does not bleed; then hold the foot with one hand and another hand grasp the limb above the ankle, that it lies on the heel of the foot; then extend the toes equally, and tie them either tightly between the patient’s thighs to hold the patient when it is stretched; then put the eyes equally on the dislocation with your hands, and another assistant holds the limb steady at the ankle, and the dislocation will return immediately.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois; puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors; et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	And when it is at a point, if you put on the dressing and bind up above, and the strain is formed, and you fix the limb to the leg, and guard the nerves that are above the ankle behind, that the bands do not become too tight; then leave it for two or three days, and if the bands slacken, if the strain; then take it off in a third or fourth part, and tell the patient for three days. And if he goes before this end, it is not certain that it will not damage further.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If pus comes out of place, if you must know, you must calm it down, as we have said elsewhere, until it is healed.
des dois	If pus comes out of place, if you must know, you must calm it down, as we have said elsewhere, until it is healed.
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the joint is dislocated, if you must know, it is necessary to stretch the limb to resume its normal position, and this is a light matter.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne; et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the dislocation is in no other place than on the back of the limb, then you must make the patient sit on one leg or on a table perfectly straight, and put your limb on what is open of these joints, then press your limb firmly until it returns; and when it is even, and there is no opening, if you put on the foot of the limb on a table for two fingers, then the strain is formed, and leave it for three days, then take it off; and rest it until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	And when they are even, and nothing is open, if you put charcoal from a pine tree onto a table at a quarter past twelve, then the strain will form, and leave it for two days, then take it out; and restore it until it is healed.
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert: si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis; et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit; et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne; et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis; et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples; et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	When a wound comes with a dislocation, and it is seen to restore itself, many times it has happened that the patient died: if you are not wise in the cure and have not used it for a long time, and if you are not compassionate and merciful and late, do not be ashamed; and at the beginning use soothing things about the wound, and leave the patient in the hands of God, if you do not see hope of health; and when you see hope, if you remember now to restore the limb, so that the wound also heals; and when the limb is restored, if you administer soothing things about the wound, and cure the wound, as it should be, from dried pus; and if with the dislocation there is fracture, and bones are broken, if the bones are fractured, do as we have said in simple diseases; and beware of pride, as we have said, for this will bring you misery according to your Creator, and for the salvation of your soul and body.
Amen	Amen.
