O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	O you, very dear sons, I have completed this book which is the latest work of the science of medicine, embracing its employment in its entirety, and I have finished it through its expositions and pronouncements.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came to pass that I realized I must accomplish this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, namely surgery
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of hands is far-flung in our region and is rare in all, if it is not learned and practiced, and if it is not refreshed, the science and art of it are lost, and nothing remains of it but the little descriptions in the books of the ancients which the hands have moved
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And this is the source of error and idleness, and the minds are closed and the science is confused.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation;	Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation.
et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	Or it seems to me that I can make it live together the ordination of this practitioner according to the way of exposure and declaration and the abbreviation; and I will come together the forms of the fire cautery instruments and other things of the work with the agreement of the declaration and preparation of the patient, as it is necessary.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	Or it seems to me that I can give life to this treatment in its entirety according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and I will bring together the forms of the cautery instruments, and other implements of the work with the arrangement of the declaration and preparation of it, as it is necessary. And because none of our masters of hands can be found in our time, the art of medicine is prolonged
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And it is necessary that he who undertakes this should be well versed in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, until he understands the structure of the limbs, the shapes and joints and separations of bones, and knows the bones and nerves and muscles and joints, and the number of bones, and the movement and rest of them, and their issues.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc;	And thus Ipocras said that one should not go about it without the non and with the work it is thus;
et meismement en l’art de main.	and in the art of hand.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes;	We say in the beginning of this book that whoever is not learned in the things that are before said, if he dares to speak in error and to blame the homes;
ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	Therefore, many times I have seen more of these things which intervene in this science and abandon its science and sense for experiment.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa I apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col;	For I have seen fools who coppied I apostume of scrofula or a woman’s neck, and coppied the arteries of the neck;
por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	because so much blood flows out that the woman dies between her hands.
Et vis I autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans;	And I have seen another fool who treated a stone of a wound, and the stone was great
si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens III jors.	if he carried away with it a piece of the bladder, and was dead for three days
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And thus I am already being called to deal with it, and see the condition of the patient and the size of the stone, and know well if one should cut deeply into it, for it would surely kill him.
Et vis I autre mire qui prist en cure I duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie;	and I have seen another fool who treated the duke of our land who had a broken limb, and with the treatment made him worse.
et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi I termine;	And the sight of ignorance hinders the bursting forth upon the wound as it is held fast by a strong ligament, and does not allow the wound to bleed at all, and leaves it unclosed at the end.
et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie;	It commands that it should not be detached from me.
et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And thus, when the limb has fled and the bone has gone astray, it has perished
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe;	I call for help to come and I hasten to unfasten the limb
et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	And when I see it dislocated, if it is quiet and causes no pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner;	But every way corruption is already confirmed or the limb is ruined, and it will not heal;
et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	And it continues to corrupt the limb as long as the limb is entirely lost
Et vis .i. autre mire qui effondra .i. apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And thus another wrinkle that undermines the flesh, enflames and burns from the malice of its lord
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For a wound caused by melancholy humours does not suffice except for touching it with iron when it is not in any other part of the body where it can remove all that is corrupted.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en II divisions:	And for this reason, very skillful physician, you must know that the hand is divided into two parts:
c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions;	that is to say, thumb or there is peril in several positions.
et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	and I will show in each chapter where there is doubt and peril.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos.	For you must always bear this in mind, so that the fools do not speak badly of you
Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez;	If you take your arms in custody, and undertake your patients gently and firmly, and use the better way, then by the grace of God you will come to health and be praised
et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit;	and leave the contagious diseases far behind with sobriety and sanitation
et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	and keep your arms from that which makes you doubt, and have faith that you will pass from this world to the next in glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens:	The hairs grow long and even: if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady until they grow.
«Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	Do not take me in charge of any bad ailment, for I am not called a fool by chance.
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	I have devised this treatise in three chapters
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez;	The first chapter deals with fire cautery and the treatment of acute diseases, and this chapter commands from the head down to the feet.
et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	and the forms of instruments, and forceps for cautery, and everything that is necessary for the work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses;	The second chapter deals with drawing out and piercing, and abscesses, and wound treatment, and the extraction of arrows, and similar things; or where there is doubt and fear, many die
et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	and this chapter commands and the forms of instruments
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses;	The third chapter deals with restoring dislocations and sprains, and similar things;
et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	And it is ordained from the lords above to hold the head of the shoulder up to the wrist, and the forms of the instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	When we remember our works, it is clear that I must say the quality of the help and the danger of neglecting certain complexion.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus;	I say that the qualities of the helper, and the doubt, are the longest words and the subtlest science and the greatest secret response.
et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu;	and about these things they speak many times in this book, and agree with this.
et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	and I am overcome by them because of their words, for I am reducing the length.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que II complexions:	I say that the cautery helps universally in every complexion or where there is matter, for it is two complexions:
c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	that is to say complexion hot with matter, and complexion dry with matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide;	In complexion hot and dry together with matter, they do not say that there is no benefit, and they say that the cautery is a great help;
et li autre dirent le contraire:	And the others say the opposite:
que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	And the others say the opposite: that cautery is of no use in diseases that arise from heat and drought.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour;	For the nature of fire is hot, and must not be used to cure heat-related diseases by heat, nor by drought;
et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	and they say that indeed it does great help in dry and heat-related diseases that arise in summer in the houses.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	When you compare the body of a man and his moisture to the complexion of fire, you find the body cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this word.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have never seen such a thing happen before in experiment.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens;	And in all ways, fire should not be used except for those who have experience in it, and who know by long experience the chapter of cautery, and the variety of complexions of houses, and the causes and dispositions of their diseases, and the issues and the space of tension
des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	of other complexions we have no fear, even in cold and moist diseases
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And you must all understand and agree to the cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	Know that fire cautery is more effective for certain secrets than burning cautery.</start_of_turn>
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation;	The healing medicines of fire come from one member to another in aligning, and cause the sick limb to regain health from grief.
et par aventure ocit lou malaide.	and sometimes cause the patient great pain.
Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	Fire, because of its height and for the goodness of its substance, does not make this worse, if there is no excess.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses;	And this I have learned through experience and by the length of service and study that I have put into this art, and it is confirmed by the truth of things
et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant;	and because of this I excuse myself for the length of the speech, for it does not please me to keep secret the secret which is reported or the fire, and the quality of the work, as it expels the diseases of the body, as the philosopher demonstrates
or le recevez en vos pensees.	Or leSuivez en vos pensées.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	Know then, child, that it is fitting in what way the cauteries should be performed and when they are urgent.</start_of_turn>
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere;	Or I say that cautery is permissible in all cases, for the harmful things that follow are driven away by the aid of the cautery.
et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	and even if the cautery is for necessary pains that are urgent and cannot wait until the greater harm has passed from the limb
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire;	And do not think, my son, as the foolish people do;
car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue;	for the disease that is cured by cautery does not come back
et il le dient ensi;	thus it is said.
mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	but it is not so that they would care for it, for the cautery is only medicine that changes the complexion, and dries up the humors that cause pain, and is worth more than medicine for its haste, and for the value of its work and its lordship
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut;	And it is known that disease does not come about at any time according to the complexion of the patient and the nature of the disease and its virtue.
et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie;	And it is assembled in him the superfluous humors by the acquisition of foods and similar things, if these are not cauterized when administered in place or if there is much superfluous humors and moisture, as with cauteries of fat due to pain, and similar things, and part of the pain does not return again.</start_of_turn>
mais ce avient poc.	But this is often the case.</start_of_turn>
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir;	And many people do not understand that the cauteries are called behind medicine, and it is seen.</start_of_turn
mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	but they do not believe that the cauteries are worth after medicine, but their understanding is false, and it is the cauteries that are behind medicine because whenever we administer other treatments for any disease and they do not work, we then administer the cautery, and it is worth.</start_of_turn
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Although the cautery is often used as the last resort in medicine, it does not suit the understanding of the fools.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance;	The old men say that gold cauteries are more discreet than those of iron, and they do not say that of other fires except for the quality of the gold and the fineness of its substance.
et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes;	They say that the smell of the cautery does not remain in the air, but this I do not believe, for I have proved it, and I have seen it in many men
et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	Gold cauteries are more valuable than those of iron, as they say
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez;	Whenever you burn an instrument of gold, you do not know whether it is golden by the color of the gold, and when it has cooled down.
et s’on le chaufe trop;	And if you burn it too much
si font au feu;	It becomes red hot
et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	And thus there is enough hindrance.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And for this reason we use our fire cautery, as we have observed it to be useful for our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	Or you have commanded this chapter from head to foot, for this reason that they may be more easily found.</start_of_turn>
dou cautere olivaire	olive oil cautery
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	These cauteries are useful for moisture and cold on the skull, and there are two methods to use them because of the disease called “soda,” and because of the many humors that descend from the head to the ears, and for many dreams and pain of the teeth and throat, and even for all diseases that come from cold such as paralysis, soda and apoplexy and similar diseases.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief III nuis ou IIII, selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir;	And thus the form of this cautery is that the patient be purged by medicine that changes the head three or four times, according to what is useful and agreeable and to the custom of the patient; for the patient can endure it.
et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	Then make the head of the patient well again.</start_of_turn>
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis;	And then make him sit comfortably between your hands, and put his hands under his feet;
aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses II eulz;	Then put the root of your thumb on the root of his nail between his two eyes.</start_of_turn
et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	And there you will find your two middle fingers, if it bleeds from the nail then withdraw the cautery which is called "olivare", for this is its form.</start_of_turn
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant;	And take out the limb that shows the sign of ink, and make it descend and extract your hand back and forth, alternating.
puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os I sol petit;	Then keep your hand steady, and rejoin the limb if you see the bone slightly out of place;
et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit;	and if you do not see it, continue the cautery until you see the bone as I have told you
aprés pren I poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse III jors;	Then take hold of it a little, put on gloves and cotton wool inside, take out the limb, and leave it for three days.
aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre;	Then put on soft wool outside.
et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	and leave it on until the swelling has gone down
aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat the wound of the swelling which is called “tetrafarmaçon,” until it is healed
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge;	And they say the old folks, the more time passes over a wound, the more it purges.
et por ce si aide mues.	and for this reason, if the wound is treated early, it helps quickly.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And they say none of these that we must leave the cautery on for so long that part of the bone is scorched, and then we must renew that which is scorched from the bone, and be cured.</start_of_turn>
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme I vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors;	And they say that if the fire cautery is delayed too long, the swelling will burst out as large as a woman’s girdle.
et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte;	And the wound must be left open for a long time
aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	then it must be cured and dressed
Et ces II manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor;	And these two methods of cautery do not seem to me to be good for all cases, for in some people or where there is fear of pain;
et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier;	I believe that moisture must be left there
car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres;	For the head of the shoulder is often loosened by continuous solutions of the same kind, as we have seen in other limbs.
et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And thus when the head of the shoulder is weak by nature, the first sign of the fire cautery is more soothing and limp than before, and for this reason I will abstain from it.</start_of_turn>
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	From ancient times pain in the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres;	When there is chronic pain lasting a long time, one must use for the patient herbs, pills which are called "cochices", and vomiting of the head and oils and poultices.</start_of_turn
et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	And if we do the cautery as we have said, it is of no use.</start_of_turn
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit;	Beware if the head of the shoulder is of great strength and is not too cold.</start_of_turn
adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	When the cautery is finished, then cauterize as we have said above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai I cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»;	When the burn is done on the limb from the shoulder down to the bone, as we have said before, and do the burn or bruise which is called a "vessel".
et est I leus en coi on met ventouses;	and put on a bandage in place.
et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os:	align your hand so that you do not see me until the bone:
li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors;	the patient feels much greater pain in this burn than in others, and I will speak of it later.
et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	it must be understood that the cauteries of the horns must be finer than those which we cauterize the moisture of the shoulder, and this is the form:
dou cautere dou chief	Dou cautere dou chief.
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie:	When pain suddenly arises in a part of the head, and it spreads throughout the illness, the head of the shoulder is expelled by medicines that alter the body, and other treatments have been made as mentioned in the division of diseases; but all this has been to no avail.
adonques li fai cauteres selonc II manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	Therefore, make incisions according to two methods, namely with water and fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope I poc as II chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir;	The water cautery is when you grasp a fleshy tumor with tweezers and expose the bone underneath, and then make the temple or the part where the pain persists until you can restore the tumor under the skin;
et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi XII houres;	and when it is restored, if you bind and strain it well and leave it for twelve hours.
et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi II jors ou III;	then take off the bandage and treat the tumor with fire, and leave the wound for two or three days.
puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	Then put upon the shoulder a cushion plunged into the bore as long as the shoulder blade is stiff.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then the treatment of the inflammation until it is healed;
et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	and if you see that you must do something of those medicines that I have written or dose treat with other medicines.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	The iron cautery is as it is taught in this manner.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Leave the hairs long and even on the patient.
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait I poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance;	And it is called "closed" because the head is made in the shape of a cup or there is little curvature, and in the middle has a small appearance;
et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse;	and put it outside the painful limb, and hold your hand and rest the fire a little while, until half of the thickness of the limb is burned over
et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	and keep your hand that the artery does not burn, that is withdrawn, and there is abundant blood
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par III jors;	After applying cotton wool around the limb, leave it for three days;
puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then I put moist cotton wool inside the wound, and then treat the limb until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	And if you burn this abscess with the cautery which is called “cultellare,” at the tip, and you cover the artery in this abscess that is not ancient.</start_of_turn
de emigraine	After having put on cotton wool around the limb for two days, and having taken it out; then I put on moist cotton wool in the hole, and finally treat the limb for swelling until it is healed; and if you cauterize this embolism with the cautery called “cultellare,” at its tip, and keep the artery in this embolism from being cut that is not ancient.
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans;	When you treat the abscess as we have said before in divisions of diseases, and it does not help, and you see that the cautery must precede medicine and that it does not suffice, then you must refrain from using the cautery which is called “cultellare” while it is soft.</start_of_turn
et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os;	If he seizes the limb with a hand's breadth of length, and grasps the hand once, and strains so that he does not cover the artery and does not live up to the bone.
et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez;	Beware of the jaw that is mute when you touch it, and it has no return except for mucus and spasm only benefits the patient; beware of bleeding from the artery when it is cut, or from the copping itself, for there is great fear and indeed among those who do not know how to do it, and who have not studied or practiced it.
et laisse l’uevre em mi voie;	Leave the work in the middle of the way.
mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	But I will tell you how to staunch blood when the artery is cut, and I will show you in this book where it is said.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee;	And if you see that these cauteries do not suffice for the disease, and the patient is still suffering, cauterize in the middle of the wound as we have said, and cure the wound until it is healed.
et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait II coutelz;	And if you see, administer the cautery that we have said or the surgeon of the extraction of the artery, with the cautery that has two handles.
et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	These cauteries are better and more helpful than the previous one
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	If you see that this cautery does not suffice for the ailment, and the patient is suffering, cauterize the surrounding area just as we have said, and cure the wound until it is healed; and if you see that, administer the cautery that we have said or the chapter on the extraction of the artery, with the cautery that has 1.5 cuts; and this cautery is better than the former and more helpful.
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When the ear suffers from cold, and there has been no success with soluble medicines and other cures that we have mentioned in the division, and the pain does not subside, then you must apply this cautery which is called the "point," as follows:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les II se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche;	After pricking all around the painful ear, or around both if the pain persists in both, and you have loosened a piece from the root of the ear as soon as you have seen the sign of engagement;
et ait X poins entor chescune oreille;	And there are ten points around the earlobe;
aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After treatment, let the limb remain sound.
de la torture de la bouche	After pricking all around the painful ear, or around the joints if the pain persists in both, and you have loosened the earlobe from the root of the ear as soon as you have signed the mark; and there are ten points around the earlobe; after that, cure the ear until it is healed.
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie;	A fire cautery should only be used for those wounds which move with pus, as we have said in the division of diseases.</start_of_turn>
et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	And do not make the cautery where there are only dry and scaly wounds.</start_of_turn
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de III cauteres:	When you have cured this semblance of torture which comes with hydric vomiting and hiccups and swelling of the head and throat, then it is enough to cauterize the patient three times.</start_of_turn
l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des II levres;	One in the root of the ear, the other half an inch below the temple, and the third at the junction of the two eyebrows.</start_of_turn
et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce;	And put the cautery on the part which opens sound, and make the cautery at the base of the ear under the cheekbone, and one at the temple just as long as a bean.
et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse;	And leave the cautery on for as long as half of the hair on the head is burned.</start_of_turn>
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	This is the form of the cautery.</start_of_turn
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros;	It is like the knife we put in front of you, but it is a finer and more delicate cut than the knife, so that the wound is larger.</start_of_turn
aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After treating the wound as I have said above, until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai IIII cauteres:	When the swelling is old and you have cured it as I have said above, and it does not benefit, and the patient does not have a fever, then make three cauteries.</start_of_turn
II sus les II cornes dou chief, et I emmi le chief, et I ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac;	II grasp the two horns of the head, and I embalm the head, and I insert the tongue which is called "vasselz" as we have said before, and afterwards cauterize on the mouth of the stomach.
et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	And be cured as we have said before.
de litargie	From idleness
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil;	For this disease it is fitting to give the patient herbs and pills that temper the brain
aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres;	after raising the patient's head and placing on the back of the head a bandage of mustard seeds which is written or treated with plasters.
et c’est li maniere dou cautere:	This is the method of cautery:
si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	if you do as I have said
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est;	If it is well-informed, it is good;
et s’il ne l’est, se li fai III cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere I doi de gros;	If not, make three cauteries on the head of the sufferer, descending juice until it reaches the collar, and leave a space between each cautery of one thumb.
et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai I cautere en mileu;	And treat him like the others, and if you see him improve, and the patient is conscious, make one cautery in the middle
et se mestiers est, II autres sus les II cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	and if there are blisters, two others on the two corners, and treat until it is healed
et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	or the cautery which is called "olive oil", as I have said before.
de la froidor dou chief	From the cold of the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit;	It is necessary that the head be stripped of hair and what has been said before
aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et I derrier et III sus l’espinee dou col;	after reattaching the head of the sufferer, then make the cautery on the head and on some corners, and one behind and three on the collarbone
et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai IIII cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos;	And if you have more trouble, and the limb is moist and the patient is fainting, and the disease is urgent, make three cauteries on the spine of the back.
et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main;	And leave them as long as the pain is greatest, and keep your hand steady;
aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	After the wound has healed, when the pain has subsided, the cautery called "olive" is applied as we mentioned before
de l’epilempsie	It must be that the head of the shoulder is loosened from the socket and the things we have said before; after that, raise the patient’s arm, then perform cautery on the head and shoulders, that is, behind and in front of the collarbone; and if you must do more, and the limb is moist and the patient is drowsy, and the disease is urgent, make three cauteries on the spine of the back; and leave them until the pain is gone, and keep your hand steady; after that, cure as long as it is necessary, and the cautery which is called “olive” that we have said before.
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	Epileptics should only use strong cautery when it is appropriate, and must first modify the head and other treatments that we have mentioned in the division when the patient is great and suffering from excessive medical care.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes;	If a young child cannot endure the pain, make him gargle and chew with teeth that soften the brain frequently with bones of flesh;
aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai I cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et I cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne;	When the head of the shoulder has been displaced in the middle, make one cautery as we mentioned before, and two cauteries on the vessel and on the scapula
et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if the patient is strong and suffers, make incisions as I have said to those with paralysis and hardening of bones, above the spine of the back and the neck, and either do the cautery of olive oil according to the manner that I have said.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai .i. cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is a child, make an incision as little as possible according to this manner:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When melancholy causes superfluousness or corrupted moisture and large phlegm, then make incisions as we have said to those who have paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if melancholy is the cause, the superfluous liquid decreases in melancholy; and the body of the patient becomes moist. Therefore, he should drink something that cools the head, as is fitting in this division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide;	After that, raise the head of the patient;
aprés fai I torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com I cercle, si le met emmi le chief;	then make a perfect circle around the limb, as if with a circle, and hold it firmly in place
et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars;	and if the patient cries out, keep it firmly held from all sides
aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien;	then present the limb, and take a mouthful of old barley bran;
et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir;	and apply the fire gently, so that it can be endured by the limb;
aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier;	After emptying the circle by its depths, immerse the head in cold water and let it cool.
et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And do this for the patient once a week for seven days with good governance, until they are healed.</start_of_turn>
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	When the hairs are pricked at their base, keep the eyes still until they grow
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument;	This method of cautery soothes the brain immediately.</start_of_turn>
et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	Then put on a wet cloth in the burrow and fat with gelatine.</start_of_turn
de l’awe des eulz	De l’awe des eulz
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When awe first comes, there are signs that I have mentioned in the division; then command him to drink and to anoint the patient with something that will dry the head, and keep him away from all moisture, and make him sweat or bathe more than once every day.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai II cauteres sus les II temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as II eulz ensamble, ou en I se li dessendemens est en I;	Then command him to rest his head, and do the cautery on the head and do two cauteries on the two temples if it descends from the ear is as two eyes together, or if it descends from the ear is in one.</start_of_turn
et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple;	And cauterize all the veins and arteries that are around the ear, and let the cautery be long according to the width of the temple.</start_of_turn
et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	Leave the blood undisturbed and if you see too much blood spurting, if it is coming from a part that you suspect is injured as you have.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras;	I shall teach you how to extract arteries and cauterize incisions in such a way as to prevent them from bleeding excessively.
et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les II os derrier.	And never make the cautery or the cautery iron touch the two bones behind.
dou cors des larmes	Dou cors des larmes.
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors;	When the tears of the eyes are old and accustomed and are above the veins, or if you see the arteries that appear to bulge outwards at the root of the nose
et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz:	And you see that these are cold, flecked superfluities, then you must make the cautery as I said at the beginning of this chapter: the tears
I cautere emmi le chief, et II cauteres sus les II temples, et II cauteres ou haiterel desoz les II os;	I cautery the head, and I cauterize on the two temples, and I cauterize or grasp the bone from the two bones.
et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout I petit cautere.	and if necessary, if the burn is too large, I cauterize cautiously above the eyebrow with every small burn.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	Dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz.
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide III nuis cochies;	When you have treated the patient as we have said in the division, and it does not help, then give the patient three bowls of wine to drink
aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire;	afterward I reset the head, and I burn or mix with olive oil
et fai II cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les II sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous;	and make two burns on the ears which are called "clavilis" on the two eyebrows, one below the cheekbones
et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	and beware of the artery that you do not cover it.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And that is the shape of the cautery which is called "clavilis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	When the oil of the limb is softened by disease and moisture, then the cautery which is called "olivare" is applied
de coi ci est li forme:	Leave the hairs long and even on the patient
Et se tu vues si fai II cauteres sus les II sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont;	And if you see two boils so long as the boils are;
et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	and do not let me go of the hand force until a third of the hair has burned away, as I have said before.
dou poil qui point l’oil	until the hair has burned a third of its length.
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc II manieres:	There is often the conversion of hair to oil when the hair is pricked, and the oil is cauterized in two ways:
c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	either by fire or by burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals;	Or the fire cautery instructs the patient to let the hairs grow long and even;
et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain;	When they grow long and even, then put the patient in the right position.
aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz;	After seeing on the eye of the patient a figure as big as a mustard seed, or as the beginning of the sign of the hairs;
puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Then I put cotton soaked in egg white and muscle juice on the oil, and then I cover the cautery with this form:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit;	After cauterizing at the place that you have signed twice, twice with the mouth open, so that the hair is as dark as possible there;
et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil;	And the sign of the health of the work is that you see the pupil withdraw, and the hairs rise to the point of the oil.
adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi III jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	Then hold your hand, and leave for three days, and then put cotton soaked in butter until the scab has healed
aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the cure of washing while it is sound.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers;	And if after this the hair comes out, and the wound is softened, then repeat the cautery on the same place as before
et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if the hair is plucked out, if the wound is healed to its natural state, and is even, do not prick the hair with the oil
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte;	The cautery of burning medicine is that you command the patient to leave the hair long and even, then make a parchment like the leaf of myrtle
puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien;	then take French soap and live chalk, each a third, and grind them together well
et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz;	and make it boil until it does not reharden, then put on the parchment like the leaf of myrtle, and put on the wound the eggs.
et se li maladie tient en I oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en I, et se en ambedous ausi;	And if the patient holds his breath in fear, if one must open in him, and if in both cases;
et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef;	and puts on soft cotton wool soaked in vinegar in the eye of the sufferer.
et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse I poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	and the head of the sufferer is placed in its normal position and puts his hand showing on the medicine, and presses it every time the patient feels the medicine biting, because he feels biting just like fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have performed this for a long time, if the bones of the medicine are to your credit.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision;	And when the biting has passed, if you lift the limb up, and reward if you see the swelling rise up just like it would rise up by contraction of fire or by incision;
et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	and if it is firm, it is well.</start_of_turn>
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point;	If this is not the case, if you must give more medicine to the limb or the medicine has not been applied, as long as your works are equal, and your eyes are fixed in place.</start_of_turn>
puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then put on a moist cotton swab in the hole as long as the hairs are long, after cure the swelling which is called "dyafenis" and the other, while it is sound.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	And if you are confident that you have well secured your limb with great care that it does not need any more medicine, then keep your eyes fixed in place.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant;	And if the swelling becomes soft afterwards, and the hair pricks in the oil, if the medicine is repeated on that limb which is softened by the swelling beforehand;
aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	after cure while it is sound.
et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	and that is the shape of a worm's head
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens;	and know that the ears of men are diverse in size and shape, and according to these constraints;
et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And let him not return the right way to the one who is studying this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	And know that the ears of men are diverse in size, and according to that, their constraints are different; and do not be answered by the straight way to him who studies this art.
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you cure fistula as we have said in the division of diseases, and your cure does not profit, then you must cauterize according to this method.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain;	Instruct the patient to put his head in its rightful place.
et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief;	and hold his head between your hands in such a way that it does not move, do not let go of his head
aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil;	after put cotton soaked in egg white or in vinegar on the oil;
aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz:	then warm the cautery which is divided:
et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere;	and let it rest on the head if it forms like a pine cone, gather so that it is the cautery
se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente;	if you see, if the head is pointed from one side to the other, and if you see, just like a tent
mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	But nevertheless, the head of the shoulder is worth moving for your work.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche;	After pressing the fistula, it becomes swollen and the pus comes out, and the bone is loose;
et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe;	and if it is closed, if the wound, and carries the bowels out forcefully
aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie;	then put on the hot cautery and hold your hand over the wound to the part of the nail not covered in oil, so that your hands do not tremble;
et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	and put the cautery in the fat of the oil and corrupt it.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	If you approach the fire cautery from the outset to the bone, that would be good.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors;	If this does not work, repeat the cautery once more, and if you have done it well, and leave it for three days.
aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers;	After I put on a wet cloth in the pit, and the cure of drying up is finished when it is healed, and when forty days have passed and it is not healed, I put on an caustic medicine until the bone is exposed.
et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	and do the same as is appropriate in this chapter.</start_of_turn>
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	And there is a manner of cautery of fistula that none of the ancients have mentioned.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu;	Then comes fistula, and open the vessel.</start_of_turn
aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	After that I put in the slit I hold the substance of which this is the form.</start_of_turn
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc;	and I do the quantity of three ounces of lead.</start_of_turn
et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil;	and keep your hand or substance firmly closed, and do not move the patient in any way, until the melted lead has run out.</start_of_turn
et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe:	And it is recommended to put upon the patient a soft cotton swab soaked in oil, in the area of the wound or the swelling.
li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	If the swelling is like that of a fistula, and the surrounding area is pale with marvelous cleanliness.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	And if the fistula is cured by the cautery as we have said, then it is well.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	And if not, if it is necessary, administer an incision to the neck, and bring the fistula back to its proper place as it is appropriate in its own place.
des crevaices en levres	wounds in the liver
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Many times there occur cracks in the limbs which are called "hair", and sometimes in the limbs of children.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe .i. petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these cracks as we have said in the sections, and the cure does not help, then you should burn [the area around the crack] with a small cautery knife according to this shape:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font;	And keep the patient quiet in these cavities until the swelling subsides;
aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the wound has healed, the limb must be kept sound
de l’aposteme de la goule	of the abscess of the armpit.
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule;	When the swelling comes to the root of the limb or the nail, or in the palm of the hand, or in the heel, or in the root of the teeth, after that it causes putrefaction and swelling and becomes a fistula
et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie:	and you must treat it as we have said in the divisions, and it will not benefit him.
adonques covient il que tu aies I cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule;	Therefore it is necessary that you perform the cautery according to the quantity of the fistula.
aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu;	After the swelling or bursting of the fistula, and hold your hand until life returns to the front or back of it
et fai ensi une fois ou II, aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and do it once or twice, after the treatment of what we have said in treatment, until it is healed
et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin;	and if it is healed thus, it is good
et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	and if this is not the case, if you must uncover the bone and remove the corrupted bone, according to what you find in your book
dou movement des dens	When the root of the tooth comes loose in the gums or in the socket, or in the palace, or has the root of the teeth, after that it makes pus and becomes rancid and is filled with pus and becomes a fistula; and you must cure it as we have said in division, and it does no good: therefore you must cauterize it according to the quantity of the fistula; after that drain or perforate the fistula, and keep your hand over it until life returns to its original place; and do so once or twice, after the cure of what we have said in cures, until it is healed; and if it is cured thus, it is good; and if not, if you must uncover the bone and remove the corrupted bone, according to what you must do in its chapter.
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain;	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicines which do not help, then put the patient’s head in your sound health
aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent;	After the burn, the cautery is made as before in a part similar to when you put a bandage on a tooth.
et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent;	and put the cautery deep into the flesh immediately, and hold for as long as the patient feels the heat coming from the root of the tooth;
aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit;	then release your hand and repeat the cautery as you wish
aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	then fill the patient’s mouth with clean salt, and hold for an hour and a quarter hours.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in part therefore it remains moving if confirmed, and the joint softens restrains, and the moisture corrupts dries.
de la dolor des dens	And in part therefore it remains moving if confirmed, and the joint softens restrains, and the moisture corrupts dries.
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc II manieres:	When there is pain in the tooth from cold, or if there is cold or heat, and the medical treatments do not help, then there must be recourse to cautery in two ways:
et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	cautery of soot and cautery of fire.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain;	Cautere of burn if it is such that you grasp burn of barley, and the end in a spoonful of iron or of raisin;
aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez;	Cautery of burn if it is such that you grasp burn of barley, and the end in a spoonful of iron or of raisin; after take cotton and wrap over the tip of a tent, and the boil in burn built, and put on the painful tooth immediately and hold until it is cooled.
et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus I fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	and thus do it often until its virtue comes to the root of the tooth, and if you see so much moisture of wool and cotton in burn frothed, and put on the painful tooth, and put on the burn iron until the fire comes to the root of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide;	The burn cauteries together fire if it is such that you grasp one can of iron or raisin, and be large if the fire does not come to the mouth of the patient.
aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez;	After the burn, the cautery must be formed anew; then place it upon the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery cools down.
fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	Repeat this action often, for the pain will be severe either today or tomorrow.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer;	And you must ensure that the patient fills his mouth with thick mucus in the haste of this cautery, and then hold firmly
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	This is the form of the cautery
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir;	Make the cautery as you wish, and as you please;
et c’est li forme de la caine:	This is the form of the leech
des scrophules	And the size of the perforated abscess and the moisture, if they are lighter, because they are of little blood. And if some of these abscesses or heads or there is no moisture, and these are the ones I cauterize or head of an old woman; and I find the abscess as a solid stone, rough and white, and cannot break it; and if there is no blood in it, we must make just as good a wound as if it were a stone. In other abscesses coming or heads, forasmuch as these which come from the spleen and from the roots of the ears, it overtures if it is always dependent on the liquid, because of the swelling; and we must cure it as it should be.
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie;	When the boils are full of moisture and cold phlegmas, and are not obedient to digestion by medicines, then you must burn the cautery again; this will produce two wounds on the other side of the abscess to draw out the fumes from the cautery
et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume;	And place the cautery above the abscess once, or if it interferes, until it reaches the front of the abscess.
et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors;	And if the abscess is small, put the cautery on according to the quantity of the abscess and leave it in place for three days.
et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee;	And put on moist cotton in the burrow until the abscess is healed;
aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	After treating the wounds and boils until they are healed
Li forme de la cainne:	The shape of the cannula:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives;	When moisture overcomes the channels due to cold complexion, then you must first relieve the patient with soothing medicines
aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	After that, make the cautery at the root of the throat, and keep that you do not go further than the throat, and do not burn more than necessary
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant;	After that, do another cautery at the joint of the collarbone at the head of the scapula, and let the cautery which is called "claw" be as it is seen before.
et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	and cure the limb as we have said before until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
de la toust	When the lymph nodes are full of phlegm and cold moisture, and are not subject to digestion by medicines, then evacuate the fire cautery from the chest immediately, for otherwise there will be swelling. Make a small incision on the other side of the body and bring the cautery close to the wound once, or twice if necessary; and as soon as it reaches the root of the wound, if the wound is small, put the cautery on according to the size of the wound and leave it for two days; and put a soaked bandage over the wound until the pain is gone. Then cure the wound of its inflammation and pus until it is healed.
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai .II cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis;	When all diseases of the pores are caused by cold moisture, and the patient has neither fever nor sweating, and the disease is ancient, if you do two cauteries on the forcele in the veins.</start_of_turn
et I autre cautere emmi le pis entre II mameles;	and another cautery between the two nipples.</start_of_turn
et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	and let the cautery which is called "claw" be as it is seen before.</start_of_turn
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles;	And if you see it, perform cautery in the area where the cautery is called "points," for in this case it is like that in the disease of the ears.
et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	and let the points be until XXX, or until they are darkened.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	After that, cure the limb as we have said before, and let the cautery be three times according to this form.</start_of_turn
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais .iij. a cop.	And for this reason the cauteries are lighter, because you make two at a time.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	De la dislocation de l’ajutoire.
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit;	Then keep the patient lying on their back and on their side
aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre;	then hold the thumb that is inside the ear with your left hand
et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners douqueil ci est li forme:	and if the joint is loosened, if it has two nails, prick the cautery which has two nails in it:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble IIII cauteres;	cauterize the thumb until it penetrates the skin, and comes out with three cauteries together
et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a III ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres;	And for this reason, the cautery is made with the cautery that has three nerves, because the figure of the cauterization lies in three cauteries.
et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a III ners:	and the nerves are in accordance with the subtlety of a limb, and this is the form of the cautery that has three nerves.
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce .i. nerf por coi il i a .viij. cauteres.	And never is the suture placed upon this nerve for there are six cauteries there.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil;	After placing the cautery on the broiled hairs with oil;
aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	then rest the patient, and do not move the limb long enough until it is well comforted.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	And if it is dislocated below, whatever the cause, then make a cautery on the thickness of the claw cautery, or several pricks.</start_of_turn
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	For the joint is closed, and the bone is moistened, and the patient is cured.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	When in the stomach come cold and moist things as long as they take their complexion, and multiply the diarrhea to him, and are customary methods of cure, and it does him no good; then it is only right that the patient should be treated on his back, and extend his legs and arms.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture;	And thus make three cauteries: one at the heel of the bone towards the palm of the hand for the quantity of a thumb, at the root of the cautery, and two at the sides as far as the figure of the cauteries makes three angles, and has a space between each other that they do not touch each other when they will be boiling together;
et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	And let the cautery be so that it grasps two parts of the hair root at a time; and let the figure of the cautery be as follows:
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme;	And if you see the cautery being made with a large cautery in the stomach according to this form;
et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche;	and that the one who has fear of this cautery, cauterize on the point and sign on the stomach just as much as you see of the hair;
puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	Then cauterize all the hair which is called “points”.
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the treatment of the cure that we have had before, as long as he is sane.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez;	When the liver comes with pain of cold and moisture and great swelling, as when it is forced from its natural complexion by the superflux;
et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil;	and the patient is cured of what we have said in divisions, and he does not benefit from it, if you do not command the patient to be healed on his habit
et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient;	and the sign of the third degree [cautery] is three cauteries done in this form and this figure and this quantity upon the liver, to drive away the hypocondria, lying or causing the spleen of the man to come.
et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi;	and there should be an interval of the thickness of a barley between each cautery
et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere;	and let the cautery be long as the nail of the thumb, and do not put your hand too close to the cautery
et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez;	and be only as red as half of a hazel, and let the patient be still over his parts;
et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais;	and if he cannot, whether he is lying or sitting, extend his legs and keep his arms still;
et c’est li forme:	and this is the form:
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors;	If you are tempted, if you cauterize these sensitive cauteries, if you are subtle and prudent in the art, and take care that you do not burn all the hair, for you will burn everything.
et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	If you do not stop, because the hair is too subtle in this place, and the tweezers to see.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile:	When it has burst into the liver, and you know if it is in the fat of the liver or in the flesh:
s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort;	if it is in the fat, the patient feels little pain;
et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	And if it is in the armpit, it feels severe pain.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste;	When this treatment is finished, if you command the patient to rest their head;
et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	and then hold their eye steady or their wound closed, and then rekindle the cautery which is similar to a flame, for in this way it is formed:
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers;	Burn the cautery until the hair is charred, and let it remain until the wound has healed completely; until the hair is quite black;
aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez;	after the treatment according to the treatment of wounds as long as it is healthy;
et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	and do not let anyone else use this cautery except for one who has studied for a long time in the art of medicine, and by whom these diseases have never happened before
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	Therefore he must be very cautious, and in my opinion it seems that the matter is worth letting go of
dou cautere de pleuresin	of the pleura.
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere:	The ancient said that we must make liberal cauteries of the roots of aristologists, and in part moderately.
pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois;	Take a long aristologist root, the greatest you can find, and let it be dry, and be as thick and long as your thumbs;
et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize I cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et II petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe;	And soak it in oil, and press it on the fire, and cauterize one cautery between the thumb and the little finger, and two small cauteries under the beard area.</start_of_turn>
et II cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc;	And two cauteries between the fifth rib and the hip bone, declining behind a mark.</start_of_turn
et I cautere emmi le pis, et I autre sus l’estomac, et I entre II espaules, et II as II costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre II espaules;	And one cautery on the heel, and another on the stomach, and one between two ribs, and two as two ribs below the cautery which is between two ribs.</start_of_turn
et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	Do not press me hard, but open your hand just as if smelling.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme;	And let no ancient man tell you that no man uses the fire cautery like a barber, and the scraper and the needle between the ribs, until it comes to this incision;
et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	And he leaps away from the pain, as we have said in the incision of the liver.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	But in this work is fear or the patient is dead now, or an fistula comes which cannot be healed.
de la mice	of mice
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent .iij. manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you cure the disease of the mouse from what we have said about the divisions of the cures, and it does not profit, then there remain two methods of cautery that are good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant;	Take away the skin if you will that you make three cauteries or four, covering according to the length of the hair, according to the shape of the cautery of the liver that we have said before
et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos;	And do not press me hard with the cautery, but open your hand just as if smelling.
et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule;	And another method of cautery is if you eschew the cautery that has two nerves, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder.
et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	And hold the nerve that is at the point where the patient’s pain comes from, or be the elevation which you support the nerve according to the nerve, according to the length of the limb, and the cautery should be according to the width of the limb.</start_of_turn>
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII.	Then after that, burn the two nerves until the nerve is felt from the other side, and then draw out the cautery, and there will be three in it.</start_of_turn
Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	And if you see that you have cauterized all three nerves.</start_of_turn
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After that, when the burn has a long tension by its weight, and this is as much as the other burns previously mentioned.
de ydropisie	De ydropisie.
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	The burn is not worth the lye, except for the method which is called "asclytes".
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis;	When you treat according to the methods we have said in the divisions, and your treatment does not benefit him, then you must make four cauteries around the belly, one on the stomach, one on the liver, one on the spleen, and two behind the shoulder blade on the spine, and one on the hip.
et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	or be the cauteries very close to the edge of the wound.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere;	After leaving the cautery open for a while to drain pus, do not leave the treatment with the patient after the cautery
et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les II ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	and the two incisions will be reunited with the help of God.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit;	The shape of the belly cautery is the nail that we have before showing it.
et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	And if for the back it is olive-shaped, as it is seen before.
de l’enfleure des piez	of the swelling of the flesh.
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire;	When the parts are swollen towards the hypotropic, and are full of yellow bile, it is necessary that you cauterize on the back between the auriculacle and the ring finger
et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	And hold your hand with the cautery towards that side
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	Do not enter too deeply into the wound, otherwise you might burn away the thick yellow bile; and let the cautery be as it should be shaped
Aprés fai sus II jambes II cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire;	Then make two cauteries in the groin at the base of the little toe
et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe;	And let the cautery be long, one from the front of the knee and the other from behind, between the leg
et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse;	And leave the cauteries over a long distance, so that the bile escapes
aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After the treatment of the other cures that we have mentioned.
de la menoison	After that, make two cauteries on the thigh at the point of the cubital angle; and let the cauteries be long, one above the knee and the other below, in the middle of the thigh; and leave the cauteries over a long distance in order to cure, that they may stay put; after that cure the other wounds that we have mentioned.
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures;	When cold and moisture come together in the belly, as long as the retentive and digestive virtue which is the stomach and intestines is emptied, and cannot be cured by means of treatment;
et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai I grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule;	you see the patient groaning with great suffering and strong virtue, if you make a great burn on the stomach as it has been said above or a burn of the stomach, the burn circulates
et IIII cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout I cautere clavile subtil, et II cauteres sus les hainches.	and three burns around the spleen at every burn nail, and two burns on the flanks
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et .i. cautere sus chaicun yle, et .ij. petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	If you see abundant moisture and the patient suffering, make a cautery on the navel and on each side, and two small cauteries on the stomach below the large one; for the cure is beneficial when there is good assistance.
de la cure des emorroydes	If you see abundant moisture and the patient suffering, make a cautery on the navel and on each side, and two small cauteries on the stomach below the large one; for the cure is beneficial when there is good assistance.
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres:	When hemorrhoids are deep-seated, or single or multiple, and are old and are composed of thick cold and moist humors, they are cured as we have said in divisions, and it is of no use to make burns:
III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois;	III above the spine of the back, this which is all detached from the marrow and in triangulating, and I cauterize the marrow II two;
et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile;	And if you think that the stomach is cold, and the meat is not cooked, and you see swelling of the face, then you must make a great cautery on the stomach, as it has been said before, and another on the liver, and another on the spleen with all the nails of the cautery.</start_of_turn>
et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	And leave the cautery open for a long time taut.</start_of_turn>
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After treating the limb until it is healed.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	If you think the stomach is cold, the meat is raw, and the face is swollen, then the face should be cauterized with a great fire directly over the stomach, and another over the liver, and another over the spleen with all the nails of the forceps; and leave the fire on for a long time. After that, cure the wound until it is healed.
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit;	When you have finished, if you see that the cautery seems to burn, then take hold of it and put it all ablaze on that which has been cauterized.</start_of_turn
et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort;	And I leave the hand as long as the cautery comes to the birth of the vein, so that it does not move without support.
fai ceu une fois ou II, et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit;	Do this once or twice, and if there is mucus in the mouth, if you cauterize each as we have said.
aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez;	after the treatment of beneficial ointments while they are still healthy;
et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	and if you cauterize with a large cautery on the flesh, it will have more great benefit.
de plaie mal curee	From an unhealed wound.
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot endure the size or opening, as we have heard, if any ailment comes to pass that can only be cured by cautery
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	When no fistula comes, and is swollen and emits putrid and moist corrupt matters, if the physician has made every attempt with a subtle touch, and keeps that the wound should be closed with all the force that it has, even if it causes damage.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing;	After flushing out the cautery which appears to have grasped, and holding it in the fistula according to the amount that it has entered, and resume the cautery as long as the flesh is stiff and corrupted is gone, once, or twice, or three times, according to the amount of damage needed;
et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	Et te gardes d’avoir de l’ardeur aux nerfs qui sont enqui, et des grandes veines.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans;	And take care to have no excessive heat in the nerves that are entangled, and in the great veins. For if there is a fistula between the bladder and the intestines, if you take care of these things, and do not make this fire burn too fiercely, and think that it is not necessary;
aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement;	then cure the wound until it is healed, and if the matter is solidified, and the things are long tense, then you must know that the wound is completely healed.
et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font;	and if the matters are not solidified, soak that the limb is relaxed, and corrupt the bone at its root;
et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	and thus with one of these things that we will say about its limb.
de la maladie des reins	Of the diseases of the kidneys.
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit;	When pain of the foot comes from rain, and great windiness, and does not take hold of a woman, then you must apply the cautery to the nails from one side and from the other to the nail cautery which we mentioned before.
et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra III cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	and if we cauterize in the middle, if there are three cauteries in line, it will do more good
de la vessie	Of the bladder.
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et I a destre et I a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce;	When the bladder is full and weak from pain and moisture, if the patient holds back the urine, then you must cauterize on the lower part of the bladder where the hair begins, and I have to the right and I have to the left, and make several cauteries as long as one inch;
et li fais I cautere defuers le dos, ou II se tu en as besoing;	and make one posterior cautery on the back, or two if you need to
et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	And let the cautery be applied to the navel as afore said.
de la marris	De la marris.
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde;	When the weather is cold and wet, and does not permit to stay indoors without discomfort, and the flowers are corrupted and their endings are late;
et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor:	and when they come, if they cause great pain:
adonques covient il c’on li faice III cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et II cauteres defuers le dos;	then you must make three cauteries around the belly, as we have said, or cautery of the bladder, and two cauteries on the back;
et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	and let the cautery be applied to the navel as afore said.
de la hainche	De la hainche.
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble;	When the viscous moisture descends to the hip joint, and for this reason it becomes displaced from its place, the sign is that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together
et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a I cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle;	And it is found that the burn is best done when the patient is sitting, so that if you burn the patient on the hip bone at the burn similar to a circle, and mark before the limb around the hip bone if it turns, so that the hip bone is within the circle.
et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	And if it is to be burned like that which we have burned the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai III cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs;	And if it is not present, make three olive-sized burns, and let the burn be as deep as all the others
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and heal as long as it is sound
de la dolor de la hainche	for the pain of the hip.</start_of_turn>
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene:	When pain comes to the hip bone, and it is from cold and moisture, and the patient is cured of what we have said in the division, and the cure is not worth it, the disease is old.
adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	Therefore it is proper that you purge the patient of the gross humors of foul bile, or other bones similar to them.
Aprés li fai cautere;	The fire cautery is done;
et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres:	and the method of performing the cautery is in two ways:
c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	that is to say with applied medicines and fire cautery.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz:	Fire cautery is done in various ways, of which two are as follows
que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire;	that you cauterize on the hip bone three triangular incisions according to this form, and make good depth and great, and there be between each incision an interval equal to the thickness of two nails, and the incisions are of olive oil
aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	Never make the fire cautery on the middle of the thigh, for there are always four according to this fashion:
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche;	Never make the fire cautery on the middle of the thigh, for there are always four according to this fashion: and if you see that the cautery is done in a circle as we have said concerning the dislocation of the thigh.
mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	but make it partly so that the circle contains the whole thigh, and that all the thickness of the knee is as before.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	And this is the manner in which it is done in sciatica, when the pain is in the hip, and does not reach the thigh or the leg
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc;	And if it comes up to the hip and the leg, if two cauteries are made like this or the patient says that the pain is still there, and one cautery below the ankle three times more, on the left side twice;
et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur;	and either the cautery is too superficial or the thickness of the knee is too great
et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	If the patient feels that the pain extends up to two palms or almost to the elbow, if he feels pain of three points or four at the cautery which is called "points".
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus;	If the patient feels that the pain extends up to two palms or almost to the elbow, if he feels pain of three points or four at the cautery which is called "points".
et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if he feels that the pain extends from the knee to the thigh, if he feels pain at the blunt or circular cautery, and he must take good care in all his cauteries that he does not leave the cautery on the skin for too long, nor does he burn the nerves and great arteries, and that he does not cause the patient more pain and contraction.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	And I myself have seen several people who have made an incision on the ankle over the bone, and left it until the leg was entirely limp, and the bone was fractured and corrupted throughout the bone
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	After a solution of the belly from which death often results.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	And if the pain is in two equal parts together, make the cautery in both of them, according to this manner.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce;	And he says concerning the groin cautery, since this is the manner, make I like this with the head at the level of a large navel of the doctor, or less, and with interspaces and be between the interspaces as much as the quantity of a nut of peas
et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait;	And let the beard grow over two parts, and be like nails, and I have a fistful of iron well made.
et c’est li forme:	This line is not provided in the given text, so I am unable to translate it.
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit;	And let the bandage be as long as the thigh is red and soft, and then put it on the box of the painful limb, and let the heel be turned towards the healthy side
et lou cauterize une fois I cautere reont et lou laisse III jors;	And let the burn once the burn is finished and leave it for three days.
et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens;	Then make an embolus of wool, and leave the wound open long and tense.
aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the treatment of the swelling when it is healed
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent;	Albucasim says that our customs often cause this burn because of its great heat, and we see many who use it
et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	And all this comes from burnt bones, which can suffer and endure it.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi;	And all this comes from burnt bones, which can suffer and endure it. If you make an instrument of tweezers between the teeth in which the marrow of the bone escapes, or of iron with a flat end, and in its height there are two nails, and between each there is the quantity of fat of an egg.
et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	And be open above and below, and join together according to this form:
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche;	Then put on the hip box of the patient lying on the ground over his costal rib, and press your hand on the hip box;
aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	Then pour between the two circles of the warm aw that is burnt by fire I put it, and I leave it for an hour without tension, and I suffer the patient the heat and the burn of it.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu;	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit;	When the cautery has passed, hold the hand with the instrument and lift the hair bundle gently, and leave it for three days, and put on butter until the black of the scab becomes osteitis.
et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait;	and leave it for three days that corruption is extracted from it
et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	and this would be the last remedy after the treatment of wounds as long as it is healthy
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument;	and if the pain has spread as far as the thigh or as far as the leg, make an instrument that will hold the hair according to what you have done in the hair bundle;
et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	It is the way of the learned men of our time, and I have written or treated of the rectification of medicine.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir;	or if there is a slight loss of blood, that the point of a knife can enter;
et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main;	and put that vessel in another vessel well plumped, and put lime, salt, and soft wax upon it, until there is one-third of an inch of powder remaining that you can easily grasp with your hand
et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	and leave it until it descends with water and blood or vessel plumped, then take away all that wax and pour it upon salt and lime as before
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres.	And thus if there is much water and it is administered in the mouth of works of medicine and in cauteries of other members.
Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	For indeed, the ointment of saffron with fumus, and if there are other medicines which we cauterize well, such as mastication of gum and honey and beeswax with soap, all these things mixed together.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	And Galiens tells us of a cure by which some honourees were cured of the pain of the groin and sciatic nerve, and he says that no other cure was done for them, and that they were healed at once when they had made this cure, and he bathed as he is taught afterwards.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie;	And thus take two handfuls of green and dry comfrey, and grind them with a little fat, and put on the loin and thigh and leg where the pain persists, and bind it
et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	and leave it for three hours and as much as the patient does not feel the burning sensation
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	And then make him enter or bathe as much as the limb is relaxed, and when he has entered or washed, the pain will go away and be healed
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	And ointments that no one must use with such medicines, except after the evacuation of pus.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout;	Dioscorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with a piece of chaff, if there is pain it helps with honey.
et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	and must be done carefully.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	Take linen and soak it in oil, and put it on the pit that is between the thumb and the great toe and the other that is called the fossilemma
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains;	After taking strong pliers dry, and pressing the fire until it is charcoal, and putting it on the wool, and leaving it until it is stained.
et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee;	and repeat the cautery until the hair has grown back, and do not stop until you think it is enough, until the pain is gone;
et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	This method of cautery is called "pliers cautery".
de la dolor dou dos	Of the pain in the back.
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, whether from sitting or from percussion or from too great an evacuation, or from similar things like cold spreading matter, of none of these signs is the cautery useful, for it is only for what comes from the infusion of cold matter
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne V cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir;	It is advisable after this that the patient be free from foul pus or other things, that we make it on the back, loin or where the pain is, three lines marked with an indent, and five vertical lines cauterized or more according to the virtue and the amount that the patient can endure
et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»;	And let the cautery be done according to the cautery which is called "poins.
et se tu vues, fai III cauteres ou IIII au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	And if you see, make three cauteries or four at the middle cautery according to this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor;	Many times this disease comes as a small wound, and the sign of its beginning is that if it is injured, it swells and swells up; fear not
et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	And you will find at the back of the spine in the loin and in us the appearance that comes after the others spines.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this and you see it healed, if you cauterize with the fire according to this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	If the fire cautery burns some part of the spine excessively.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	If you see that the cautery has burned two or three lines deep on the spine, and that the points are close to each other.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	After treating the wound until it is healed according to what we have said, take care that you do not cause further damage to the nerve in haste.
de la dolor des jointes	of joint pain.</start_of_turn>
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere:	When the pain of joints is from moisture that is spread throughout the limb of bone, and when the pain comes from the heel, call it "podagre" properly; and when it is from cold and is cured by medicine, it cannot be cured; if it is cured by cautery in part:
fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	Fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	And if there is need that you prick on the face of the bone, if you cauterize with the whole cautery, we call that a “point”.
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire;	Make the mouth of the cautery around the joint of the limb, and let the cautery be olive oil in this form: if there are pains that reach the knee and other joints, and this happens many times, make the cautery on each knee three cauteries or four of each part, with all the olive oil.
et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you must proceed further, if you do more, but do not hold your hand firmly until the thickness of the thumb is as wide as an ass.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	And if the pains descend down to the groin and back, administer the cautery as we have said in this chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes;	And if the pains are in the hands, if you make points around the nail two lines.
et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main;	And if there remains no pain in this area, if you make points on some joint and on the hair of the hand.
et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	If the pains come up to the shoulders or up to the collarbones, if you cauterize some part, and make the patient take good care of himself and prescribe medicine.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	For if you make him well-governed and purge phlegm, he will be healed with the help of God.
de la routure dou syfac	If the vessel does not lose its nourishment by the incision of the veins, and if it dries and does not yield assistance.
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor;	When the fever breaks, and the bile descends like coals and is new, if you think that when you see it cured, that it will not return again;
et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre;	and that it uses things that release the belly, so that the pains descend from the belly
aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors;	then you must make him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to hold his arm tight until the bile is repaired, and hold it at your sides, and mark on the skin the fever above the collarbone, and at all signs that it resembles half of a circle below the ears
puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Then he grasps the fire cautery; thus is the form:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	As long as it is soft and he sweats sensationless.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu;	Then he grasps the fire cautery; thus is the form: then he grasps the hair at their root.
et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier;	and he holds his hand over so that they do not move back;
et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains;	and he gives well the blows to the patient, and puts a cushion and a dressing on the wounds, and another on the hand that holds the instrument; and he holds the patient’s hands firmly
puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os;	then he places the cautery on the sign at all your hand, and holds it straight and holds it until you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, if you do it again as many times as you live until you reach the bone
et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere;	and take care that the hair does not burn when you are doing the cautery.
que tu ne le brulasses;	Do not burn it;
et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	Do not burn it; and let the patient not suffer any other harm.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	And soaks that when you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your work is in vain.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure;	And you must know that the cauterization of veins must be subtle in accordance with the measure of the person, and of great people also in accordance with their measure
aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	After three days of treatment with the cautery of a burn, until the scab is ossified
aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee;	After the treatment of other wounds, until they are healed, and keep the patient lying down for forty days on his back until the wound is well healed.
et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And you must know that his movements must be quiet and slow, so that the fluid does not flow out when he moves from the bed to the bedroom
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors;	And after forty days, when he wants to rise, there appears a well-made wound, and bears it for forty days.
et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire;	and has good rest, that he works little and guards against too great repletion of drink and eating, and of too high a diet;
et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	and when he has learned this, if he is sane throughout
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And I shall tell you afterwards the treatment of the tail in its chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	of the route of the belly
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur;	When wounds come to other parts and are recognized, and you see that they do not grow further, then you must make cautery of cautery according to their quantity, and take a third of the dose
aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit;	after the cure as we have said
et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	and none of the ancients have said that it should be cauterized with cautery at three angles according to this shape
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	but first sign the limb and make a line over the belly of the wound, and another at the bottom, and hold your hand firmly over the entire cautery needle.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But the first cauteries are lighter and softer.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	There is no ancient pain in any limb.
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	When pain comes to any limb, or to the hip or to wound, and this pain lasts a long time, and the medical treatment is not worth it, then it is recommended to cauterize with the cautery called "pins", and to cauterize according to the length of the limb and its smallness and weakness and its toughness and its swelling and its pain
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien;	If he is sane after the first cautery, that is well.
se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	If so, repeat the cautery on that limb, for it is customary to burn the parts that are nearby, so that you can make the cauteries while the patient is still sane.</start_of_turn>
de meselerie	When pain arises in any limb, whether from sitting or injury, and the pain persists for a long time, the remedy of medicine is not sufficient; therefore it is recommended that it be cauterized with the cautery which is called "points," or with the cautery in accordance with the length of the limb, its smallness and its weakness and its toughness and its twisting and its pain. If it is cured with the first cautery, that is well; if not, repeat the cautery again. Indeed, it is customary that it must be burned towards the adjacent limb, for it is believed that in this way one can make the cauteries until the patient is cured.
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	The disease does not yield to cautery at any time, and even the disease that comes from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief:	Can you see that it is being cauterized? Take care if the disease is at the beginning, and if it is cured as we have said in the division, and do not linger, for you doubt that the corruption does not spread throughout the patient, so make five cauteries on the head.</start_of_turn
I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous;	I hold the head anew, and the other towards the front towards the end of the beard.</start_of_turn
et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel;	And on the two corners, and one behind the heel;
et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir;	And I leave the hand as long as the cautery approaches the bone, and as long as the scabs come out forcefully so that the vapors of the thick humors can escape.</start_of_turn>
et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	And I perform the cautery on the mouse according to what is in front of me.</start_of_turn>
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse;	And if there is moisture everywhere;
et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et I cautere en som lou neis, et II cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et VI cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et I grant sus la crupie et I autre delez, et II sus les II espaules;	then I cauterize from these cauteries which we have mentioned before. I cauterize under the jaw and the cheek, and six on the spine of the shoulder, and one on the shoulderblade and one at the hip, and two on the two elbows.</start_of_turn
et II sus les coutes, et II sus les tendrons dou pis, et I sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains;	And upon the shoulders, and upon the tendons of the hand, and on one side of the wrist of the hands, and on the hollows of the hands.
et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler;	And beware of the nerves that are behind the heel, that you do not burn them.
et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et I autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et I autre sus lou foie.	And never perform cautery upon the bone of the heel, or upon the bone of the stomach, or upon the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite;	And the more you do cautery, the more you will do good, and the more you will benefit from it.
et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	And the patients do not feel pain from the cautery if they feel it when they are well, because the flesh is already corrupted
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	And it must be known that the cautery must be great and small according to the limbs and joints, according to what you find in the handling of things.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	After treating the wound several times with flour and honey and other cures until it is healed
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre;	When swelling comes to any limb and is cured by medicines and oils and plasters, and it is not serious, then you must perform cautery on the limb according to the greatness and smallness of the limb;
et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur;	Or let the cautery be made at a distance from the skin like a thumb in the thickness of the flesh.
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	then hold the wound steady until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure;	Never do we make the cautery on the hand, the arm, or the back, at the outlet of a nerve that makes the limb numb, and if so it swells the bone;
et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	otherwise no one should interfere except those who are knowledgeable about the limbs and the movements of the nerves from the bone
de albaras	When swelling arises in any limb and is cured by medicines, oils, and plasters, and it is not completely healed, then it must be cauterized on the limb according to the size and degree of the swelling; and either the cautery should be applied once in the middle of the swelling or several times at the edge. Then it must be dressed with ointment until it is healed. And under no circumstances should cautery be performed on the hand, foot, or back, at the site of a nerve that makes the limb immobile. And if it is a bony swelling, all these things must be known about the limb and the course of the moving nerves and bones.
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color;	When the ailment called "albaras" is inflamed, and the means of medicine are of no avail, then make a cautery of the thumb at a distance from the skin according to the thickness of the flesh until the bone is bled and its color is changed
puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie;	Then sometimes for the cure, wheat flour with rose oil and plantain leaves, and blood of colon and blood of alder, each a part.
et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then mix them all together, or bind them with a cloth, and keep them warm until they are healed.
li cure de chancre par cautere	The cure for chancre by cautery
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	When a boil starts to form, and you see it stop growing, if you cauterize at the level of the circle that appears around it, all around the boil.</start_of_turn>
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre;	And all these things say that the fire cautery is done in the middle of the abscess.
et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois;	And I do not think that is good, because I fear that it will become ulcerated and corrupted, and I have already seen several times that it does not work;
et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	And the most right thing is to cauterize around the circumference, which is called the circle, as we have said previously concerning the cautery
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	of the swelling which cannot be measured
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens;	When anyone has an ailment which is called "adubelati", and it delays in healing or through excessive swelling that it makes or through the hardness of the patient when decrepit (that is to say too old) and there is much blood, or for fear;
et tu la vues haster de meurer:	and you must see it haste to heal.
adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant;	therefore cauterize around the mouth of little cauteries by pricking.
aprés le laisse ensi.	leave it like that.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	For it will haste to heal.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see that it is perishing throughout the entire cautery, if it is hot, make the cautery smaller; for this is its form:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	And put your hand in the middle of this ailment which is called "adubelati" until the cauteries perceive the pain, and be such cauteries that the patient feels relief in parts as the process of decay advances.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	Then leave it be until it is perfectly healed
li cure dou feu par fer	The fire cautery. Instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	Another disease of this kind is called "corrodens," and is nothing other than a swelling of a limb, for it swells the limbs just as the fires swell the lines of dry things.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est;	If you see this ailment in which you can suffer cautery all together with fire, then remove the large and small cauteries quickly, as much as it is convenient for the limb or the ailment is;
aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	Then cauterize all over until you have eradicated all the corruption, and nothing remains except the bone itself
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	And then let it rest for three days, and put on the cauterized limbs a bandage soaked in oil until the cauterized parts are ossified, and all the corruption is gone
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	After the cure of wounds caused by these embers.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin;	And if after three days the hair does not grow back, it is well.
et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	And if it does not, repeat the cautery on that which is left corrupt
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu;	And this swelling has never been cured by any medicine except for the fire cautery
mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division:	but every fire cautery is of greater aid, and I have already said the cure of the medicine that is in the section
pren la quant tu en as mestier.	take as much as you need
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	portions that come as pieces.
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	Many times it happens that when hairs grow back, a disease called “clos” appears according to our understanding, and is a great burdensome burden that causes great pain
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	And the cautery for this disease is done in two ways.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	That is to say, fire cautery, and hot water cautery
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges;	The fire cautery is if you are ashamed of one cautery is like a pin of wool, and is made of good iron to the measure that it can penetrate the clot of all parts, and that there be subtle margins;
aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou;	After the meat is put on the cloud, and bend your hand all the way into the cloud until it reaches the front of the cloud.
et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture;	and leave it there for three days until it starts to smell rotten.</start_of_turn>
puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	Then make an ointment of wild mallow broth with salt, and leave the ointment on all night, and it will be loosened from its roots.</start_of_turn>
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then cure the swelling by applying pressure until it is healed.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude;	And if it is softened by discharges of urine, and many times comes out in hands and feet, if you can, bring a hot water cautery.</start_of_turn
et est en teil maniere:	It is partly like this.</start_of_turn
pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues;	Take a flax or iron bowl or a needle of gut, and put on the cloud and the underside, that is to say, with bumps.</start_of_turn
et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine;	And put the bandage upon so that it covers all around, then put on a little pot of warm wax, and hold your hand firmly, and press your hand as you are turning so that the edge of the bandage comes to the root of the wound, and you will find the warm water way down to the root.
et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre;	And offer the patient a little the warmth of the warm water for an hour.
puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	Then leave it like that, and it will spread all through its roots
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	So do another, until you have scraped away all that is on the bone, then cure the wounds that remain and discharge the carbuncles that have formed.
li cure dou trembler	it cures trembling.
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices IIII cauteres ou IV sus l’espinee dou dos, I cautere entre chescune espinee;	When there are tremors of cold from nerves, or from a quartan fever or from something else, if you must do two or three cauteries or four on the spine of the back, one cautery between the shoulder blades
et I cautere ou pez, et I sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire;	and one on the side, and one on the stomach at the olive cautery
si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	If you leave it trembling, and hasten the healing of the cold sickness.
des pustules puans	When some shiver from cold or from a quartan fever or from another, if you order them to undergo three or four cauteries on the spine of the back, one cautery between the shoulder blades, and one cautery or pinch on the stomach just below the naval; if you leave them thus, they will stop shivering and the disease will be overcome.
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	Sometimes from wounds appear bones bathed in pus, or boils filled with pus, which come from corrupt matter.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule:	When you see it at first that we are making cautery upon each head of the pustule.
un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	A subtle cautery of mustard seed, or that which has its point grasped by the fire, or of long aristolochic root, or the lenticular cautery
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez;	And never do the cauteries commence until they see it according to this manner, and it does not cause them to swell forward, but is broken by the excess of which they come, and they are healed;
mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	but it must be done after the evacuation of blood
quant li artere est copee	When the artery is cut.
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses;	Many times there are great discharges of blood from the artery which is cut at the wound that comes to the surgeon, or at the incision of the abscess, or at the cautery of the limb, and similar things;
et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	It is a great grief to extend [oneself].
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus;	And thus when this happens to anyone, if you are hasty to put your thumb on the wound of the vein, and you strain too much without calming your thumb, and that there is no more bleeding;
puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge;	then put the olive cautery on fire several small and large ones until they are all red;
puis empren I, ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	then I take hold of it, great or small according to the wound and the limb in which the artery is blocked, and put the cautery on that vein or hold your thumb there, and hold the cautery as long as it is not restrained
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement .i. autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if it spurts out fiercely when you take your thumb away from the vein, and the cautery is extinguished, take hold of another cautery that is in the fire immediately.</start_of_turn
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez;	and do not cease to do this one after the other until the bleeding is stopped
et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide;	And beware that you do not cut away the nerve which is below, and that no other evil come upon the patient.
et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des IIII manieres que nos avons dit:	And so that without cutting the artery, you cannot well fill it again by itself when it is large, except in three ways that we have said.
ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc;	or by cautery, or by extraction when it is not otherwise treated, or by strong stitching with thread, or by medicines placed upon which have power to fill blood;
et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And be bound and strained immediately thereafter.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Whoever brings about a rest of the limb by tightly draping it or by putting on hot things upon it, or other similar things, if this does not prove helpful in no way.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne;	And if this happens to him at no time and there is no remedy or medicine at hand, you must put two fingers upon the wound of the vein as we have said, and hold them in place until they are completely closed over the wound and the vein
et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez;	And do not move it [the shoulder], but moisten it with cold water often so that it becomes cold as much as when it is without ice and freezes and thickens;
et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	Make incisions in front of the place where the cautery and medicines are to be applied.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	This sentence translates as:
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres;	We have already said in the first chapter that in all diseases where it is necessary to apply cautery or burning medicine, we must apply the cautery and medicine, and we must examine the wound and its cause and its form
et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	I have placed this chapter among the others because it is more convenient for me to discuss it in this way
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And thus, as I begin this chapter, I must tell you, dear sir, that there is more danger and fear in this chapter than in all the previous cautery, and for this reason it requires greater caution.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses;	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	Where there is doubt and fear, and in comes death.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	And I warn you that you should not be rash.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	For in many ways people come to harm in treating.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice;	When such things come to pass, they bring with them such fear and anxiety that their limbs move carelessly from the violence of the disease, and from the greatness of their suffering;
et de ces doit on avoir paor.	and from these things we must have fear.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit:	And from these things one must have sense, and say:
«atendez, je sui garis»;	Wait, I am gone;
et li maladie est despitouse.	and the disease is terrible.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los;	I can only advise you to leave these things to those who have this custom, but put more great caution in your honor than in your covetousness, and do not do anything rashly but prudently concerning that of which you are certain, and which you can take and leave as you please
et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie;	And use prognosis and indication in the treatment of your patients so that health is either preserved or restored;
et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	and this will help you to achieve lasting fame, glory, and lasting memory.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Very dear son, our lords, you must understand and be skilled, and if you turn to the inspiration of his hand, amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Or I vos ai ordonné ce chapitre en divisant par Chapitre, selon ce qu’il est devant ou Chapitre des cauteries, que j’vous ai devisé de chef jusques à pied, pour ce qu’il vous trouve plus facilement ce qu’il vous avez mérité.
dou chief plein d’aigue	Or I have commanded you this chapter by dividing into chapters, according to what is before or the chapter of cautery, that I have commanded from head to foot, because it will be easier for you to find what you have desired.
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant;	When this disease comes from repeated assaults in childhood, and when the bail is too strong for the head of the child;
et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	it does not come from any known cause that we are aware of.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors;	I have never seen this disease except in infants, and in all those that I have seen, it has been fatal
et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	because of this, I believe it is better to leave the work in parts for treatment.</start_of_turn>
Et je vis I enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir;	And I saw a child whose arm was completely filled with water, and the head swelling so much that he could not support it.
et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os;	and the moisture was so great that it became blood, and this blood if it is gathered under the bone above the socket, between the marrow and the bone
et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large;	and if the moisture is between the marrow and the bone, and the abscess is small, you must make a wide incision at the head of the bone
et soit ausi longe com II nous, tant que li mostor corre;	and as long as the moisture is corrected
et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	and you will see the limb return to its normal shape:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai .ij. fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is deeper and the abscess is larger, if you make two incisions like a cross, following this form:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut:	and if the moisture is under the bone, and you see that the head of the bone is displaced from some part, and there is pain that increases when you press with your hand from inside, and this does not go away:
si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief III fendures selonc ceste maniere:	If it seems that you have made three incisions around the head of the shoulder according to this method:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	And after the incision, drain out the moisture with all your might.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor;	After that, strain the edges of the incisions and remove the clots, and put in wine and oil, and leave for five days.
puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	Then take out the dressing, and cure the wound with stitches and ointments, and leave the head of the shoulder well drained, and give the patient dry food until the limb is comfortable and healed.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue;	Or another method of incision is that you look or open the greater tubercle, and gather the fluid.
car aucune fois est elle devant;	For it never appears before;
aucune fois derrier;	Never behind;
aucune fois en destre;	Nevermore in distress;
et aucune fois en senestre.	Nevermore in distress; nevermore in distress.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir;	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
et warde que tu ne coper l’artere;	and beware that you do not cover the artery;
et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	and blood flows freely, so that the patient dies from excessive bleeding and the evacuation of moisture
de reume	When the shoulder or the armpit is open, and the filling of the liquid, and you do according to what you can bear; and beware that you do not cover the artery; and let the vein flow blood, if the patient dies from excessive bleeding and the evacuation of moisture.
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les .ij. arteres.	When there is no known disease which is called a "catarrh" of the eyes or the ear, and the disease is old, and the medical cure does not help, then the only remaining cure is to cauterize with the fire, since this will cover the arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief;	You must therefore take care, not to cover them, that the patient makes a second dislocation
aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel;	after you have rubbed the limb with a rough cloth until the arteries open, then straighten the patient’s neck with all your might
puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues;	Then look whether the vein is bleeding, and the blood from one and the other side is behind the ears, and they are returned;
puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	Then see the bloodstained wound, then close one and the other with a sharp needle of two parts, as long as the vein is wide up to the bone, and that is as far as the large pulp of the head
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com .ij. dois au traver.	If you see that, withdraw the sponge from the artery and tie it below, cutting as much as .ij. inches across the vein.</start_of_turn>
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is tied, if blood spurts without stopping, continue to bleed upwards.</start_of_turn
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os;	And if the artery does not bleed on inspection, if you must measure the amount of the space of three fingers, then close with a needle and do so until the bone is reached
et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere;	and what must be done with the blood is to put force if it is six fingers, and sometimes more or less, according to what the patient can suffer, and the refilling of the artery
puis regarde la plaie:	Then look at the wound.
s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	If it remains on the bone with a swelling, if the wound gapes widely, then strain the wound and hold it still, and cure it with oil until it is healed.
de emigrainne	If the artery does not open upon feeling, if it is thought that two fingerbreadths suffice, mark the spot and hold it firm until bone is reached; for what is to be done with blood that will be shed if more than two fingerbreadths are needed, or less, as the patient can bear, and the refilling of the artery; then look at the wound: if it remains over the bone point where the stitches were placed, if the wound edges do not meet, then strain the wound and tie it off, and cure it until it is healed.
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When ancient dropsy comes, and acute swelling, because of the moisture of tears and the choleric humours in the temples and the ancient saliva is lost, and similar things, and it is cured by means of medical treatments and all that does not help, if the arteries of the temples are extracted and cauterized, as we have said.</start_of_turn>
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit;	And as for the extraction of hair if the patient has repeated the growth of hair on his temples, and understands the artery which opens in the temple, for it opens well with its beating, and is not closed like in some people who are too hairy;
et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement;	And if it is closed, strain the patient’s neck with some cloths, then rub the limb of no rough hair, and raise the limb of warm water until the artery opens clearly
puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	Then take the sponge which is like this:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie;	Then hold the skin loosely until you reach the artery, then pull it up with hooks, and remove the nails that are below the fleshy part.
et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	And if the artery is thin, if the vein has its tip at the root of the bone, then cut off that part as much as necessary.</start_of_turn>
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	For if it is not fixed, if it leaps out without hesitation.
Et trai dou sanc des VI c/, jusc’a III;	And take out six ounces of blood, up to three.</start_of_turn
et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en II leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc;	And if the artery is large, it is sufficient to ligate it twice with a strong silk thread, so that no blood flows in front of the healing of the wound, and let the blood drain out naturally.</start_of_turn
puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les II liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez;	Then cut off the surplus that is between the two lines in that hour, and then if you see that the bleeding has stopped, if you burn with the cautery needle until the wound is closed.</start_of_turn
et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And it is known that the malady is dull and languid, when the patient has no fever and is of fair complexion.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors:	For the cautery is useful for finishing off moisture:
por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	because it is more effective for moisture.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites;	or it is useful for extracting arteries that are filled with much blood and put on good tension;
et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and when they are released, if they are cured by dry medicines that cause new blood to grow, and by tension, until they are healed;
et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez;	and if without stopping the artery as much is said above, if you rush to cover it with cautery, or if you use the substance of vitriol and strain your hand, it will be stained
et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient;	If you do not have this [present] on hand, put out the limb you must until it is relaxed; and raise the limb with cold water until it stops, and hold it strained as it should be.
et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de II pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	And that which is more rigid and lighter in the extraction of the artery is that you cauterize the vein of this cautery cutting through two parts, but the cutting must be well spaced in order to keep it longer lasting.</start_of_turn>
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the instrument is too tight, it holds less heat.
Et doit avoir entre les II coutelz I doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les II leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en II leus;	And must have between the two cuts one must have of great spacing, and then when you have signed the two bones, and you must let the burn the flesh burning over until it comes up to the bone, and close the vein in two bones.</start_of_turn
et soient esloigniet entre les II chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout;	And must be pushed away between the two bones because it is not firmly soldered from this cautery at all.</start_of_turn
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And thus is the form of fire cautery:
des larmes	The fire cautery must have between the joints a space of one inch. Then, when you have marked the area with ink, let the loop of the instrument rest burning over until it reaches the bone, and press the skin in one inch of the loop. Let the loops be spaced between the joints because they are not soldered by this cautery in any way. This is the form of the fire cautery.
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis;	And thus is the form of fire cautery: when the tears of the eyes descend from the veins that are above the root of the head, and it does not avail much of medical treatment in this case, you see the patient's face grimacing, and he feels pain or fear of walking as if with fear.
et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	and if they are tense and moist if the hair of the paper is cut, and they are scorched by the tears, if there is any hope of this treatment.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front;	And they call it the old "contusion cure," and you must make the patient who has this disease let the hair grow out over his face, and then make three incisions or equal front according to the length of the face;
et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres;	And it may be that one of the wounds has swallowed all the fat from the front as far as the jaw, and the others two have two ribs under the papers, and you must avoid incisions of the arteries that are under the papers.
et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins;	And hold your hand away from the continuation of the two mandibles, and if there is a wound there, take hold of the amount of three thumbs to cross joints;
et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	And provide a piece of sponge and cloth there to soak up the blood, and then bind the sponge tightly with two fingers of the hand that is the shape:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision;	of the incision which is over the temple up to the second incision.
et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les II fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	And stretch out all the nerve that is between the two wounds to all the surface that is over the bone, then do the rest of the wound up to the other second, and then take out this bandage.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	If in the first fissure the instrument which is called "cultellaire", and is very well cut on one side, and on the other side is soft, do not cut deeply, for that is the form:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	And place the cutting edge of the scalpel towards the outer side of the shoulder at the joint, and hold the cutting edge towards the bone, and hold the handle until it reaches the middle fracture line.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer;	And take all the vessels that descend from the head as far as the incision is continuous until it reaches the opening of the vein, and then the rest make in the middle fissure until the other side of the wound.
et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris;	Then take out the blood equally, and express the limb for the blood taken out.</start_of_turn>
puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne;	Then put in the wound a piece of cotton cloth and put on wet cloths soaked in wine and oil and in herbs, and keep that the wound does not bleed.</start_of_turn
et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And after three days remove the limb, and bring great healing plants of aquatint, then cure the wound basally with rose oil, and other cures for wounds, until it is healed.</start_of_turn
dou reume des eulz	because of the return of the eyes
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees;	When no acute burning comes, you see the pupils fixed and dilated, vomiting, and paper turning brown.
et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue;	the hair grows thick and curly, and when they prick at their root, they cause pain that is like fire, and the patient spits out blood.</start_of_turn>
adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	therefore these matters and the burning cause these evacuations, which are not due to other veins, and they bring relief rather than harm.</start_of_turn
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	And instruct the patient to recline his face, then make a great incision from ear to ear, and another one wide here below.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os;	From the left temple to the right temple, and from the incision up to the bone.</start_of_turn
et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier;	and hold your hand away from the nerves of the temples that move with swaying.</start_of_turn
et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin;	and when the bone is discovered, empty all the blood out with a sponge, and then loosen between the two layers of the incision and put in cotton wool, and try to hold it in place.</start_of_turn
puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut;	Then lie down under the damp cloths soaked in wine and oil, and keep your posterior warm.
quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	When it is stiff, if you must, rub the bone until it begins to grow, and then treat it with drying things, which makes it swell up.</start_of_turn>
En teil maniere:	Part of this manner:
pren II parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine IIII parties, et en fai emplaustre;	Take two parts of barley flower and three parts of colophony, and make a poultice.</start_of_turn>
et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	And apply it to these wounds to make them swell up throughout.</start_of_turn>
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Regarding the ear swelling,
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des IIII choses:	Everything that is heard in the ear is one of the three things:</start_of_turn
ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer;	or barley, or barley chaff, or stone, or other things like iron.</start_of_turn
ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois;	or semen, if like seeds, fever, pois;
ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	or things that flow freely if like water and ease and similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	When he pricks in the earlobe or any other way that does not fit with the ear, do not believe in the ear, but put the ear to the sun.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction;	If you see the stone, if it distills no purple oil or sesame oil, then mix in extraction;
et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine;	and make it spit out the contents, and hold the nose when it spits, and put around the ear pieces of cloth or wool
et estent l’oreille au desus.	and extend the ear downwards
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure;	Many times comes forth from this cure;
et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	and if it does not come forth, mix in extraction as subtle as possible, for this is the form
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin;	If the fire burns too fiercely, it causes wounds; it is good.
se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure;	Otherwise, if it does not consume the base of the hair, it necessitates excision of the hair follicle of small double curvature.
et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne;	and if it does not burn at the base, make a mark at the root of the hair or pluck out the hair from the earlobe, and press that which is around the root of the hair so that it does not go inside with the hair
puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit;	then the fire will burn further, because many times it comes out as we have said
et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor;	and if it does not come out completely, take hold of the limb and put on no instrument that will cause damage, and put a pad of cotton around it
puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	Then press the buttocks against the stone or whatever it may be, and pull forcefully.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme;	If it does not happen from all these things that we have said, if you rush to cut the ear immediately as we have said, there will be spasm.
et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant;	and the manner of the incision is that if you do it first for the well-being of the head, and draw blood according to the measure of its virtue, then seat the patient between your hands and turn the ear downwards, and make a small incision at the root of the ear at the fat or bone depending
et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche;	or so that the incision be like the moon, as long as you reach the bone, and the bone according to your will, and suck the blood profusely from your mouth
et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the treatment is as long as he is healthy.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction;	And if it is grains that are bruised and swell, if you administer extraction;
et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre I spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	and if it cannot be cured, if you must give an emetic according to this form:
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	mix in incision of that grain.</start_of_turn>
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces;	But do not do this until you believe the grains are moistened by the moisture of the ear, until you have made many attempts;
puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	then extract with fine tweezers and suction, as we have said, so that the extraction is aligned.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	When the ear aches, then the patient must put on a condensor at first, and fill the ear with much cotton.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	And be it without on that ear or the pain is there already.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	If it is burst through that, that is good
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu;	if this is not the case, take many pieces according to the length of your desire and hold them tensed and limp, and burn them all in the fire;
et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille;	And put the patient's ear in his hand, and take his jaw from the other side, and hold his cheek with the other hand on the cheek that is in the ear.
et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer;	Do not cease to do this movement from thumb to thumb until the pain has passed, and when it leaps it will be all gone.</start_of_turn>
et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars;	And if you see, take hold of the joint, and hold one of the heads in the ear, and the other head press with fire until the pain in the joint is gone.</start_of_turn
puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	Then do the rest of the joints until the pain has passed, as we have said concerning the thumb.</start_of_turn>
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division;	In the extraction of the stone, if it is of little bulk, if like a flea and similar things, cure it as we have said in the division.</start_of_turn
mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures;	But if it is of great size, it can be felt, and necessitates the extraction of teeth.
et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	And this is the lighter thing to remove from the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil:	When extracting worms from the ear, when you have cured as we have said in the division, or when treating distillations, the cure does not benefit me, if you do not look at the ear in the sun:
s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	if there are no worms, if you have extracted subtle teeth, and if they do not appear, take the tweezers accordingly, for this is the shape
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	And let the wound be broad and deep.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine;	And keep the most subtle head in the ear according to the quantity of the patient’s suffering, then succeed with all the tweezers;
fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	Leave the hair long and even; if you prick at its root, keep your eyes steady until they grow.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere;	And if they do not obey by this, if you press into the cotton wool as I have said in the stone;
et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations;	and if they do not come out with force as we have said, if you administer distillations that the former have experienced in the incision of worms, and you will find them or treat them with distillations.
et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	and if you distill your oils and medicines into the ear with all these instruments, as you see:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a I petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller;	Or of silver or gold, these are the little ones that are lost, and over these you must distill;
et por presser dedens la distillation a I estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren I raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton;	and for pressing within the distillation to these instruments of gold well made for this, and if you see me take a scraper and wrap it around the tip immediately with cotton wool;
puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille;	Then I pour out my oil or juice, and whatever you see of your medicines in the can, and the can should be in the ear.
puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille;	Then I press from the armpit to the heel over the whole coat, and press your hand gently until the oil is distilled or almost out of the ear.
et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations I poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille;	And when you feel the patient is relieved, and the distillation is finished, do not leave the fire until it has cooled in the ear
et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And keep it from getting too cold, for the medicine will not be so good.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Regarding the ear swelling,
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles;	No child is born without some hole in their ear
et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir;	and the same thing happens at home by bursting of wounds, or of hair growing in the ear, and these bursts never come without leaving a mark in the ear if we do not see them
et aucune fois avient I poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	And never has there been a time when I did not fear for my life, and I saw them all well.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil;	When the cause of the patient’s pain comes to light, if we are unable to see it, it is a sign of serious illness in many cases; and in this case, it is clear that you put your ear close to the patient’s ailment in order to hear it.
et regarde dedens:	Look inside:
se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	If you see the swelling apparent, if the limb has become completely limp and rigid, this is its form:
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille;	So be vigilant from front to back, so that it does not burst open; for if you do not heed it, your ear will bleed
se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	If the swelling is of cartilage or bone of the ear, if you hold it tightly with slight pressure, while that bone is still fleshy.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	And if the operations are embedded in the ear, take a sharp scraper of the finer kind and burnish a little at the fire, then put in or remove the earwax.</start_of_turn
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille;	If you feel the tingling which the patient feels at the ear, prick slightly, and keep your fingers from the ear;
puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	Then put in the ear a plug according to the size of the hole, and the wool in an Egyptian position.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet;	Do this without moving until the wound is healed, or you take a plug and wet wool, and powdered vitriol broth
et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	and if you see the ear fleeing, if you can, remove the plug and put another plug made of rose oil and wax, until the swelling is bony
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat it until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	If blood vessels swell, immerse a sponge and wring it out in cold water, place it on the ear, and apply other treatments that are useful for stopping blood flow which is causing the swelling.
de la char des papieres	De la char des papiers.
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines;	Thus all these things come out of paper when the eyes are moist and dry; if you can extend them with nails and pins, and press with a spatula from their roots
puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	Then take out the glass vial filled with broth.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues;	And if there is no change, if the burn is done with a lenticular caustic substance and the burner does it after the incision is worth moving the limb immediately.
et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines;	and often it is repeated, cannot anything remain from its root;
et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	When they are burned by fire, if they are burnt to the root, they do not return again
de la gresle	From the grease.
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz;	Often come out on paper scraps things that seem greasy in their form and in their hardness, and for this reason this disease is called "granule", and is an accumulation of large moisture in the substance of the skin and bones;
li ovraiges est telz:	The work is like this:
pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir;	Take care if the great swelling moves from one side to the other, for it is an easy matter to know.
fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	Make the great swelling swell up completely, then gently massage the chest piece, then take hold of it firmly with your fingers and hold it steady.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide;	If you do not perceive any improvement in the patient, do not grieve; for nothing is more grievous to the patient
et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	and if the fracture is great, if you assemble with a bandage, and keep it until it is healed;
et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	and if it is small, do not use force, for it will soon restore itself and bring relief
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre;	If the great swelling is descending into the ear towards the upper part, reverse the blood flow, and stretch the swelling with one finger, and hold and press from one side to the other
et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien;	And if the marrow is loosened by the incision, it matters not.
et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	And when the marrow is cut, let the oily liquid of the wound flow out, and heal the limb of that which engulfs hair until the patient is healed.
de la graisse des eulz	of the fat of the tears
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz;	Pus is a greasy substance which is enclosed in layers of paper, and this happens more often to those who are poor, and causes great pain to their eyes, and they come to have a discharge of tears in the mornings, and they cannot look at the sunlight because of this
et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	And because of this, they lie with their faces downwards, and sleep on their backs, and their papers are wet with moisture which causes them to swell and appear covered in pus
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	And when you press the limb towards your chest and feel the wax between the bones.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain;	And thus the work is such that the patient places his head in his throat.
et puis pren I drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li;	and then takes a fold of linen, and makes a loop in the manner of a circle according to the quantity that contains the excess of flesh from the chest, and puts it on it.
et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle;	and presses from both sides, so that the excess is assembled in the circle
puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne;	then makes in the middle of the moisture at the trenching of a large wound, and is not to be greater than the wound made to the vein;
et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach;	and makes the skin in a wound as long as you see the excess;
et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	and in many cases comes excess from the wound, according to the shape of a piece of white fat
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars;	Remove the thumb completely at a right angle between your two thumbs, and bend your hand to the left and to the right as much as possible.
et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	And keep your fingers from being cramped in the crease, that you do not move them at all until the thumb has grown to the tip of your finger, that you do not bleed.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere;	If it does not emerge from the base of the crease, if you see a little piece of bone at the base of the crease, gently open the crease again until it emerges.
puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	Then remove it as we have said, then moisten the bandage and the surrounding area, and put on the limb, and support it.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	And if in such houses where they bruise themselves and put on to corrupt the moisture which is remaining
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then the cure as long as it is healthy
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it comes to the vein being cut, if the cure of closing wounds is applied as soon as it is sane.
des poilz des papieres	paper hair
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz;	When paper nails grow long, do not clip them except as nature dictates, and keep them clean; for if you clip them, the blood will clot, and brings on various diseases like tears that are usually associated with inflammation and softening of the nails and glue, as much as this is the cause of the clotting of the blood
et est li cure selonc IIII manieres:	And it is the cure in three ways:
ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	Or by whole-body cautery, or by water-medicine as it is before or alongside the fire cautery, and is done by incision and suture or by ligatures, as I shall say.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre;	You must put the patient’s hand on your left side, then turn the palm of the hand towards you;
s’elle est convertie, c’est boin;	If it is bent, that is good;
se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil desus;	If not, if you see a splinter under all its threads;
et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai I fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur;	then either pull out the margin of the palm or the hair will be born from these hairs, and pull out the thread from under all of it, and turn the palm up again.
puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit;	Then make in the armpit the papier, the hairs close together, at all the expanse encompassing, from the great to the small;
puis estrai I fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	Then draw out the thread, and put under the paper a little attempt of cotton and bandage, then mark on the paper a figure like a nail, as if like the head of a nail, and thus it is known that the figure is as much as you see elevate the paper that is destined for you.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie;	And if in a part that has suffered much, you must hold great quantity of the paper according to that which the paper is softened;
puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit;	Then make at all the expanse on the two lines that you have marked, from the great to the small;
et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute;	And if it be one of the wounds near the hair root in the thickness of a radish, then one should apply the ointment to one of the two angles downwards, and then cover all.
puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce;	Then assemble the two layers with a staple of a needle at every thread of fine wool, and wipe the blood, and make air the excess of threads over the two edges to all corners, as you see me do;
et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII;	and if this does not suffice, if there is no remedy, then leave the staple and the threads until three days or four;
puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor;	then cure the wound with a bandage of dry and constricting things, for the moisture recedes at the wound heals and the reunion of the parts, but the staple is mute (as they say the old ones), and this is work with fear.
et si a une autre maniere:	And if in another way:
et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	And if in another way: if you mark the mark of a figure which is like the foot of a myrtle, as we have said, at three inches distance from each other according to the shape that is here.
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	Then hold back what is above with small forces evenly according to the form which is here.
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure;	And if you do not have the nails to hold it, and the thing is not quite equal, if you take a needle or there is a thread, and the thread will be in the mark;
et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment;	and join the other thread with great loop, and the second thread with a small loop, and assemble between these two the threads equally.
puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	then hold your hand equally, and hold all the leather over which you have marked, as we have said, and assemble the two layers of the wound by stitching, and cure until it is healed
et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans;	And if the incision comes to your wound, if the surrounding area is apposed with certain cerotes and similar oily substances, it will be soothed.
et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit:	And never has it happened that the hairs of the patient have been converted:
si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision;	since you must use what we have said about the incision.
mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	but the costure in one and the other is more artificial
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme:	The cure for these wounds is in this form:
et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai II caines par art, et II liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est;	and that you convert the hair and the root according to what I have said, and then make two incisions by art, and two sutures as long as the hair and the surrounding area is wide;
et cope as II chiés de II pars ou tu tiens les filz;	and grasp as two cuts of two parts or hold the threads;
puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les II cainnes des II parties forment;	Then assemble one with the other smoothly above what rests on the marrow of the oil, and strain the two thumbs of the two parts forming.
et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	And leave it in place for a while, and the skin which is strained will tear and fester and swell, until it recovers by itself.</start_of_turn>
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	If it is delayed, if the pain has become great, then cure it until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil;	And when the wound is closed and the marrow is raised, and the hairs do not prick, they will not grow again.</start_of_turn
et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	And this is the form of the two thumbs that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of length and breadth.</start_of_turn
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute I fil de soie souef et subtil;	The work is such that you grasp a subtle needle, and there is a thread of silk subtle.
puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc;	then gather the threads and knot them together subtly, and if the length of the threads is long enough, make a palm of length
puis ordene en la chasse I autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil;	then order in the chase another thread of silk briefly, and do not let the thread slip through the needle
puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain;	then put the patient’s hand in its right place;
et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil;	and if the work is delicate, if the work is delicate, because it is a subtle and fine work, then leave the sun out so that the work is not spoiled, for this is a subtle and fine work, and put the needle at the root of the hair and make it pierce in the tissue until you bring it out in the natural way
puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a I ou II ou III ou plusors;	Then withdraw the hair until above the chase, and remain in the chase that hair, if there is one or two or three or more.
puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	Then withdraw your hand as much as the hairs vanish from the entire chase to the tip of the palm with the natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil;	And if the chase is treated and the hairs no longer prick with it, if you draw the chase to the outside as you have commanded, until the chase vein bursts through and you see it through the oil sight;
adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo II jors ou III, tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus;	Then you must draw the chase and the thread, close the oil and leave it closed for two or three days, until the hair returns to its place and the mark disappears from above
et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne I poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	And if the hair is little, if accompany one long hair naturally, and leave it with that or leave it alone, until it is elongated and then retain it
de la porriture de l’oil	from the putrefaction of the oil
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres:	When this ailment which is called "aleacrati" or putrefaction comes into the oil, if there are two methods:
l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	When this ailment which is called "aleacrati" or putrefaction comes into the oil, if there are two methods: one natural, and the other unnatural.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	And comes from the wound, or from a burn or from cautery, and from similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee;	And the way of working in this case is that you make that suture, dry the flesh of it, put in linen threads, and leave it until it is healed;
et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	and do not do anything except use dry and restrictive things in the treatment of it.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere;	For if you do that, the disease will return worse than before;
mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic;	but you must give it soft things, such as fennel
et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	The acute rose or thistle and flaxseed should be boiled, and aquilon oil melted in none of the oils, and it should be wrapped around a bandage, and it should cure this.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant;	If you take care of your wound, it will not swell as before
et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And these works that we have mentioned are not fierce except in addressing this disease, for they do not regress beyond their former form.</start_of_turn>
de la char qui vient en l’oil	From the burn that comes in oil
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	This disease which is of sudden onset and which truly is called "axacrati", is natural and accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans;	Accidents arise from wounds, cuts, cautery, and similar things.</start_of_turn>
et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char;	And the way of this work if you take an awl, if it has two threads, and the hook in the flesh, and it makes the liquid of the armpit so that the thread of the vein is split in two at the root.</start_of_turn
puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	Then the head of the shoulder is extended upwards to the highest point, and the scapula is abducted to a wide span.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin;	And if the limb returns to its normal position as it should, that is good;
se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere;	otherwise, take hold and put it into the socket, and turn the limb, and make two incisions or break the bone within the limb
et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»;	and make two incisions at the two angles of the incision that you have made, and make an angle so that when they are reunited, the limb should have the same shape as the letter that has not been split
puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne;	then fix the head of the shoulder, according to the quantity of its bones and cartilages, of that which sustains the limb, then join the two separated parts with a silk thread.
puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then comes the treatment of what we have said of soft medicines and patches, as long as he is sane.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant;	And if the disease comes from a fracture or sprain or burn, if you must make a full incision from the hair to the skin, and as described above.
puis desevre entre les II leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit;	Then remove between two fingers of a bandage, as I have said before.
et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil;	And you must make the work according to the form of the disease, for it is diverse in form, and the wise men appear to be of all sorts as to how to return the limb to its natural shape
et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	and the patient himself, according to what is convenient in the work and the instruments in various arrangements
dou soudement de la papiere	And if the disease comes from a fracture or a sprain or a cautery, if you must make a full incision along the hairs of paper, as above; then separate between the two leaves of a tent, as I have said; and it must be done according to the form of the disease, for it is diverse in form, and the surgeons know best how to make it return to its natural shape; and the patient himself, according to what is convenient for him in more diverse circumstances.
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut;	When the suture comes loose at the fingers in such a manner that the thumb above is soldered with the white of an oil, and cannot move or perform its natural works, if you must, then bite the tip of a needle with your teeth and hold it high.
et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil;	And extend as pinches, as much as you can cope with the thing which is at the edge of the sensitive area, which should not be too tight nor too loose, so that the patient does not suffer too much and does not spit out the oil
et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil;	Or make your incision, which you must loosen, gently, so that the thumb returns to its natural position
et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere;	And is cleansed entirely of the surrounding area, and do not put in any salt or vinegar, and lift up the fresh water, and of vinegar;
puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef;	Then put between the paper and the oil a lint cloth, and put on the oil wool soaked in abundance of eggs.
et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	And afterwards, use a bandage doucovered with cloths and other soft things until it is healed
de l’ungle de l’oil	From the root of the oil
Saiches que li ungle est selonc II manieres:	The nails are according to two methods:
elle est nervouse et semblans a I dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om;	One is nervous and seems like I soft scab, and another which is not nervous, but seems like white moisture frozen, which when touched with iron and warmed up, as if by a burn, it cannot endure;
et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	And both of them seem to commence towards the great marrow, and cross back and forth so that they cover all the eye and the light and the movement of the oil
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz;	And if the patient puts his head in his side, then hold the eyes;
et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus;	and keep the hand steady, then grasp the pupil as if it had small double vision, and stretch it upwards.
puis pren une aguille, et i met I poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et I fil fort;	then take a needle, and put in hair of horse, or ox, or beef, and tie it firmly;
et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement;	and double the point of the needle a little and pierce through the pupil, and tie the pupil with a thread and stretch it upwards, and scratch all around the pupil the costae of the pupil that lies under the edge of the iris, and leave the natural discharge or mucus, if in the incision there is no discharge of tears usually
et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit;	And never has the nail extended at the cuticle alone, but gradually, as we have said.
puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	Then the swelling engulfs all the surrounding soft tissue, as in this shape:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie;	And keep that the soft tissue does not touch the tough membrane and breaks it, and that the pulp is not perceived;
et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor;	and after the incision, pour into an oil a little bit of bruised silk, and soaked in cold water, and leave it until the other evening
puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	then cure what is causing the pain until it is healed
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines;	And if the nail is not nervous, and you cannot push out the awl, and the bone does not enter, many times this semblance of a nail is cured by medicine;
et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And they grow as I have said in the division, and if you see them covered, if you smear oil on the patient, and take the sponge slightly moist according to this form:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor;	And they grow as I have said in the division, and if you see them covered, if you smear oil on the patient, and take the sponge slightly moist according to this form: immediately pull out the hair gently, and if you see that it has ceased and the root is pressing, if you distill from your mouth into the oil of the coliers make of litharge and red coliers and it boils, and stamp the oil until the other side is reached.
puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	Then repeat the work according to this same form, until it is entirely healed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing hinders you, if like an incision, if necessary, hold the milk and cure the wound first until it is healed, then resume the work as before, until it is healed.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne;	And if there appears flesh in the marrow at night in the oil with great suffering, if you suspend it on the ointment, and cut off a part and not all, that tears of tears do not arise;
puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	Then distill in the red colander which is made of litharge.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	of the seed that grows on the plum tree.
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste;	Then there is no red rose in the world that comes into being; cover the plumule and restrain upon the papers and burn them, and it will seem like a rose of ballast.
et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force;	If the patient puts his head in his sound, then do the works; hold the eyes, and take all that has a convenient curvature for this, and support with force;
puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige;	Then take the first portion, and go on taking it to the scraper until the end, and keep that you do not spill the oil during the work.
et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre;	Or the incision of the spleen that we mentioned when incising the vein and have little force so that one can see the bone marrow, as it is shown in this chapter
et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut;	When the incision is complete and the bones are exposed, if you employ cold sesame oil or distill collyrium rouge and similar corrosive medicines, put on lint soaked in vinegar with eggshells, so that it is firmly fixed.
et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut;	If it remains immobile, and the patient’s pulse weakens, and you doubt the healing of the wound, if you leave the oil on and treat the wound with soothing things that promote healing.
puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	Then return to your work until it is healed, and when the wounds are joined in the oil by this appearance.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil;	However, you must know that you must alleviate the treatment with a slight amount of natural oil.
et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer;	And in case of an accident, in the work of fire;
et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	And do not move your hand in any of these works until you see that this limb is suffering from that work.
des voines des eulz	des voines des eulz
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	The red veins are covered in oil, and endure the gaze of the surgeon and absorb the oil throughout the day.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel;	Then you must first look and see if it is swollen, because force is, and there is no other disease stronger than swelling
adonques le coil en teil maniere:	therefore take hold of it firmly:
comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	instruct the patient to put his head in your hand, then suspend the veins all around according to his wisdom, and do it cautiously in this form:
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en .i. cors selonc ceste forme:	Red veins covered with fat, endure the sight of an eye and make the fat swell all the days. The physician must first look at the eye to see if the fat is soft or hard; there is no other disease more violent than this; therefore, the physician must do this part carefully: instruct the patient to put his head in his hand, then suspend the veins throughout their length as he deems appropriate, and let the physician double the ligature as much as he deems necessary:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil;	then hold the veins gently, and drain the blood afterward, until you see the swelling disappear;
et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes;	and keep that you do not stain the oil with specks of blood, do this work at midday in the sun, and be calm in your work if you do not cope for only the veins;
et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	When you have done this, if you distill in the oil of colera green and red to corrupt what is remaining doubtful.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez;	When you have finished that, if you do not collect all of that in this hour, make a plaster on the oil of calming things to soothe the pain of the eyes, and let it rest until the pain is relieved and is assured after the post-cautery; then repeat as before until you are healed.
et c’est li forme des forces:	This is the form of forces.
de la fistule de l’oil	And if you are unable to collect everything in that hour, make a poultice upon the oil of soothing things to relieve the pain of the eyes, and leave it in place until the pain is relieved and is assured after the burn is complete; then resume in the same manner as before until it is healed; and this is the way of action.
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule:	Moisture is called "arissati" and forms a fistula:
quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	When you treat it with fire cautery and burning medicine as I have said before, and it is not completely healed, if there is any remaining moisture, you must open the wound on the post-cautery, drain it out, and remove all of the moisture until the bone is exposed
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme;	And when the bone is discovered, you will see corruption and blackness, if the disease has all the implements of this kind, this is its form.
et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a I chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And it is called "acute chief", and is made of festering flesh at the root of the head, and is pointed as with a lime when it is in this form:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese;	And put on the limb of the decaying bone, then turn it between your two thumbs, and press your hand until you feel that the corruption is finished
et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	Do this only once, then restore the limb of the exuding medicines.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez;	If the wound is sutured, and there is no discharge, and the swelling of the limb is sutured, and remains for 40 days, and does not heal and is not removed, and other misfortunes do not come, say that it is healed.</start_of_turn>
se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme:	If not, if there is nothing else to be done but to restore the fistula to its place without damage, do so in this fashion:
et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	If not, if there is nothing else to be done but to restore the fistula to its place without damage, do so in this fashion: uncover the bone a the second time by iron and with sharp medicines; and when it has been uncovered, take hold of the fistula according to this fashion: let the iron be at a right angle, and the fistula should be thinned out until it reaches the head as you see here.
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif;	then place it upon the bone without marrow, and wipe your hand with oil, then draw the fist completely until it breaks the bone and the patient feels pain from that which comes from that which remains in the fistula if he holds his hand on his shoulder
et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif;	and as soon as the dry medicines are placed back, as I have taught you, and when the wound has healed and hardened the limb, if there is any matter in the shoulder;
si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	If it is easier for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	Then put your thumb on the bone below the armpit, withdraw your hand from the oil quickly, pull the whole limb until it breaks the bone and the patient feels it through that which comes into being if he holds his hand on his elbow; and then restore the dry limb, as I have taught you, and when the wound has healed and the limb has become firm, if there is still something to be done for the elbow; if it is less burdensome for the patient.
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide;	When the eyes are wide open and there is no risk of disturbing the bowels, if it is easier for the patient, you may bind his hand.
puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil I liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz;	Then do the same with the other eye, and put on a bandage or compress to stop the bleeding, then apply oil that has been scented with acacia, aloe, incense and ochre, and strain the oil, and place it on cloth patches and bandages
et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en IIII, et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier;	and leave the cloth patches in place if you take cloth patches that are soft enough, and double cheesecloth in three, and then put one on top of the other according to the amount of bleeding there is between them
puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir;	then strain it out with a piece of stiff bandage, and start the bleeding again by applying the compress to the wound
puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout;	Then extract the wound and leave the oil drained day and night, and if it is linked with pus, if you must, drain it with your mouth.
puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin;	Then extract the wound afterwards the day and the night, and if you see the oil returning, it is well;
se ce non;	otherwise.
si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	if it persists, leave the dressing and the limb and the wound as long as it is well.</start_of_turn>
dou derrompement de toile uvee	Dou derrompement de toile uvee.
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com I grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir;	When dislocation comes in the armpit or upper arm, then open it, and bring forth paper as if there were a grain of resin; this is to be expected to see.</start_of_turn
adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait I fil double des la partie dou larmier;	then if you see it covered, the work is like biting a needle at the root of the limb up to this distance, then bite another needle or there is double thread of the limb.</start_of_turn
et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition;	And let the fire burn, and leave the first needle according to its position.
puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef;	Then grasp the loop of the thread double and tie a part of the iris around, and strain well, then remove the needle and put on soft linseed oil in abundance.</start_of_turn>
et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee;	And leave it until the thread has bled with the iris, then cure the oil with soothing things until the wound is healed.</start_of_turn
et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And never restrain the wound by the inner corner of a circle of gum until it is healed.</start_of_turn
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost;	And if the blood vessels are greatly swollen, if he pierces at the spleen with a subtle tremor that comes from the oil, correct the moisture of the albumin and drain the blood, and enter in between them quickly.</start_of_turn
puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then remove it until it is whole.
de la bowe de l’oil	De la bowe de l’oil.
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue;	This ailment which is called "alcunnati" is not fierce except for the swelling which is assembled in oil, resembling descending water, and it is not true water;
et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz;	and the way of appearance of the ailment is that if you make the patient sit on a chair, and place the hand over the eyes, then take hold of the head between your hands two parts, and move it until you see the swelling coming down towards your eyes
puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit;	then it is either tightly bound and does not descend and breaks the light, and see the patient suffering in this way;
et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	and if it does not descend on its own, as it should be, it is like acute pain, and if the swelling descends, it does not appear as we have said
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse;	If you make the patient sit between your hands, then take the spatula and place it on the horny tunic under the continuation of the conjunctiva with the tunic and the crown, as long as the bow is finished.
et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when it is discharged, if distilled in hot aqua vitae mixed with honey, or in vinegar or fenugreek boiled with honey, then be cured of other treatment until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
des aigues de l’oil	From the belly of the oil.
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier;	We have seen the signs of wounds in the division, and what it is necessary to perceive.</start_of_turn
si en oevre selonc la santeit.	If in work according to the sanctity.</start_of_turn>
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort;	It is necessary that you make the patient sit between your crossed hands, far from the light of the sun, and apply pure oil and tighten the mouth tightly.</start_of_turn
puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres;	Then put the thumb of the oil on your left hand if the eye is left, or on your right hand if the eye is right.
puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre;	Then take in your right hand if the eye is left, the instrument which is called “almagda”, or in your left hand if the eye is right.
puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide;	Then put the tip of the instrument below the eyebrow by the thickness of a hair at the part furthest from the tear duct, then hold the instrument called “almagda” firmly, and withdraw your hand until it touches the oil, and feel that the “almagda” has reached the empty space
et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour;	And make sure that the measure of the “almagda” is at the bottom of the measure of the space from the armpit to the end of the eyebrow
et c’est li corone de l’oil;	And this is the crown of the oil;
si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	if you see the bone in that membrane by the clarity of the yellow corn silk, and thus put the instrument until it reaches the bone or the liquid is there, then press down the oil once it has gone down a way.</start_of_turn>
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	If he feels a sudden pain now, if he sees the patient before him and the instrument in his eye.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc;	After a little rest, when the liquid returns the second time, put the force with the instrument, and when it is firmly fixed and does not rise, if the oil has been squeezed out too much around the hand and the hand, then remove the almond gently by circling your hand around it.</start_of_turn
et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	and then put back in the liquid a little bit of gum, and remove from that the oil from inside.</start_of_turn
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	Then put by force the stamp or gauze soaked in rose oil and soaked in abundance of eggs, and bind with the clean oil
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	Yes, and those who are of our kind, put upon common broth with abundance of eggs.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if the almagda cannot enter the oil because there are parts of bone that have too hard the veins, it is to be known that you take the instrument which is called “alberit,” which is like this in shape:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit;	And pierce then the conjunctiva only, and do not go too deep, but make the liquid subtle, then put in the almond as we have said.</start_of_turn
et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous;	And at the end of the work, the patient is shown I the sleeper coming, in which he sleeps on his back in I the gloomy night.
et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor;	And if you must take all movements away, and grasp firmer meats, and do not move his head to the side or to the left, and keep him still according to his setting until three days past
puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor;	then loosen in this same house at night, and remove his eyes, and let him see nothing, and then return his eye until seven days past
et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	and you must only do this in the hour of treatment or after the incision now, but you must know that this must be done cautiously, because the pain will increase greatly
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme;	because if you do not loosen the oil before the seventh day, and address it to that which relieves the abscess;
et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	When he is appeased, if you loosen the vein and put on his face a little cushion to cover nothing, keep it there until it is firm in that dark place.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas;	Then go out of the house quickly and quickly, and when you arrive at your case;
et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	stay away from them that no disciple should interfere in this matter.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens;	And one came to us from the Iraq, who told us that in the peace time they did often see women having an evil spirit cast out of them, when water was applied to them, but we never saw anything like that in our land, neither did we read about it in the books of the ancients;
et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	and it is a new thing to us.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie;	And these are the signs of the forms of an evil spirit, for those who do not know them will not recognize them;
et soient d’arain proprement:	And let them be again in their place:
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en .iij. angles ague.	And their tops are of this same subtlety, and their backs in two angles like a hook.</start_of_turn>
de la char sor le neis	From the shoulder joint on the neck.
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez;	And nevermore let hair grow or be cut various, for there are some which seem to have scorpion's mouths at their roots.
et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	And if there is such a thing or if there is hair entangled of hair color, or if there is hair of marrow color.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil;	For in that case of these hairs which is marrow, and does not prick, it must be that you make the patient sit between your hands facing the sun
et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers;	and uncover his nose, and bring the ointment to those hairs, and take away the feces;
pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	Then keep that which you put under the patient's skin firm and strong from one side, until you know that that hair is entirely healed
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout I des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien;	And if nothing remains, if the wound has all of its subtle instruments lightly, if nothing stays;
et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient;	if nothing settles, or incisions remain open, if the edge is slippery as it should be;
et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	if there are malignant abscesses, hasten and cauterize until the tumor is dry and the edges are solidified, then let go or do not delay in administering pain relief or wine.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez;	If it does not bleed and moisture comes up to the palate, the patient is sane;
et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier:	if moisture does not flow as it should, the patient has fractured bones beneath the skin, for the instruments do not pass through without breaking them.
adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins;	Therefore it is advised that you take a broad thread and loop it around the limb, and grasp it firmly with your hands, and keep between each knot no space greater than or less.
et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche;	and put the patient’s hand over the dislocated limb at its root, and keep smelling until it comes out through the mouth of the limb.
et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire;	and many times make the child do as they are taught, and it is a light matter for one who has seen it done;
puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	then hold the head that comes from the root with one hand, and the other head that comes from the mouth with the other hand, and grasp one after the other with your thumbs as we do with a needle and thread.</start_of_turn>
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant;	Do this until you are certain that the knot has not been damaged, then pull out the thread, dry the blood, and moisten the thread with Egyptian balsam, and reset the limb as before.</start_of_turn
fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char;	Fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char.
et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use;	Do so for three days or more, until the swelling has subsided throughout. Then apply or remove a sponge soaked in wine for several days until it has healed, and if there is need for sedative medicines, use them as well.
et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	This is the shape of the instrument for drawing out the head, from which we extract oils and medicines or not
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi;	Be of silver or gold, like an overspread lamp, like a sponge, and guide accordingly.
et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief;	And if you see, make a closed sponge, and let the instrument be flat for purging the head
et ait I mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	And he has one hand clasped at the head to hold it when we burn oil or no liquid.
de la char sor le neis	From the shoulder joint on the neck.
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder;	Many times there arises at the head no disease which is called "telul", and grows and becomes large again, so that it is seen like a thing;
et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant;	and therefore you must take hold at the beginning, and break the bone, then put out the fire or the burning medicine
et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens:	and if you delay to take hold when it is large, if you take hold too tightly, of poor color, of faintness:
si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide;	if you do not touch it with iron because it is a swelling abscess, for when you take hold of it once, there comes great harm to the patient;
et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	And if the abscess bursts with a soft touch, not of a harsh color, you see that you can cover everything; if you see the patient vomiting and groaning in fear, cure the limb of dry and restraining things.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	when the neck is cut and bound.</start_of_turn>
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	Do not leave the hairy growth for too long, but take out the hair at its root, wipe the blood, and moisten the hair with Egyptian balsam, and reinsert it as before; do this for three days or more, until the hair has eaten away everything that is left of the carbuncle; then put on or take off a cautery every other day until it is healed, and if there is need for drying medicines, use them as well. This is the form of the instrument for purging the head, from which we distil oils and medicines or nothing.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc;	It is therefore necessary that this does not happen at all, if you observe that the wound is fresh throughout its entirety
et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	then immediately join the two levers to a suture, and then cure until it is healed
et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet;	and if the levers are already detached from one side and the other, if you can cover all the parts of their curvature until they bleed, then assemble the two levers to a suture, and tighten, and sprinkle with powdered dragon's blood and incense powder
et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And put upon the wound a piece of dressing of great or other dressing which sticks, and leave it until it bleeds by itself, then cure it of swelling as it becomes healthy.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution:	The method of stitching is as follows: if you assemble the solution.
ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre;	or by needles, as we have said in the stitching of the belly;
ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	or by thread, as I have told you.
des apostemes des levres	from the armpits of the arms.
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant;	At home, there is in the veins a dense paste like mustard seeds, sometimes minor and sometimes greater
adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie;	Therefore you must tear open the veins, and make incisions upon each knot, and take hold with tweezers and grasp in the middle part
puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	Then apply the poultice after the incision of the vitriol, until the wound is closed.
et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then leave it [poultice] easily, and cure the wound of dry things until it is healed.
de la char des gencives	From the heel of the jaw.
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»;	Many times there appears on the gums charcoal-black spots which the old people call "albules.
si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc;	If you support it [toothache], and hold the root, and let the blood flow out, or the blood clot;
puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives;	Then put out the broiling vitriol, or other restraining and drying powders
et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize:	and if it comes back after the incision, and comes many times, if the root comes out a second time, and cauterize it
si ne revient mie aprés le cautere;	If it does not return by itself after the cautery.
et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	And these are the forms of the instruments for covering
des sordens	Des sordens.
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres;	Never are they assembled at the head of the dens, between the teeth in the mouth, escorces that are burdensome and rough
et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant;	Never are the teeth black and yellow and towards, until the corruption comes to the gum, and they are biting;
si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien;	If you must make the patient sit between your hands, and his head is in your hand, and open the teeth or the escorces wide, until nothing remains to be removed
et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees;	And thus make blackness and greenness, and yellowness and other impurities, until they are washed away
et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin;	And if the bone that is at the first cause is good, it is well.
se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis;	If not, if it starts to slip again the second time and the third, until you have all failed;
et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens;	and the teeth that they have must move in various ways, as it shows in their work, for the root of the teeth that we remove to drive out has other forms than those that remain between the teeth
et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	and these forms and others are seen with you
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire;	You must know that when you cure the tooth of its pain, you must leave it alone as much as possible, for it must not be made worse
car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	because it is a thing of great moisture so that we have no excuse for making it worse
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	Therefore, when the patient is constrained to endure, if you wish to be certain that he will endure.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent;	Many times the patient complains of pain, whether it is acute or chronic, and causes the limb to tremble.
et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors;	and never does the pain depart from him except when the evil is removed, for we have already wished to do it to these scoundrels.
et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars;	and when you are well sure that it is the bone causing the pain, if you can, escort the limb to its root at all costs; keep it firm to prevent the bone from shifting from all sides
puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles;	then the muscle has to be pressed towards the shoulder or the scapulae at the first moment and the second time, until they are well loosened, and then firmly bind them again
et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	and if the head of the shoulder is in its place between your shoulders, and you keep it well still if it does not move
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	After that, stretch the tooth outwards along the ridge; and if it does not yield, take no instruments and hold it loosely within the gum, and move it as you did before.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont;	And if the wound is seen and bleeding, if it is possible, cover it with a cloth, otherwise let it bleed out.
et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre;	If the wound is bleeding slightly, do not strain too much, for it will break
et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	It is necessary to keep the wound moist around the limb by using a swab to absorb the blood that escapes from it.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	Be careful not to break it, and leave some of the root intact, and return to the patient with the greatest pain of the first.</start_of_turn>
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit;	Beware that you do not do anything rash as the ignorant do, who without haste and without courage break the limb every time and bring nothing but what we have told you
mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut;	but often cause greater pain and damage to the limb due to the root of the disease or the fracture that breaks, as we have often seen
et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil;	And when the disease is severe, if you bathe the limb in wine or vinegar and oil,
et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet;	and the blood comes away often; so often do we see it, if you use strong vinegar, it is enough to clot the blood.</start_of_turn>
et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	If this does not suffice, if you cauterize.</start_of_turn
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent;	The shapes of the instruments, which must be silent at first, must have long points and large handles, so that they do not double when you draw the tooth.</start_of_turn
et ce sont les formes:	These are the shapes.</start_of_turn
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And be of great size if they do not bend when drawing, and be of iron well made, and be toothed so that they may hold firmly.</start_of_turn>
de la racine des dens	of the root of the tooth.</start_of_turn>
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou II, tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne;	When the root remains when you pull, if you must put out the soft cotton wool in the wound I or II, as long as the wound is bleeding, because it holds the teeth that are loosened “algrophi”, so that the head of the shoulder seems like a beak of a rooster.</start_of_turn
et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	And let the incisions be made as with a lime, and this is the form:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not yield to all these tensions, if you can, uncover the bark entirely around the root, and put the instrument which is called the «althali», which is to say a palanche, because of this form:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin;	And be strong and wide so that if it does not break me, and if the root leaps over this, that is good.
se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	Otherwise, if you aid all the instruments, so that the forms come afterwards:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait .ij. rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you use this instrument which has just rain, because of this form:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	And other instruments which are before in the reason of the teeth, and of this instrument which seems like a great clamp, of which this is the form:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont;	And be these instruments strong that they cannot break, and nails that are as much as teeth of the jaws are
et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez;	And so of other instruments, which are not counted here;
et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	And so the master surgeon will find by himself the instrument that suits his work and the patient's disease, for there are many diseases where the old ones did not teach an instrument for the variety of things; and if it breaks not from bone or from other parts, or if it is necessary, if you seek other instruments, as I have said, and if you help with gestures, so that this is the form:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster;	And let them be thick and firm to hold the bone, that it does not slip away, but can be held and grasped.
et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	Then restore the limb with the appropriate medicines suitable for this case, and if there is decay in the bone, even if it is small, if the wound has all these instruments at hand.
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer:	When the teeth appear contrary to their natural course, and the form is bad, and even in women of gentle birth, if you suspect that they are decayed inside and cannot be seen externally, and are not in their proper place, they cannot be treated or comforted
adonques lou raie;	Therefore, extract it;
et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a I petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	And if it is mixed with the tooth, take this instrument which has a small beak-like shape, and be like a little spear:
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	When the tooth persists too long in the gums and in the hands, for the duration of the tooth's hardness, and because you do not move the others, if it appears, it can be limed, if you use a file that has the same shape as the tooth
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles;	And it is also like when we make needles.
et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece;	And like when we bite teeth together without gloves, if they do not move until they are pricked
puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	then the face at the end has no relief, and if the tooth is too deep and bites the tongue, you must keep the biting teeth even until they are even, so that they do not bite the tongue or corrupt the speech
quant li dent lochent	When the teeth loosen.
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut;	When the front tooth is loosened, by percussion or biting, and the patient cannot press on anything that hurts them except biting, you must treat them with restrictive medicines, which is not worth
si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques;	if you must restrain them with a gold thread, because the silver thread becomes green and corrupts, but the pain never goes away
et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens;	And let the hair be neither too thick nor too thin, according to the quantity of the space between the teeth.
et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part;	And if you see the teeth leaning, if you take hold of the hair and double it between the two front teeth, then put the thumbs between the teeth next to each other, if there are one or more, until you see clearly up to the tooth opposite;
puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point;	Then repeat the covering up to the part where you began, and strain your hand subtly and cautiously, until it does not move at all.
et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	And let the suture be at the root of the tooth if it cannot escape.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue;	Then grasp the thumbs with pincers, assemble them, and put them between the tooth and the tongue, and hold them there so that it does not bite the tongue
et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil;	And then let him hold his limb firmly as much as he can, and if it slips or the thread breaks, if the strain of another thread.
si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	if he should remain and serve his hold firmly, and this is the form of the teeth and the setting of the two teeth above, and the two teeth below, as you see.
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit;	When the tooth bites, if we reset it in its place, fresh from fresh, as we have said;
et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	and no other thing should intervene except moisture and ointment, and never make it the shape of a tooth of ivory, and put it in its place or withdraw it where it is wanting, and strain it as we have said, and remain and serve firmly long tension
de coper lou liien de la lengue	De coper lou liien de la lengue.
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi;	Never is this life which comes from God or nature, that we are born without.
ou par accident de plaie soudee;	or by the sudden blow of a deep wound;
et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue;	and the work is such that you must offer the mouth of the patient, and take his head in your hand, and hold the tongue;
puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement;	then cope the nerves of the large intestine, so that the tongue is freed from its bed, and if there is duration or it does not go away, and it is a consequence of a wound, if you see blood and cope the large intestine again
et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz;	and keep that the wound is not too deep, for the artery which comes from there
et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin;	and when you have done this, if you lift the limb of water-rose and easily, or cold water, then put the tongue back in its place with a little thread.
et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	And the patient groans in his sleep, that his limbs cannot rest.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet;	When blood spills forth, if you take out the glass vessel that is bleeding,
et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu;	If it does not stop, if you cauterize with the lentiginous cautery, which is good for this;
puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	then you must cure it with other means until it is healed
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre;	and if you see black or red or hard pus, if the patient does not feel it, do not touch it, for it is an abscess.
et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre;	and if it is drooping with moisture, if there is moisture in it, if it bursts, and there comes out a white spittle, and you deliver from a part and from the other;
et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer;	If it does not go well at your work, if you put on a glass of broth that is stained, then return to your work until you have finished everything.
puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then lift your head easily and cautiously, and cure it of other ailments until it is healed
des apostemes de la gorge	Des apostemes de la gorge.
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde:	Never comes from the throat boils that are called “Godath,” and when you treat them, as we have said in the division, and they are not healed, take care:
se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	if they are hard abscesses of little size and color of rust, do not touch them with iron
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc;	if it is red and the root is large, do not touch it with iron, even though it may burst blood;
mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi;	But leave it as long as it is whole, and then you will take it away, or it will break by itself.
et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	And if it is pale in colour and the root is fragile, if you have brought the instrument to cover it, but look first to see if the swelling has subsided and is calmed.</start_of_turn>
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme;	Then make the patient sit before the sun, and his limbs be in their normal position, and cover his mouth and take hold of his hands, and press the tongue down towards the instrument, for this is the form.</start_of_turn
et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	And be of silver or gold as thin as nails.</start_of_turn
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues;	Can you press the tongue down towards the instrument, and you see the swelling, if you take the ointment and put it in the hollow, and draw it out more than you wish.</start_of_turn
et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces;	And do nothing with the towels, then take hold of the instrument, for this is its shape, that seems like a powerful force.
et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	And behold, the head of the sufferer is bent, one part over the other, and is very acute, and is made of iron or steel:
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	If you do not have this instrument present, if you can manage with pincers, know that this is the shape:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom;	Or that it be split on one side, and on the other side whole;
et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	And when you have grasped one of the angles, if you grasp the other in the same manner, and after the incision, gargle the patient with hot water, hot and easy, and remove the blood that comes out, if you gargle the patient with hot water, or if there are pomegranate seeds or wormwood leaves, or similar things, until the wound is clean;
puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then the remedy must be such that it is effective while the patient is still sane;
et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les II amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les II amandres igament.	Then never arise in the throat other abscesses than the two amanduses, if the nails are thrust in like the two amanduses always.</start_of_turn>
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens;	And I treated a woman with an abscess that was not in the throat, namely one abscess of small size.</start_of_turn
et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	and had her close the throat well so that she could neither breathe through the choked passage nor eat or drink, and died because of that.</start_of_turn
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	And the abscess was so large that it had forced two grains out of the two holes of the nose
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe;	I had already seen so many, and in one I had made an incision, then the fire went up, and in the going up took a great portion of the bow.</start_of_turn
puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue;	Then stretch out the other limb in the opposite direction of where it hurts, and cover the mouth and press the tongue;
aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc;	After applying ointment to the abscesses, and pressing down a portion, only a little blood should escape
et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens;	Then grasp the tongue of the woman beside the neck and make her drink water and wine, and do not cease pressing on this abscess for a long time
et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros;	The abscesses would recede at the same time as the swelling in the body would go down, as long as I avoided vomiting, and until the great swelling disappeared
adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge:	Then I bound it and cauterized within the neck:
ensi demora sens croistre;	Then let it rest and heal in peace;
et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	And I am gone from these parts, and only God knows what happens to him after me.
de l’uve	De l’uve.
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»;	When the limb hangs downwards, and it flees and becomes long, if it is called a "perpendicular".
et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	and if it is thick and round, it is called an "uve".
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes;	When it is cured as we have said in the division, and the wound does not profit from it, you see that the wound is appeased and is subtle; therefore you must hold it together
et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe;	and that which is round is assembled and is not too long;
et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	And it is bloody or of a reddish or black color, so beware the incision of it.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	For there is great peril upon the patient.</start_of_turn>
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant;	So be it, when you see it, according to what I have said, of its color and length, that you make the patient sit in the sun, and press the tongue with the instrument which we mentioned before.
puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	Then put on the ointment in the eye, and draw out the foreign body, and hold at I two instruments that I mentioned in the incision of the two almonds
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil;	And be sure that you do not cover more than the excess that is beyond the natural limit;
car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle;	because if you cover more, if it cries out with its voice and its throat;
et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And after the incision, use of that which we have said in the incision of the two almonds, and cure until it is healed.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	And if the patient has fear of covering, then you must know that you must use something to restrain the patient at the cautery of the painful side.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	And the manner of the cautery is acute and hot
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere;	And let the patient put his head in its right place, and then press the tongue to the instrument which we have said or the surgeon of cautery, and grasp with live charcoal, if it is neither too thick nor too thin.
et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	And make use of the handle of this instrument, for it is like this shape:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve;	Or has a beard or puts medicine, as with the nails of a nail, and put the instrument over the limb;
et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece;	And the patient should keep his side against his chest, so that saliva and mucus flow from his mouth over the medicine, if it does not go down to the throat, and makes a hiss
puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie;	Then keep your hand on the medicine and press on the limb for the quantity of half an hour, until you see it wrinkled and the bite of the medicine is appeased.
et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve;	And if you see it, take hold and cover it with no instrument, and moisten the cloth with the medicine, and press the instrument with all your might on the wound below, until the cloth sticks to the limb.
et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés IIII jors ou V.	Do it often, until the cautery is perfect, then leave it dry, and cut after three days or five
Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine;	And if you have to renew the cautery of the medicine, if you renew it, and after the cautery wipe the limb thoroughly with cotton wool or lint, and bandage what is around the medicine
et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	And let the water rise from a cold source, and cure the hoarseness as long as it is healthy.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere;	This treatment is safer than incision, for the cautery
s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en I pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir;	she is cured by fumigation according to this method, takes charcoal and rue and chamomile and marjoram and ivy and rosemary and similar herbs, and brings them all together in a pot, and puts oil on it, and boils.
et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait I estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	and the pot should be well sealed with strong earth, and inside the pot has the instrument that bites according to this method
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie;	And let it be of silver or gold, and let the one of the hands bite into the patient’s mouth until the vapor rises to the eyebrow through the hole, until the eyebrow is numb;
aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent;	After the redness has ceased, it often recurs as long as the wound is dry; keep that in mind when you begin the treatment of the burn, for many things happen then.
et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	...and do not do this until the redness has subsided.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut;	If these instruments are not present, take a needle and put a piece of egg-shell in the patient’s mouth, so that the patient does not suffer too much from the heat
car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	because the egg-shell does not make the vapor sting the mouth, and this is a good remedy for many things
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose;	Many times it has happened at the throat bone or fishbone, or nothing at all;
si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose;	Therefore, if you saw it, treat what you see, and press the tongue to the sunlight with all your might, until you see the object;
et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac;	And what does not open your mouth and is placed in the throat, you must make the patient vomit so that the meat is cooked in the stomach.
par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement;	Otherwise if it is taken out by vomiting;
ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou I morceil de pain sec;	or the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of gut, or a lettuce root, or a dry breadcrumb;
et lie a l’esponge I fil, et puis la transglutisse;	and tie it to the sponge, and then transfix it
et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer;	and when it comes back, if it is aired, and then draw out the foreign object.
et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren I estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	and if it does not come out by this, take an instrument of pliers according to this form:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit;	And let the beard be trimmed at the root if it can more easily enter the throat, and have the head lifted up.
et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens;	Beware that you do not touch the epiglottis, for if you do, it will cause him no good, nor will you drive the bone out of place.</start_of_turn>
et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse;	Let the patient grasp the instrument, for if he is strong or the thing is slippery.</start_of_turn
si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	If the tongue swells or bites fiercely at the instrument evenly, as much as it can.</start_of_turn
de la sansue de la gorge	And let the curved instrument rest at the head if it can more easily enter through the throat, and keep the head raised; and beware that you do not touch the epiglottis, for this can cause them to choke, do not push the bone inwards; and move quickly that the patient may hold the instrument, for if it slips or the thing is loose, since it has slipped down, or if it is forced too far, it will be equally broken.
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines;	Medicine is never without its danger, as I have said in the division, by the cure of medicines.</start_of_turn
et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	And when it does not help, look in the throat of the patient at the sun, then press the tongue against the instrument that I told you.</start_of_turn>
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	If you see the limb without its bone, if the fracture has penetrated all the way through, or if there are subtle cracks that are worth as much.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	If these are not the case, take a saw and place it in the throat of the patient; then cut either upwards or downwards with the saw as much as is necessary.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	If the patient groans with acute pain throughout
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent;	Then take full notice that I see a cold sweat, and wet the mouth, and vomiting in the direction of swallowing, and the hand moves often.
et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	and if the tongue swells with the heat, it swells up.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve;	And if it does not swell as we have said, if you suffocate the patient with asafoetida, with the instrument that I have mentioned in the fumigation of the eye;
fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	do this many times, for it will have a sense of purpose.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument;	And the method of fumigation is that you take a pot or there are charcoal pieces, and that the position be covered with a veil, and that which is pierced is the head of the instrument.
puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue;	Then I order you to perform fumigation and the patient puts the head of the cane in his mouth and closes his mouth, so that the smoke does not escape, but comes out only through the nostrils.
et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois;	and the nostrils will now swell, and if they do not bleed, repeat the fumigation many times.
et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue;	and if the patient feels thirsty, and swallows dirty and foul things, and does not drink water;
et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	then you must know that it is necessary for her to vomit because of this treatment.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge;	And the shape of the instrument with which we treat the bleeding is, if we can see it, like tenailles hooked in the throat to enter the gorge;
et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier;	And it has the semblance of a vulture's beak, and it has the roughness of lime, so that whatever it grasps, it cannot let go.
et vez ci la forme:	And thus it appears:
li chapistres des apostemes	the physicians of abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille;	The shape of these wounds is such as those of an abscess, as it is mentioned in this book many times, and they differ in perforation and size
et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	There are two ways in which this occurs: one is like its own shape, and the other is due to moisture
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	And the second method if for the limbs or if they are stiff.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	for the swelling of the head is different from that of the root, and the swelling of the limb is different from that which comes at the joints, and the tendons have their judgment in the work.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement;	If there are abscesses, one must not pierce them until the swelling has subsided according to its degree;
et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	If there are such cases where it is necessary to pierce them when they are solid, and they do not subside according to their degree, like an abscess which is between joints
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	for when swelling comes from the joints, and it is left until it is relaxed, by chance if the bone and the nerve of the joint are corrupted, because of this there is contraction in that limb.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil;	Or the incision is at the root of the principal limb; and if you delay the perforation until it is middling, it will reach the principal limb.
ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs;	Or it is at the root of the foundation, if the perforation is not done immediately when it is middling.
et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule;	And I must only tell you that you must pierce the abscess in a straight line with digestion accompanying, except for the one at the root of the foundation, which must not be perforated, and be along, and there will be fistula
et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	and cannot be cured in great time.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes;	And you must know that you must wash the wound of the abscess which is dead according to the completion, when the pain is calmed, and the departure of fever, and the cessation of pain and redness, and doubt and the swelling of the head of the abscess, and other signs
et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues;	And you must know that you must make the perforation or more dependent on the abscess, and where it bursts out muscle.
et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	Or if the perforation is long in the bone, and if the abscess is grasped by hand or piece, or in joints and nerves and arteries, and in all these cases it is equal or there is no fat.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	In these cases, according to the location of the limb.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	And when the wound is in flesh, if it is deep enough that you leave the perforation until it is confirmed in digestion, as we have said
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure;	For if you pierce before this, if it comes out along the bone, and there is plenty of pus;
et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	And by chance it strengthens the bones and deepens it from him.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	And if there is no abscess that is perceived at the large end of the wound, according to what the limb has to bear.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus;	And you must know that you must bring in small abscesses, small perforations;
et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme;	and many wounds according to the size of the abscess.
et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper;	And if there are such abscesses, or if it is necessary to shave close the hair near, cover.
quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes:	When it is so swollen as a drape, and is softened, if necessary, one can do the same as with boils:
et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres;	And if there are such as are split into three angles, and such as require being grasped just like the berries of thyme, or like abscesses of carbuncles.
et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	And if there are such that require making a round cut of a certain size, and others of various sizes and similar to cutting off
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement;	When there is no head, if it is a superficial wound, it is necessary to pierce straight through
et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie;	And when the abscess is large and there is a great swelling, and you pierce through, if you do not pull out all the swelling at that moment, but only a part
puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief;	Then I press the abscess right up to the other jaw, and then do nothing more.
fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute;	Do this repeatedly with great force, until the swelling is completely gone
meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	Indeed, if the patient is of weak virtue, or a woman in childbirth, or a young child, or an old man decrepit.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite;	Hence avoid this chapter with great caution, and when you have perceived the abscess, if the wound is small, look to see if the wound of the abscess is small;
et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton;	and if it is of full size, if you attempt to pull out hair or old cotton
et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre;	and if it is a large abscess, and there is much pus, you must know that you must bite together two attempts so that they meet each other
et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor;	And if you have cauterized in the abscess a part of raw skin, and you have closed it round, then you must know that you must fill it with much cotton or lint of hemp in the direction of moisture, and keep it firm until the third part is over.
puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then the bone, and cure the wound until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	And if blood should discharge from your work, if you order cold water and ease, and moisten the drape, and withdraw the draining limb many times.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut;	And if the wound persists, if there is danger of infection and cure, and the powders that I have said are in the hands of the lord in this book, and if it is spring or summer, and the hands or the abscesses are covered with moisture, if you must put on bandages and wet cloths with vinegar and oil
et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit;	and if it is in this state, and the hand is fleshy, if you must put on wet cloths with water and oil, or with vinegar and oil, until the third part is over, as we have said
et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then take away the abscess, wipe away the pus, and treat the wound, if it is possible, until it is healed.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes:	This action is useful for all kinds of abscesses.
or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	Or as you have said, before treating the abscess, one must prepare the patient properly.</start_of_turn>
des soros	And this thing is known throughout in the treatment of abscesses: or as I have said previously, before treating abscesses, you must be wary of the chapter.
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	Or if the chief comes down with small abscesses, and they are like those which are in silk, as is the case with a goose, and there is in it something which resembles it.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz;	There are some greasy or wet patients with moisture as with boils.</start_of_turn
et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	And if there are some that are hard and painful at the bone, and no doubt that the artery does not oppose it.</start_of_turn
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	And as for the work of this size, if you expect with all the instruments which are called "instruments of introversion", from which the shape comes afterwards, what thing does it contain?
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	For if it contains moisture, if it flows down long.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien;	When the moisture is evacuated, if you leave the skin that contains that moisture, it returns to its place.</start_of_turn
puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens;	Then plunge the cotton swab into the Egyptian ointment, if it is present.
se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor;	If it is not present, in water and oil, and use the wound, and leave it until the other day.
et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	And this will counteract what remains dormant at night
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit;	And when it has begun again, like before, the second day, and the third, until you are certain that it does not remain dormant at night
puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then cure the wound of ointment according to what is appropriate, until it is healed
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc;	And if the abscess persists without fat, if you cut it according to this form, for a long time
et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist;	And evacuate your sponges, and the pus from all parts, and put all your care to drain for the coat or where it lies
et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	And if the artery opposes you, do as I have said afterwards.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	In the same way, do an incision if it is purulent, and cut and cure as I have said before
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	And the size of the purulent incision and the moisture, if it is less severe, because they are of little consequence
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme;	And if there are any of these abscesses or heads [of wounds] or there is no moisture, and if these are the abscesses that I cauterize or heads of an old woman;
et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier;	then find the abscess just like a stone, rough and pale, and cannot burst.
et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	and if it does not bleed, we must make an incision as with a stone.</start_of_turn>
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe;	In other abscesses that bleed or head, for these that come from the bowels and from the roots of the ears, it opens even on the most dependent day, for fear of bursting the belly.</start_of_turn
et les cure si com il covient.	And the treatment is as it is commanded.
des scrophules	And the size of the perforated abscess and the moisture, if they are lighter, because they are of little blood. And if some of these abscesses or heads or there is no moisture, and these are the ones I cauterize or head of an old woman; and I find the abscess as a solid stone, rough and white, and cannot break it; and if there is no blood in it, we must make just as good a wound as if it were a stone. In other abscesses coming or heads, forasmuch as these which come from the spleen and from the roots of the ears, it overtures if it is always dependent on the liquid, because of the swelling; and we must cure it as it should be.
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	Many times this abscess arises at the collarbone, and the armpits, and in the groin, and never comes from anywhere else or bone, and is bloody, and is joined to each other.</start_of_turn
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit;	And every swelling is properly placed in its sheath, as we have said before;
et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	And the signs of these swellings are many.</start_of_turn>
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	There are some diseases that contain moisture, and if they have malignants that do not obey reason, they will not yield to treatment.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde;	When you see a good colour in the touch, and that it is like the colour of bone, and soft from one side and not hollow as in the neck nor in the artery nor in the vein, nor deep.</start_of_turn
si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief;	If you can grasp it by the root and the soft part, and if the two levers of the shoulder are as we have said in the apostemes of the head.</start_of_turn
et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	And so be it that you keep your hands away from the nerve and the vein, and do not touch or handle anything that may cause spasm or bleeding, only grasp firmly and do not speak too soon, lest you cause more harm than good.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie;	And if you grasp the vein or the artery, and this does not allow you to work, if you put in the wound a bit of vitriol broth or any powder that remains bloodless, and strain the wound;
et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	And leave it until the swelling has subsided and the wound is softened, and then begin to move around.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses;	When the thing is washed clean, if you return to your work, until you have finished it;
puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	Then your duty will be shown if there remain no small scabs, if you grasp and touch them
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement;	And if there is a large swelling at the root of the scrophula vein, I do not advise you to grasp only the swelling at its root; but rather to bind it with a strong double thread and leave it hanging freely, as needed.
puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	Then apply the dressing of many layers of cotton, oiled in Egyptian fashion, and then treat the wound
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	If you have completely cauterized the boil, know that you must now join the two layers of the wound and suture them; and that there will be no remaining excess due to the size of the boil.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	If you understand to grasp the root of the thing and to pull out the pus, and to suture as we have said.</start_of_turn>
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure;	The scrofula that persists in excess, pierce it or I fear it will die.
et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption;	And pierce it like the one before mentioned, depending on the situation, and mix it with oil and similar things, so that it may remove what remains of the corruption
et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the wound is well closed, if the oily dressing adheres firmly, as long as it is healthy.
de squinance	When the wound is well drained, cure it with ointment which will cause the wound to contract as long as it is healthy.
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge;	The ancient men spoke and told of the measurement of the throat;
mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	but I have never seen it in our land, and it is the writing of their words.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee;	As for those who have a squint, it is necessary that the epiglottis, which is called the epiglottis, be turned away.
et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en II amandres.	and this does no good, for all the veins and the blood of the patient are at those which are above the mouth, in the throat or in the two mandibles
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the disease is in the chest of the abdomen, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to prevent the loss that comes from strangulation.</start_of_turn>
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige;	It is therefore necessary, when we want to split the epiglottis, to split it from three circles or four, a small cut between the two circles or by the quantity of the split of the cartilage;
et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	And if the larynx is closed to the epiglottis, there is no meat there, and the blood vessels are long and thin.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil;	And if the master is fearful, then you must stretch the skin of the throat to its furthest extent, and then cut the hair as far as the chin;
et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit;	And hide the blood vessels, if you see nothing else, and then close the wound as we have said before.
et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix;	It is shown by the cutting of the windpipe that the cough will erupt from the broken bone, and by the loss of voice;
et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	And leave the wound open for a piece.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les II levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige;	When the hour has passed and the strangulation is not seen, gather the two layers of the wound of the chin, and bind them all around the cartilage
puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then administer medicines that cause the growth of hair, until they are healed.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Albucasim does not make this just until the throat is completely closed, and the patient is judged to be dead, and the default is that it has failed.</start_of_turn>
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort;	Therefore keep the epiglottis closed for this reason that the patient does not vomit, and he breathes through the wound; and thus death is averted.</start_of_turn>
et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee;	And for this reason the ancients command that the wound remain open until the malice of the disease has passed, and it is passed in three days or four. And when it is healed, they command that the wound be sutured and healed, until it is healed.</start_of_turn
et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	And I tell you this, that I have seen.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon;	I have seen that a lady took a knife and put it in her throat, and grasped parts of the windpipe that were hanging loose.</start_of_turn
et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	And I fled called for the cure, and found her as dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I discovered the wound, and found the blood that had escaped from it, and saw that it did not penetrate any vein or artery except for the throat, and that the blood came out through the wound itself.</start_of_turn
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee;	I hurried, and saw the wound, and cured it until it healed completely.
et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition;	There was no further complaint from her, except that her voice was hoarse, and she returned to her usual state
por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	Therefore I say that in the cutting of the epiglottis I did not feel fear
de la grosse gorge	of the great throat.
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes;	These abscesses are called "neck hernia," and are large abscesses the color of jaundice, and are very common in women
et est selonc II manieres:	And there are two methods for treating them:
naturez, et accidens;	Natural treatment and surgical treatment
ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	Or natural treatment has no effect.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere;	And the cause of the accident is two ways, for one is like grease to us, and the other way is like an abscess which comes from an artery.
et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire:	and there is doubt, and one cannot do more work than in this small thing, and the evidence and the search is in everything that is inside:
se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point;	if you find it just like I do not know of grease, and cannot do anything to it, if it swells, as we swell the thumb, and take away from all around it, if there is no point;
et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	and cover everything thoroughly, and treat it as if it could be saved, until it is perfectly healed
des nous	And encircle all around, and cure it as it should be, until it is perfectly healed.
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances;	Many things of this kind are with us, of which I will speak of all the similarities.
et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	And thus it is proven that I shall tell you all the difference that exists between a nut and an issue.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture;	I say that dislocation is a heat and fever that persists as long as the inflammation has not passed, and is accompanied by swelling;
adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	Therefore rest the fever and heat.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros;	Without a nut there is neither heat nor fever nor pain, but it contains the sap, which is its own bag and is like the color of blood, and begins like an abscess and becomes large;
et sont selonc II semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	And are like wax, grease, or moisture, and moist of the color I have said in the division
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	It is necessary, when you come to the cure of the knot, that you first examine and inquire about the instrument which is called the “entromissoire,” according to its form or chapter which follows.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme;	And the manner of inquiry of abscesses of the head is that you take more moisture from the head than you find in the abscess, and twist your thumbs and fingers back and forth until you believe that the instruments have felt the pain, then that it is in proportion to the greatness of the abscess
puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	Then remove the entraumeater, and take care that the leap bound over it does not spring forth.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes;	When moisture covers the skin, making it slick, if it is like this with other incisions;
et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout;	and if after the removal of the entraumeater no moisture comes, greasy discharge, if it is like this with other incisions, grasp the surrounding area with tweezers and pinch slightly towards the bone, and keep the dressing in place with your hand or with a bandage.</start_of_turn>
et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	and if you do not handle it carefully, if you tear it piecemeal so that nothing remains.</start_of_turn>
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois;	For if nothing remains, it will return to us many times.</start_of_turn
et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	If it lingers a little while, and without pain, if you employ a wound of some corrosive powders, hold the wound steady, and apply calming things above the wound, and it will heal of itself; and do other treatments until it is healed.
et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	If it swells greatly, if cost two pounds of the wound, and treat it of that which engulfs flesh.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet II jors ou III, tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc;	If the vein swells up against you or something similar forces you, and if you hurry and use the broth of vitriol ground fine, and leave it for two or three days, until the wound bursts, and rest the swelling of blood
puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	then return to cover what is remaining that has lingered from now on.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres:	See here the forms of the entrapped bones, and there are three kinds:
grans et moien et petit;	Great, medium, and small;
et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres:	There are three quarters which are called "albaret", and one which is called "breb", and there are three ways of doing it.
grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule;	Great, medium, and small, for to encompass the fistulas of the abscesses.
et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule;	And are like nails which we sew up the wounds, and are of saffron, or iron, or silver, and must be thick enough to encompass the cortices of the fistulas
et sont de III manieres:	And there are three ways of doing it
grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	Great, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the size of the perforation.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci:	The shapes of the needles are like those of wheat grains, as you see here:
grans, moiens, et petis;	Great, medium, and small;
et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi;	...and if there are those who have two curves of three ways also.
et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres;	...and if there are those who have three curves, and are also of three ways
et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres;	...and if there are those who have two curves, and one curve only, and are of three ways
et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	...and all these things are necessary in their place.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf;	The head of these shoulders feels is tense, and there are some that cut only from one side, from which we extract the nails, because of this we do not close the vein or the nerve.
et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes;	...and from these inward movements are the bones repositioned in sleeves, so that the patient does not lose them when opening the abscesses;
et sont de III manieres:	And there are three methods:
grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois;	And there are three methods: great, small, and medium, as you see.
et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus;	and do not use them except in cases of fractures, such as legs, arms, ribs, and spleen; or similar conditions.
et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	never use another small instrument, resembling fists, in this form, because it stops the blood flow
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	And one must never put it back in the same place where it has been severed from veins, arteries, and never again in like manner: for in this great form.
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme;	Never swell the breasts of any man when they begin to decay, so that they appear like the breasts of a woman
et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	and remain silent and discreet, and who would see them cured if you do not tell them according to this form from line b to line g
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	Then scrape off the fat, and apply the medical salve with charcoal, then sew together the two layers of the wound with stitches, and cure it until it is healed.
et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures;	And if the breast swells downwards, and is calmed by its great size as with women, if it hangs from two ribs below, by two similar incisions;
de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.;	then one must hold one to the other at the end of both, so that the greater line contains the less, according to this figure, from this line B up to line G
puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then scrape off the skin between the two layers, and bone the fat, and mix in what we have said of stitches and powders, and anything else necessary for the cure, until it is healed.
et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif;	And if he is not quite healed, or the incision is not quite finished, because the patient does not see himself recovering, or for the discharge of blood, if you must, fill the wound with moist cotton wool in corrosive order.
et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	And leave it until the fat has healed and the edges have closed, then treat it until it is healed
des apostemes des asselles	of abscesses of boils.
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	These abscesses that come from the buttocks are like hard carbuncles and there is only that in them contains moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When any bone in the appendage is emptied, if you use a broad bandage and leave it until the other side, then bind up all the bandage, and cure the wound that has arisen from this until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscess appears to be like small carbuncles, if you do as we have said in the incisions of carbuncles, and if the wound rents open, if you join the cautery as we have said before.</start_of_turn
de la routure de l’artere	From the root of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme;	When the artery is severed and the skin is raw above, if there are many abscesses again, and just as much blood escapes from the vein as from the incision;
et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont;	and if you know that it is the artery, if the abscesses are long and burst through;
et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement;	When you know that it is necessary, if you know it has been torn out;
et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans;	And when it comes to the vein, if it is renewed to flow freely;
et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	and it is foolish to think that this will be enough to stop the bleeding from the wound and the abscesses, and the boils and the bites and other wounds, for there is great loss of blood in these matters.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc;	Therefore one must avoid the treatment of fire, and he who is in charge must also avoid it, and in that in which an artery is burst by the swelling of a vein from beneath the skin; for this is a perilous matter
puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte;	then one must open the size as one would uncover a vein, and remove the blood from the clot, until it is completely uncovered
puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples;	then one must extract the clot with a hook, and make it pierce through to the other side, and hold the vein with a double thread in two places, as I have taught you in the extraction of the two veins in the temples
puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme;	Then point out the area between the two links of the humerus until the bone that is there is freed from its position; and hold the abscess firmly.
puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient;	Then bring close the wound that encloses the bone, until it quiets; and keep the abscess well bound
puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then treat the swelling that follows this, until it is healed; and hold it firmly
et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit;	and if the abscess is as big as the vein, then you must hold your hand firmly in place over the abscess and push the needle through the limb and pull out the bone, and there should be two stitches, so that you can grasp it from the other side
puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil;	and tie the abscess as I have said, or tie it with two pieces of thread as two strings of thread
et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus;	If you doubt that the wound has not fully healed, if it recoils from another awl at the site of the first incision, and the awls are held in place for three days,
puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez;	then hold the swelling until it subsides, and then hold the swelling down for some time and leave what is bound over;
puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	then apply a moist dressing of wine and oil, and bind it with stitches and ointment until it heals.
des apostemes des ners	of stitches of nerves
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	Thus as well as with the incision of a vein or a vein, abscesses also come with nerves when they are irritated or from too great a workload, and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor;	And this often happens in the armpits and the groin or in all joints, and it is the cause of many wounds, and its color is like the color of corn, and it causes great pain;
et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur;	and when it is strained, if it causes the patient pain, and is not as red as corn, but is more like yellow.
et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer:	And he must remain silent from all sides, neither going forward nor backward, neither downwards nor upwards, and he who is in joints must not be covered with iron.
par aventure i vanroit contraction;	By chance, there may be contraction.
et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	And he who is head, shoulder, or face, makes the skin pale like parchment
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine;	If the abscess is small, if the patient has some tension, and he grasps it at the root;
et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is large, if the abscess has pus at the bone, and he boils it, then he breaks the bone and joins the wound together, and he heals as long as it is safe
des grosses boces pendans	When it is swollen, if you suspend it at the navel and scorch it, then the bone and reassemble the wound at the suture, and cure it while it is healthy.
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros;	Never happens in the belly and not anywhere else, and is a disease which is called "fungus" because of the resemblance of dust, and is the root of all troubles, and the chief thing.
et en i a de petis et de mout grans;	And there are small and great pains;
et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	And I saw there two who had two or three swellings which were more like mushrooms than anything else, and there was no difference between them, and they were white, and had a great root, and were all split open, and were full of moisture.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine;	I bound them and found in one XVIII ounces weight, and in the other VI, III, and the works were done in the incision if you look to see if the patient is moist, and the color of the artery is pale and moist with a faint root
si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	if the boil bursts wide open, and if you are present, do the cautery with fire.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer;	For at the root comes often too great a discharge of blood, and if it does not go away, if you hurry up then do the cautery;
et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors;	And if you see the patient groaning and fearing the incision, take a strong thread well made, and tie the artery as we have said, and leave it for two days.
et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail;	Then restrain him, and do not cease to tighten the thread until it grasps the artery; and ask him what work it is doing.</start_of_turn>
et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne;	And if the roots are large, if he has fear at the same time for the belly, but you must cover half well, then cauterize so that it does not return.</start_of_turn
puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	Then cure the wound, and keep that you only cover the area that is of a dark color and of little sense and of milk residue.</start_of_turn>
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For this is an inflamed abscess, and I will come to the treatment of the abscess later.
quant li boude ist fuer	When the head of the shoulder is for.
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit;	If pus appears, it comes from cautery of a wound or incision of fat, and is on the belly and is in some veins, as it happens in other ways, or blood that escapes from veins or arteries according to what is before, or windiness.</start_of_turn
et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	If the pain is in the armpit or the buttocks, and the colour of the wound resembles that of corn, and there is little pain, and various issues ensue.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	and if it is through the intestine, then it is more diverse, and when you press it with your hands if it returns and comes back, and by chance if it is closed, and grows large with water and for much work.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie;	If the cause is moisture, it is a light matter, and opens well when you press it with your hand, do not constrain me;
et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit;	If the cause is blood, if it opens with these signs, the wound is large and hard, and is clotted to a considerable extent
et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	If the cause is wind, if it is rough at the touch, and the work if you look is that of a vein or an artery, or wind
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	If you think that you must leave the dressing.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	For there is doubt and fear, as I have already said or as in this chapter about abscesses, due to the artery and the vein.</start_of_turn>
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude;	If the appearance is in the intestine or the buttocks, if you command the patient to hold his breath, and he is exhausted, then stretch out all the way, and then mark around the bulge;
puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine;	Then he commands to grasp the limb between your hands, then go around the limb that you have signed at all the circumference, then pull out half of the depth at the bottom of all the bone.
puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz;	Then he ties it around with a strong thread or a strong silk cord firmly, and keep it firm.</start_of_turn>
puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine;	Then withdraw half of the depth extended above the limb, and put your thumb and index finger on it, and hold the intestines.</start_of_turn
se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre;	If you find it seized to the limb, if you pull it out, hold the intestines away from the belly.</start_of_turn
et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit;	If you find swelling, if you grasp the bone, and break off the excess.</start_of_turn
et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier;	And if the artery or vein is torn, if it goes well inwards, return to your work and take two needles, and bring two strong threads, and pass the two needles through what you have made in the cross that you make pierce.
puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi;	Then strain the abscess in three layers above the needles, and if you see, hold the needles firm, and leave the wound open until it bursts, and cut off the dead flesh by itself.</start_of_turn>
ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit;	Or you can grasp it when it is subtle and carries, then cure what is causing the swelling, and tie the abscess as we have said.</start_of_turn
et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	Then drain the blood or moisture that you find, then cure the wound from what is causing the swelling, and close the wound.</start_of_turn>
dou chancre	And draw out the blood or moisture that you find, then cure the cause of it, and bandage the limb.
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer;	We have said in the previous sections about the signs of an abscess, and how one should operate with medicines, and how one should shun the cautery.
et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement;	We have said in the previous sections about the signs of an abscess, and how one should operate with medicines, and how one should shun the cautery. And we say that the abscess swells in the marrow, and has great caution in the treatment, and they say that when an abscess is in its place or one can remove it if it is like an abscess that is enclosed in marrow, and in the flesh, and in other things; and one should remove it immediately when it is in its beginning.
et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner;	And when it is great and old, if one does not know how to approach it, for I know of no healing in this matter;
ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	no one has ever healed me of this before
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire;	And in the work, when it is in place or when one can hold it off, as we have said, never purge the patient of black bile.
puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide I boin leu por faire l’ovraige;	then make him well if he shows excessive swelling, then expel the evil from the body entirely in a good way for the work;
puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier;	then remove your nails or abscesses, and the head of all parts, and the bone of all parts so that nothing is left undone
et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	leave the blood to flow freely, and press firmly with your hand or anything else, so that if there is a bruise from the incision of the vein or artery, the cautery may be done without it being stained
puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat with other treatment until it is healed.
de ydropisie	De ydropisie.
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer:	We have already said concerning dropsy that its signs are assembled from water, and its symptoms resemble those of a wound; and the treatment which is made by medicines, and that which is made by fire.
si est eclites soulement;	if only it is slightly blistered;
et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances:	and one must not touch iron in these two symptoms:
c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose;	for these are deadly things
donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses;	then when you have given these medicines for this symptom which is called "ECLites" of medicines, and it does not profit, if you notice that the patient is weak, or if there is another disease besides dropsy, such as all sorts of abdominal and similar things;
si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance;	do not touch iron, for there is doubt;
et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer:	If you see the patient very strong, and he has only hydrophobia, neither too young nor too old, then you must work on him.
lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	Believe the patient firmly in your hands, and press the abdomen towards the lower part of the spleen, then take the spinous process in this shape:
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	And let two parts be excised.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier;	With a point, and do not go too deep so that it can come out as soon as it is pushed into place; do not obstruct it.</start_of_turn>
puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines:	Then look if hydrophobia is confined towards the intestines.</start_of_turn
si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil;	If you think that you have reached the third rib, put two fingers on the epiglottis.</start_of_turn
et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois;	And if dropsy is caused by the disease of the liver, if so be your incision on the left side of the buttock III.
et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu;	And if it is caused by the urine, if so be it on the right side, and do not make it so that the patient lies on the incision that the excess fluid does not flow to that weak limb.
puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor;	Then pierce through the skin with the instrument, and withdraw it, and keep your hand over the area between the skin and the cartilage just as when escorting the quantity of an nail or as much as an inch in thickness
puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	Then pierce through the cartilage until the thumb comes out, and that is the cause of the pain, then pull out the instrument, and there you have it: this is the form of the instrument
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus;	And it is similar to a silver needle, and is of barley or barley chaff lighter, and has at the upper part a little hole.
et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus;	or costs from one side three holes.</start_of_turn>
et II d’autre part, et I d’autre;	and two from the other side, and one from the other.</start_of_turn
et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	and the head is cut off like a pen, and this is the shape of the incision which is written to cut off the head.</start_of_turn
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument;	at the top is the marrow, so that when the instruments are brought to the edge, if they go too deep now on the instruments.</start_of_turn
vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort;	leave half or a third part of it, for if you take more than that at this hour, by chance the patient will die from the resolution of his spirit of the weapon, or he will bleed profusely, or he will approach death.</start_of_turn
mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz;	But according to the quantity of its virtue, and according to what the provisions of the virtue tell the patient, and his pains.
puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere;	Then carry out the instrument and hold the pain, and it is retained now by the hook which is stamping the part above the surface, as I have said, that you pierce according to this manner.
puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit;	Then repeat the instrument the other way, if you see the patient suffering from this, and take out a small amount of pain;
fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	Do not do this again, and take care not to do this until there remains only a little pain.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre;	And if you doubt the patient, and you put too much pain, if the surgeon of the burial or sand burn, and by putting out sweat or bath and sun, and drink plenty of liquid.
et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	And the treatment of dry medicines until they are healed, and cauterize upon the stomach and upon the liver and upon the spleen after the extraction of the urine, as I have said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	of the stomach of the thigh.
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	Never are children born without a mark on their belly, or the mark is small, or it is not properly in its place.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	If the coving [cautery] is too great, that it causes no perception at all in all the surrounding parts following this form:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet;	Then put or pierce I clo of ointment, and bind and hold it for III days or IV, and when he wants to urinate, if he keeps it closed, make him urinate, and then put it back
et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	and by chance it cannot be, for the urine that comes out will not leave it closed.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	If the opening is small, if it is treated with oil of lead, as we have said, if it dilates.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut;	Those who do not have the opening in their limb are blind, for none are born with the opening at the head of the penis, for they cannot urinate before they lift up their penis
et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	and cannot urinate because of that, for the matter cannot come down to the marrow, and that is a bad illness
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient;	And thus the work proceeds if the patient lies somewhat bowed down on his back, so that the head of the arm and the elbow are as wide as a thumb, if indeed he has pierced through flesh in the middle, as he should.
et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And thus you must keep from bloodshed which often comes, and if it comes, if the stain of that which stains blood, and cure the wound until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
des pustules de la verge	Des pustules de la verge.
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide;	Many times this white spot appears in the arm, and is an omen of great suffering.</start_of_turn
et en i a malignes et non malignes;	and there are malignant and non-malignant.</start_of_turn
si covient que tu les preignes a I oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien;	if it is possible that you take hold of it and cut it superficially, and break all the bones and teeth, then put on Egyptian linen cloth.</start_of_turn
puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then the treatment of ointment is applied until it is healed.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	And if the bath is bad, of dark colour and putrid, if you must bring cautery to it.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier;	When you have grasped it, and if the swelling is in the hip, and there is some in the belly and some outside, then you must stretch the swelling that is inside first
et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	and when it is softened, if the ointment has been ejected
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion;	For when you treat it whole, if you do not keep the shoulder firmly in place, it will blacken and corrupt the limb and the bone.
si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	if you must cover everything that is black and corrupt, then apply honey and flour made from pomegranate peel and sometimes, apply other ointments until it is healed
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	And if blood flows away, if you mix the lunar cautery in this fashion:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble:	The cautery is of two sorts:
c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption;	It is to say, at the discharge of blood, and the corruption;
et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi;	When the head of the arm is corrupted and retracted, if it is suspected that you have swallowed or passed a clot from the vein, and the patient urinates among them;
et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars;	When the skin is pierced at the root of the arm which has not been previously circumcised, or if there is a wound or incision, if it is suspected that the blood vessels are lacerated, then you must immediately grasp the arm and pull it away from the wound until the bleeding stops
et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil;	If this matter is neglected, if it is suspected that the fracture of the bone is not displaced, that you must grasp the arm without moving its head or shoulder.
puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	Then sprinkle somewhat between two, and I put one subtle bandage of wet linen on the cold water, which does not move from its place.
de la circoncision	with circumcision.
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies;	Circumcision is not simply a continuation of other wounds;
toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	However, when we make this work of our will, and properly apply it, if it is necessary that we make it better, and the lighter for the health.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancients did not speak of circumcision in their laws, because they did not use it in their customs, and we have only what we have learned through experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor I dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule;	For I have seen the greatest part of masters and doctors who make circumcision endure for a long time, with force, and with all their skill;
si fuioit li keurs car il i a II toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	If they flee from fear because of two tiles, and by chance they break this one and leave the other one behind
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre;	Or it is recovered covered, and the pain is doubled, and there is confusion that is not sure whether the point of the limb is fixed;
et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	And at the loosening of the ligament by chance escapes the iron, and corrects the work, and many times they are born anew that they do not need to be loosened again, and I desire it.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	Or the wound covers again, and the pain is doubled, and at the movement which is done with too much force at the point of the limb; and at the movement of the tendon by chance escapes the iron, and repairs the work, and many times the nails are born again without having to make another incision, and I want that.</start_of_turn>
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens;	For when you press your hand, if it is equally taut throughout,
mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir;	but that the thread is well stretched around the skin;
et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	and that the manner of the first work makes you think of the child, if he understands, that you do not force him to bind the thread around the limb too tightly, but that you make him do it loosely in various ways as you wish
puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens;	then you make him grasp between your hands straight, and bring the forces between your hands or withdraw your pieces that the child does not see them, neither any of the instruments;
puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens;	Then take your hand to the shoulder and breathe or groan, and pull it up as high as the head of the shoulder is bent;
puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien;	Then thoroughly cleanse the wound of the filth that is gathered there, then tie the limb with a double thread, and tie it firmly so that it does not slip away again.
et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge;	And hold it as two fists by the second loop to the pouch and the thumb, and pass between the two loops, then hold the thumb downwards tightly and pull the head of the shoulder forward
puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres;	Then let the blood flow back slowly and steadily, because that is the medicine.
et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And put powder on and over the powder I drape a cloth glued with an egg yolk smeared with rose oil and fresh, and leave it until the other side is healed, and cure it with other ointments until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste:	The forces of form are multiplied when this is the case:
li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	when both shoulders are tense and firm, and the arms are as strong as the hands equally.
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision;	the force of the world is great when the tendons are torn during an incision.
donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme;	therefore you must extend your nails, even though it makes the wound burst open
et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	and keep it even, and if you do not wish to hold it with your nails, grasp it firmly, and then pull it out
Et s’il trespassent III jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement;	and if it persists for three days, and what is below the edge is inflamed, if you leave it as long as the swelling subsides, and gently scorch it
si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	If the head of the shoulder is like this, and you hold it from the root of the limb, it will not move at all.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point;	For if the head of the arm is like this, and you hold it from the root of the limb, it will not move at all.
cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then cure it as we have said, until it is healed
dou retenement de l’urine	Dou retenement de l’urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division;	It holds back urine if there is an obstruction of a stone, or blood clot, or tumour, or worms, or similar things, which we have mentioned in the division.
et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz;	and if the urine is not released, and you see that the obstruction is in the stone which is in the belly or the neck of the bladder, if you must, you must bend the patient over his knees
et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet;	And let the patient place his foot on his back, extend his belly from the upper part of his back, and hold the patient still as much as he can.
et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e;	Then constrain the collar of the bladder towards the expression of the stone above, so that the urine is released easily
et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme:	If it does not come out, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, it is necessary that you administer extraction with all the instruments which are called a «syringe», for this is the form:
et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil;	Or of fine silver wire, as thick as a sparrow’s quill;
et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	And let the cauterization be of a long and a half palm, and of a finer sort at the head
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue;	And thus the method of extracting urine is as follows: if you take two needles and bind one to the head of a wool or cotton swab, and pass the needle through the bladder.
et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede;	and keep the surplus of wool and pass the juice until it reaches the head of the syringe, then join the syringe with oil or butter and egg white, and make the patient sit on a chair, and gently raise the bladder and the oily parts moist with oil and water
puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude;	and put the syringe into the bladder until it reaches the root of the bladder, and double the bladder under the pubic bone
puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors;	and pull the syringe out before it reaches the bladder, and the patient will feel the urine come out until it is empty, and this must not be done except in this order because it may cause damage;
puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine;	Then the thread is at its greatest length, and the urine follows the thread, then the bladder is emptied, and the urine is corrected.
et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	The catheter is resumed until the bladder is empty, and the patient is aligned.</start_of_turn>
des maladies de la vessie	Des maladies de la vessie.
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When there are flank stones or blood in the bladder, or if there is swelling, and you see urine and medicines being distilled, if you have at your disposal the instrument called the «clepsedre», which is shaped like this:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus:	It is closed, and if there are three holes:
II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois;	Two from one side, and one from the other, as you see.</start_of_turn>
et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est;	and the head of the shoulder is held so that the medicine can be applied as well as possible to the bone, if we can remove the moisture, and push as much as necessary.</start_of_turn
et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens;	And when you see the medicines dripping from the bladder, put the head of the physician over the moisture, and push the one who is behind.</start_of_turn
si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens;	If you grasp moisture at the shoulder, and then quickly push back the hand that grasps it;
si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira;	If then moisture enters the hand, and comes to the belly now, if the patient feels it;
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie:	it is the shape of a subtle blister from which we must drain the belly:
si est ci:	it is like this.
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut;	It is of silver or gold, and the head is higher
et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet;	and the bones creak within or the limb is dislocated
puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu;	then take a bladder of mutton and put the moisture which you saw draining from the belly inside it, and bind it between the two armpits with a double thread, and burn that moisture on the fire.
puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie;	Then stretch the arm forward, and strain your hand over the bladder with all the moisture that comes, until the patient feels that the moisture has reached the bladder.
et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor;	And if you do not have a bladder, if take a piece of parchment, and make a circle, and pierce it round about the edge
puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument;	Then stretch the thread firmly through these holes, then assemble the circle as if you were assembling a ball, and put inside what you see of oil, moisture and water, and bind it with an instrument.
et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	And do as if you had made a bladder, pressing your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
de la piere	Of the stone.
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines;	We have said above the methods of cutting and the extraction of arrows, together with medicines.
et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille;	And I have said the difference between a stone embedded as rain and all the signs, and in what case a stone must be opened of size.
et en la vessie, et en la verge;	And in the bladder, and in the kidney;
et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	And I shall tell you openly and briefly
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit;	I say that the stone which is embedded in the bladder is often like rain, and this is a sign that the stone has burst from the bladder as if from its subtlety
et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist;	and opens the kidney, and grinds the patient's flank, and it can happen many times, and then it hardens;
et a mout de ces saut li fondemens;	And from these bursts the foundation is loosened;
et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont IIII ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece;	and is light the healing of the bursts until they are three years old, and is great grief in the elderly, and is like a young man between youth and old age;
et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	And it is the lighter cure of those who have the large stone, than of those who have the small one.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	And when we come to the treatment, if it is necessary, first purify the patient by vomiting, to drive out all the bile that is in the intestines.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	For it never hinders to inquire about the stone.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut;	Then take the patient by the limbs, and loosen and move them downwards, so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, and does not rise up again high;
puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval;	Then make him sit between your hands, and his hands rest on his thighs, so that the bladder is completely emptied downwards
puis la quier et la touche dedens;	Then press and touch inside.
se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	If you feel the stone in the space, then quickly pull up on the stone immediately.</start_of_turn>
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis;	And if it does not come out with the touch, then take your left index finger, if the patient is old, or your middle finger, if the patient is young and robust;
et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie;	And the stone at its foundation, and ask the bone, and when you feel it at your elbow, if the marrow is at the neck of the bladder.
puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	Then press on your elbow, and the stone will be forced out or you will see your tailbone
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille;	And instruct the attendant to press the bladder with his hand, and command him to extend with his right hand the ribs above, and with his left hand grasp the skin that is below the ribs in the part where we make the incision;
puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	Then pull out the clot covering, for that is the shape
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre;	And enter between that which is between the ribs and the foundation, do not go inside but along the edge of the left armpit;
et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans;	And either hold two fingers upon the stone, and the two must either stay or rest, and the size of the hole must be as great as the breadth of the stone, but not too large; according to the quantity of the stone, do not make it too wide.
par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail;	By chance the press if two must stay or rest, that it leap forth in the direction of work.
et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges:	and the nails that are on the edge of the stone or that are angled, and margins
si est griés a issir;	if they are gripped to split.
et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	and if there is something soft that looks like a gland, round, from which there is a slight oozing
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant;	Then make the hole larger where there are angles and margins
et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe;	If it does not jump, know that you must draw above the nails which are as sharp as a file at the root, for the tooth must be drawn out if it escapes.
ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief;	or you must hold the instrument curved at the root firmly.</start_of_turn>
et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole;	and if you do not hold it firmly, if it is too large, the vessel will burst, and if the vein is split open.</start_of_turn
et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	and if there are more than one tooth, first draw out the largest at the root of the vessel, then draw out the others in order.</start_of_turn>
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	If it is large, if it must be soothed, and make greater pain.
Car II choses avienent au malaide:	For two things happen to the patient:
ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder;	or he dies, or the urine comes together due to the heat that the leaves cannot withstand.</start_of_turn
mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces;	But all the while you must exert yourself greatly to tear, or to remove, the teeth, until you have torn them out in pieces.
et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut;	And when you have finished your work, if you apply the salve of incense, aloe, and dragon’s blood, and hold it tight, and put above it a wet cloth soaked in oil and wine, or in oil and rose water and cold water, to soothe the burn.
puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	Then restore the patient to his collar, and do not loosen the ligature until the third joint below
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have loosened it, if there arises much blood from the wound of oil and water, then treat with oily dynafinicon and oily basilicon, until it is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine:	And if boils come to the wound and carbuncles, and swelling of blood in the bladder, or because of retention of urine, which is known in part as being like urine without its discharge:
boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit;	Boutes donc ton Doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sang, car s’il y reste, si corront la vessie, et la porrit.
puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then lift the wound of acute and easy and gentle aid, and support it in every way you know, until it is healed;
et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	and that you cover that all the hours that you treat it, that you bind the two edges together, and assemble the medicines on the place.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir;	And if the wound is small, and it is an opening of the gut, and is plugged with silk, and the urine cannot pass;
si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	if you are treating this as I have said above, that you must listen to me many times, for this cure is heard of in this size
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	I have already heard of this in other cases
Pren .i. foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a .iij. angles fichiees en .i. tison:	Take a piece of iron according to this form and make two angles fixed in one vessel:
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie;	Then take I thread and loop it around the root of the stone, so that it cannot go back into the bladder.
puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere;	Then tighten the thread lightly in the root until it comes to the stone;
et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part;	and turn the thread around the stone back and forth, until you can pierce the stone from the other side
si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	When the urine comes, then press your hand on that which is remaining of the stone that is in the root.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides;	If it is broken, and spurts with the urine, and is seen by the patient;
et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie;	and if you are unable to do this for any reason, then take I thread from the root of the stone and I other from above, and push the root towards the stone between the two lines, and then pull it out forcefully, and release the thread, and congeal the blood in the wound
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And keep it steady until it is healed.
de la piere des femmes	If you do not wish to do this by any means, take hold of the limb above the joint and support the limb below, then push the limb forward between the two tendons, and pull it out forcefully, remove the tendon, and congeal the blood that is in the wound; and cure as long as it is necessary.
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por III choses:	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge;	one is that in such cases the woman is a virgin.
et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	and the second is that one cannot find a woman who is truly learned, even though she is chaste.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains;	and the third is that one cannot find a woman who is truly learned in this work of hands;
et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil;	and the fourth is that if the woman’s hand is more plump than the man’s, because it can therefore hold a deeper size, and great pain is at this point. And if you need some skill in this, if you take a mistress who is truly learned, and prick her with the needle, and if you do not find her to be chaste, there is no woman in the world who is as subtle as she.
et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere;	And she presents a cunning dance in the life of women, or a woman who cuts off a part of her body, and she commands her to do what you command her with the inquiry of the stone;
et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge:	and look well if the woman is a virgin.
adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere;	then she must push her shoulder forward or downwards and inquire about the stone.
et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	and if she finds it, if she confines her shoulder socket, she recommends that she push her shoulder forward or with the patient, and she orders her to press her left hand on the bladder area
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse;	if she finds it, she must move it from its entrance on the bladder until it reaches the root of the thigh
puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie;	Then put your hand on the thigh at the root of the knee and find the middle of the bone, where it is usually visible, and feel the bone in that part.
et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite;	Do not move the forearm under the bone or beside it, and let the size be small at first.</start_of_turn>
puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont:	Then tighten the limb steadily, if you feel the bone growing in the wound as much as the bone can bear, and soak up the blood that has flowed many times before.</start_of_turn
c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	This is to say, small and large, acute and blunt, long and round, and which have rained.</start_of_turn>
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	if her discharge resembles stones, it is an issue.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	And if it does not go away, if put at the limb vitriol broth, and hold it for an hour until it is stained.</start_of_turn
puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre;	Then return to your work, as long as the stone is firm, and have the instruments that I have told you about in the extraction of the stone, for they are useful to you in your work.
et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide;	If it does not go well, and it is the artery that is cut, put powder on the wound and hold tight with clamps and bandages, and do not attempt to move it again, but leave the stone alone and do not touch it, except in the event of an accident that causes the patient to die
puis cure la plaie.	Then treat the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	When the bleeding has ceased and the limb is at rest, if you return to this work while the wound is still fresh, as long as the bone is firm.</start_of_turn>
de hernie carnouse	Of hernias of the intestines.
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef;	Warm water is nothing other than an assembly of moisture or white fat, which is like lukewarm urine from cows, that contains eggs.
et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit I autre oef;	It is called "syfac," and never is it properly in the urine of a cow, if we take care that it is not something else
et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit;	And this is the skin between the white surface that we mentioned before.
et ceu n’avient se poc non.	And it does not swell further.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the generation of this membrane is from weakness that comes from the cheese, and it is spread throughout that matter.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors:	And never if it comes from percussion on the bones, and this moisture is of many colors:
ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus;	or it is pale yellow, or it is without red, or black, or pale blue, and this is more
et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	And these are signs of congestion in this assembly, because if it is like the white surface that we mentioned before, if the abscess is reddish, I do not see the bones, because there is moisture everywhere
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef;	And if there is moisture in the flesh itself, if the abscess is reddish with a part of the yolk, and because of this it is believed that it is another bone;
et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien;	And if moisture is between the skin of the armpits and the white membrane, if he feels well;
donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	Then when you know the colour of the moisture, if it spreads throughout the entire inwardness where it appears, from that it is known that its form is as it is before.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to this, therefore, which comes after the introductor, judge of what is within.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors;	And when we bind the limb with iron, if it is known that the patient is well according to the poor and the filling of his body;
puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz;	then we support him on his back, on something somewhat high, and put on him a little bandage
puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions;	then sit on his left side, and command the minister to sit on his right side, and stretch the limb to the second rib below the armpits;
puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir;	then take the sponge of lead, and grasp the skin of the armpits among the long hair as far as the ridge of the scapula, and make a complete incision straight across the armpits down to the white membrane, and burn it superficially as much as the poor allows
puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont;	Then pierce the skin deeply with a large hole, drain all the liquid, and then place your thumbs on, extend the skin upwards.
et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement;	Do not touch the root of the bones, but only the skin should be grasped gently
cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue;	Cope either all at once or in pieces by itself the cost of it secretly, for if you do not cope it well, the liquid will return
et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac;	If the limb leaps up to your work, keep it in its place until you have completed the work of the incision
puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then assemble the two limbs of the bones at a joint, and then suture if like the other wounds until it is healed.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc;	And if you find the limb corrupted by another illness, then you must tie up the vessels that are suspended, doubting the decay of blood;
puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	Then grasp the shoulder firmly with all the suspenders, and draw out the limb, and cure it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices;	And if it is assembled into two parts together, its roots are two branches.
si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset;	if you have grasped the other part in the same way as the first, then press out the blood, and put lint in the wound soaked in rose oil
et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	and put another layer of gauze soaked in wine and oil on top, and put on the two shoulders, and put on under doubled cloths, and bind it up in the way that is according to this form:
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil;	Then take two cloths and use coarse wool according to this shape and join them together at the armpits, and one hand grasps at the bottom just up to the back, and the other at the part of the armpit
et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier;	And the other two heads above the two armpits, and so be altogether assembled the restriction in the loop of the braid.
et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers;	And never is this twig of cautery as large as iron, and take I cautery of the pointed kind, and burn the hair of the flanks, and so eschew if we have said, so that the white fat that contains the liquid is discovered.
si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	If you take the cautery thus, and pierce that fat as we have said, and burn with this pointed cautery:
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout;	And so burn in all ways that you will, until you have scraped all of it away.
et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef;	And keep that the flame does not touch the egg;
et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve;	and the wounds that this work is more helpful.
et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille;	and bloodletting for the removal of swellings, and medicines that mitigate the severity of the diseases;
et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	and if anything hinders you, or incisions of boils or discharges of blood or anything else, if you can, cure that which hinders you, as it is said above
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit;	and if the patient is pale and does not wish to stay with this work because of its horror, if you must perform an incision, as I have said, and when you are certain by the signs we have mentioned that the swelling has gone down, if you wish, you may seat the patient on a low chair
pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors;	then make the incision at the lower part of the limb with all the surrounding tissue, and put the perforation through to the bone's length
et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer;	Or let the wound be large, so that all the pain will cease for certain.
puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee;	Then put cotton on the wound, and bind it, and leave until the remaining pain ceases; then cure until the wound is healed completely.</start_of_turn>
et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant;	If the white cloth does not hold back the pain at the edge of the wound, then you must drink a penny or the instrument with which the wound is treated for dropsy.</start_of_turn
et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	And make the wound large, and soak it in water so that the pain returns, and bandage it together after six months or when the pain has passed, and when it is bandaged as before, the patient will recover his days.</start_of_turn
de l’aposteme des coions	Of the abscess of the buttocks.
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse;	Soaking as in the section of this twig has many precautions, for I believe it is better to leave it alone.</start_of_turn
et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	And I shall tell you of the work and the semblance of the abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions;	I say therefore that the main cause of an abscess comes from suppuration or boils, and even cysts;
et c’est par mout de cas.	And it is through experience.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion;	This is to say by excessive rubbing and swelling, which is caused by boils or percussion;
et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors;	and it has the color of an abscess according to the color of boils;
et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief;	and does not cause pain, but is a true abscess
et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	and sometimes it is a bloody abscess, purulent and painful, with a foul color, and never comes from a vein or swelling of a vein.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois;	When there is no pulse from an artery, if it is known by the position of the cautery, when you press on it at your side;
et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	and you must not touch it there.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars;	The one that is made of swelling of a vein is known by its position at the expression of touching the sides, and can well do the size above this semblance, and above the others
et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	and that you hold it like nails, then the head will be high, and the thread for white silk, and deliver the suspension from all parts of the head.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope;	If the head of the limb is already swollen with these nails, if you can, then only treat the limb and hold it
et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	And if it is near the surface of the skin, or in what is inside the blood vessels, you must deliver all the surrounding tissue, and the cavity must be rounded off.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	If the limb hangs loose from the socket or from behind, then you must grasp all that is taut, and pull out the root, as we have said.</start_of_turn>
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	When your work is finished, if you have used up the soft wool dressing in oil and rose wine, then cure it with other ointments until it is healed.</start_of_turn
de l’aposteme des coions	Of the abscess of the buttocks.
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait;	This is an abscess enclosed by a covering resembling two boards, with the softening of the bones, and the patient groans when he walks.
et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	The treatment for this disease is as dangerous as the disease itself, as we have often seen in the past.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment;	You must make the patient sit on a low seat, then support the bones below his shoulders to the armpits, all the veins that are around the edge, and hold them firmly, and stretch them out
puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples;	Then grasp the spur of the tooth that is piercing wide through the blood vessels, until it is uncovered, and then pull it out from the root, as we said in the extraction of arteries in the temples.
puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief;	Then insert a needle or if there is double thread, and bind it to the first limb or the nail has gone, and bind it loosely at the other end.
puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues;	Then hold them (the teeth) in the middle upright, according to the length of the root, and remove the corrupted moisture
puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions;	Then treat the wound as others or bathe, so that no blood vessel is cut except those that nourish one of the bones
car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz;	because by this there is no harm, and if all the blood vessels come loose, as it should be, if you can carry the bones over all the blood vessels.
si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	If the oesophagus does not lose its nourishment from the incision of the veins, and if it is dried and does not swell, it will not need aid.
de la routure dou syfac	If the vessel does not lose its nourishment by the incision of the veins, and if it dries and does not yield assistance.
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions;	The outcome of this root is if it is by the section that comes or if it is extended on the belly in the part of the flanks, because the intestine descends from that passage to one of the buttocks.
et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes:	And this passage is either by section or by extension of the intestines, and these two methods arise from two causes:
ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses;	or by percussion, or by jumping, or by pressure, or from the lifting of a burden, and by similar things;
et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement;	And the signs when it is by section of the syfac are that there is both pain and swelling in length, and it does not come immediately
et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	And the abscesses are equal in size until towards the belly, because the spleen presses the intestines.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the sign is when the socket is inflamed, that it makes an immediate sharp pain, and the swelling is diverse, sometimes the skin is pale, and this is because of the escape of the intestine and the stiffness of the socket.</start_of_turn
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And never is the bone moved with the intestine, and is retained when it is pressed, and makes great pain for the patient, even when it is pressed.</start_of_turn
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these treatments with fire and fear, for it is known that they must be cautious.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir;	And the way of this work is that if you command or patient that he bend the intestine to his hand in the wound, if it can return there again.
puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes;	Then hold his collar between your hands, and keep his legs still;
puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc;	Then stretch the limb upwards, and clench all the skin of the buttocks long
puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir;	Then hold the bowels open to the size of a thumb according to what you must see to open the wound, and be like that which causes it not to move
puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars;	Then uncover the spleen that is under the skin of the buttocks, until the white spleen is discovered throughout
puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac;	Then take your thumb and index finger and place them on that which teaches you the position, between the white splint which is above the leather of the egg, and between the second splint, and withdraw that which is behind the egg, and between the second splint.
et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille;	And thus move the right hand from the knuckles of the fingers, and extend the white splint above your left hand, and hold the egg against all the splinting towards the belly;
et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement;	Command the minister to extend the egg upwards, and loosen that which is behind the ligament.
et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz;	And look if there is any intestine or white splint hard involved, and if you find nothing, if the egg is soft against the belly;
puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions;	Then take a needle or if there is thick thread made of X threads, and pass it through the back part of the scapula, which is behind the skin of the armpits.
aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz;	Then the size, then tie the head of the dislocation which appears from the threads, until there are three threads remaining.
puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars;	Then assemble the bones one over the other in the shape of a cross, and bind the scapula, as we have said which is behind the skin of the armpits, with a strong thread of two parts
puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne;	Then wrap the head of the dislocation in thread and bind it firmly with two parts, so that no blood vessels that nourish them can enter, except for the incision that we have made.
et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi;	And put the thread straight according to the first thread which is two finger-widths long, and after these two fingers leave the scapula which is behind the skin of the armpits the greater part of a palm
et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte;	And afterwards, according to the roundness of the egg, which is carried.
puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant;	Then grasp in the part which is under the skin of the joints, as much as it hangs loose, and bow it, as we have said before
puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	Then mix coarse wool with oil, and put it on the wound, and put in the thread that we have said.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And never cauterize the flesh except as we have said, after the incision, in doubt of the discharge of blood.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui;	For this often happens, and leave the thread as long as it wants to slip for itself
et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece;	and if it persists at the shoulder, if it be raised from hot water, and put on what we have said, as long as it wants to slip
puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	Then cure the wound in another way, until it is completely healed
de hernie carnouse	Of hernias of the intestines.
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this chapter, I have never seen anyone cure it with iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz;	And the old ones say that it is made as the twig which is bound to the nut, in part as you bind the blood vessels, after the size above lightly on the outside.
puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient;	Then hold them firmly in place, and cure the abscess of that which overpowers, until the blood vessels cease to bleed
et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And cure as we have said, until it is healed.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus;	Never comes rupture in anger, as we have said, and open the wounds
et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres;	and do not break any intestines as bones, and if there are any, that is bad, and repair them at all hours.
et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent;	and if it stays too long in this place, if he believes the wound or the hernia, until the intestines break;
et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert;	And this comes from the stretching of the hip, which is angled, as we have said, because it is extended, then is softened and filled with air;
et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit;	and the remedy for this is by cautery, as we have mentioned before.</start_of_turn>
et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere:	and never is cured by iron in this manner.</start_of_turn>
et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois;	and that the patient lies prone on his back between your hands, then grasp the limb from the root and stretch it out wide as much as is necessary according to the quantity of three fingers.</start_of_turn
et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac;	and then draw out the hip that is below the skin that covers it, then take hold of the edge of the limb and pull the limb outwards until the bony part of the hip is exposed.</start_of_turn
et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre;	And press upon the belly, then cut the two thighs appearing from the hip bone on the top of the right thigh, and cut both of them.
puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines;	Then pull out the right thigh, and do not cover the hip bone or extend the knee or anything else, as I told you in the treatment of the hernia of the intestines.
puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	Then treat it with the treatment for wounds.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when you cauterize the hair, if the wound closes and heals the wound, as long as it is whole.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The swelling is confined, and has no apparent cause in the course of treatment, and the cautery is useless in this situation, and more proximate to health.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	of the softening of the skin of the nails
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir;	Many times is the skin of the joints softened in baths of hot water, because the bones that are within are softened, and it is evident to see
et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil;	And it is necessary, when one sees it cured, to make the patient sit up on his back, and to support the softened skin on the natural skin
puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a III costures ou IIII fermement;	Then gather two layers of leather at a staple, and if you see, first close the superfluous layer of leather and soften it at three staples or four firmly.
puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Then stretch between the staples, and tie the cure as with other wounds, until it is healed, and cut the thread.
dou chastrement	Dou chastrement.
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre;	The wounds which are scraped in our laws, and for this reason I do not wish to speak of them in this book;
et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres:	and are only necessary for two methods:
dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure;	one is that the patient looks at the wound when asked and that the cure is applied to the wound itself
et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	and the other is that often we have seen patients scratched by animals such as dogs and goats, cats and other animals
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres:	I say therefore that the cautery is performed in two ways:
ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	or by traction, or by incision.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant;	In that which we do it by traction, we must keep the part to be treated in hot water, until the skin is softened and limp.
puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	then grasp it with your hand, until it is firm and you can no longer feel it
Du chastrement de taille:	Of the size of the cautery:
covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez;	you must hold it firmly, and press the skin of the parts at your left hand, then bind up the dressing, and keep pressure on each wound until you have well secured them
et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz;	and leave no wound that is soft or bloody which has escaped from the vessels;
et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure;	And this method of treatment is more silent than that which is made by traction, because with traction it adheres by chance to nothing of the bones, whereas it desires luxury.
puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	then cure the wound until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
des hermofrodites	of hermaphrodites.
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes:	Hermaphrodism is in two ways as at home:
l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	one if between the two genitals appears as the nature of a woman, or there are hair, and sometimes in court it urinates.</start_of_turn
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	And the other way if it is in a woman, and has on the navel as a penis and two nails.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies;	And the treatment of men and women is if you carry the offensive tumors away, and cure them as other wounds.</start_of_turn
en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	In the second method, of those who urinate from the skin of the genitals, if there is no cure.</start_of_turn>
de la tentigene	Hermofrodie is according to two ways: one if between the two testicles opens as with the nature of a woman, or if there is hair, and sometimes in between they urinate. And the other way if in women, and has on the navel as a boy and two testicles. And the cure for the womb and fame if it is that you copulate the testicles all, and cure as other wounds; in the second way, men whose urine jumps through the skin of the testicles, if there is no cure.
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir;	Tentigene est une chars ajostee sur la partie naturelle, tant qu’elle est trop lourde pour voir;
et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	Tentigene is a weight hanging from the natural part, as long as it is too heavy to see; and many women have had as much as an arm, and that is the cure.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement;	It is necessary to hold the surplus of the weight at your hand or on the nails, and to support it lightly;
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	do not go too close to the wound, for blood will come out, and that is worse than the disease itself; then the cure of other cures when it is healed
et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	and another weight that comes from the mouth of the marrow, and the spleen, and by chance a jump upwards, and it is like a cow's jaw, and for this reason it is called the old "coward disease".
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If you perceive that it has slipped, as we have said, hold the limb steady until it is healed.
de erratique	De erratique.
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis;	Erratic if it is when the nature of the woman is not clearly known, or the opening is too small.
et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est;	for it is natural by birth, or by accident from illness that it comes about;
ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit;	or it is caused by a tight band, or a soft swelling or spasm, and is done by pressure in the marrow, or the ribs, or the bowels, or otherwise
et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir;	and hinders conception, and birth, and by chance flowers to have;
et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	and the knowledge of this is by the sight of the belly.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	If swelling appears nearby, if you wish to test the two limbs or the root.</start_of_turn
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi:	if it is soft and close to two lives, if you hurry, and break it there:
met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes;	put your two thumbs together and the woman be on her back, spreading her legs wide open
puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens;	Then are the two levers formed, as long as the subtle syfac is round and the staple is overfull.
puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	Then take wax, and mix it with oil, and put it on the limb, and hold the woman at home close to each joint, so that it does not burst.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	And if the scapula is hard and thick, it is proper that you grasp it at the edge resembling a leaf of myrtle.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope;	If the staple is of bone, if you suspend it at the hip and grasp it;
et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef;	and have the medicines ready, such as chamomile, dragon’s blood, incense, and a lot of eggs together;
puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder;	Then mix in a large dose of lead plaster, so that the wound does not burst
et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec;	and let it be long, and mix in some dry linen cloth
puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then let other cures be done while he is still sane.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	And when there is blunt trauma to the limb, if you cover it according to this manner, it is not necessary to make incisions.</start_of_turn
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	For the blunt trauma in the limb, do not touch the bone.</start_of_turn
des emorroides	des emorroides.
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul;	Emorrhages are bursting of veins which, without treatment, are almost always fatal; and when old, become thick and clotted.
et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	And as we have mentioned in the preceding sections the signs and symptoms, I will now speak of those which signify a cure.</start_of_turn>
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	I say that in old emboli, when they are softened in the marrow, and cannot be felt, if they are not treated by fire.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	Those which are at the root of the marrow can be felt, and these can be cured.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses;	It is therefore necessary that you place the woman in a cold house, then keep the abscess closed with pins, and press on its roots, then sprinkle on restraining medicines like acaice and dragon’s blood and incense, and similar things.</start_of_turn
puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide;	Then bind her parts until an hour has passed, then immerse her in cold water.</start_of_turn
et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	If blood flows away, if the patient sits in a decoction of sumac and pomegranate peel, of barley and other things, then take barley flour, and mix with honey and oil, and apply it on his back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	And if it sticks, that is good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir;	If not, if he has wind in his belly and has swellings on his back and has vomiting;
puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	Then take linen and moisten it with the juice of plantain or with the juice of elderberry with vinegar, and make him vomit.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	And when the abscess is rested, if you can cure the limb of its swelling as long as it is healthy;
et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul;	and the one called “albathir” is red, and is like a rough beard, if you cover it as I have said previously.
et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then he must be treated until he is healed.
des apostemes de la marris	Emorroids are tears in veins which without support are not usually seen; and when old become tough. And we have said concerning the marks and signs, I will say here those which are useful for cure. I say that emorroids and tough veins, when they are pressed in the marrow, and they are not felt, if not except by the cure by iron. Those which are at the mouth of the marrow, we can feel, are those which we can cure. It is therefore necessary that you put the woman in a cold house, then extend the heel and press on its root, then sprinkle on medicines that restrain blood, such as acacia and dragon’s blood and incense, and similar things; then withdraw its pieces an hour later, and put it in cold water; and if there is blood, if she sits in a decoction of sumac and pomegranate seeds and barley and similar things, and then take barley flour, and mix with honey and assails, and make one application on her back. And if it stops, that is good. If not, if there is an opening at the back, and there are clots that look like wounds; then take lint, and soak it in the juice of plantain or in the juice of elderberry with wine vinegar, and make an opening at the root. And when the wound is healed, if it is cured of swelling as long as it is healthy; and that which is called “albathir” is red, and is similar to a rough beard, if it is covered as I have said the tough veins; and then it is cured as long as it is healthy.
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	Many kinds of abscess come into the marsh, such as carbuncles and perforated abscesses and herpes and swellings and fistulas and hemorrhoids and cautery abscesses, and other diseases that I have mentioned in the previous division.</start_of_turn
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe;	Therefore, I must say that I die in this treatment the abscess that comes up in the armpit, which is not just an abscess that collects pus;
et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	And if you see the work of iron, if you see that the abscess is already coming to an end at its beginning, full of heat and fever, and if it turns red when you see it.</start_of_turn>
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie;	Therefore do not hasten to pierce [the abscess], but make me wait until the pain is eased.</start_of_turn
et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe;	Then make the patient sit on a chair, and give him two small stools or he will lean forward, and support him on his back and join his limbs so that they are aligned with the limb;
et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien;	And let his thighs be spread wide, and place his arms under his knees, and bind them well with a strong thread.
puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme;	Then bend the knee towards his chest costing, and bring the instrument which we hold in our hand to cover the mouth of the mare, for after this comes the form
et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide;	And you must know that when you bring this instrument to cover the mouth of the mare, that you must first test the depth of the wound, so that what enters between the instrument and the wound does not go deeper than it should, and does not harm the patient
et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve;	And if the instrument is large, if you must cover the depth of the wound with cloths, so that the instrument does not cause pain
et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	And he must put the horn of the instrument at its base, and hold the instrument.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit;	When the abscess bursts open, and we make a hold of the hand below, if he covers the head with the thumb and index finger,
et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec;	When the wound is cleaned out, if he covers the wound with a bandage, you must put in it some soft lint or cotton soaked in rose oil or dry green oil.
et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites;	Put a little pressure on the wound at the bottom of the vein, and put a layer of lint over the vein and over the piece of cloth, and fill with water or mallow which has been boiled;
puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then keep it bandaged for two days following this, until it is healed;
et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites;	And never lift the bruise and wound with a clustery of water and honey, and then with water or radish and chamomile long shall be cooked.
puis reveigne a l’oignement.	Then return to the swelling.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	And if the wound is closed in the cavity, one must take care not to burn it, but cure it as we have said in the division.
de l’enfantement	De l’enfantement.
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar:	Master is first at play that he knows the figure of natural childbirth, and the signs are when you see the woman press down and desire to smell the navel:
adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir;	Then the child is born with force to be delivered
adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui;	Then the saches that the childbirth has according to the natural figure, and the head comes out first, and the second with it
et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost;	And when you see these signs, if you must press lightly on his belly, so that the child is thrust out;
car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification;	For when he falls on his head, if he is accompanied by a second person, and the marrow of his superfluities is broken by violent impact.
et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	and this which comes from elsewhere does not come naturally.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises;	For it never comes from its bones, but comes from force of bone or limb, hand or from the belly, or even from the throat, and is turned by chance from his collar and by other harmful postures.
si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	if he is aware of the dance that it should be discreet in these matters, and he avoids error and deception, and I will show you all the postures in which one must aid him
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent;	When the mistress comes upon his head by natural issue, and the mistress cries out and the hand is weak, if she sits on a chair, or the women hold her;
et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	And thus arose its nature of oil or fenugreek, or else between its two, the small cubical shape which is its form.
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers;	And split the secondine, and hold at its nail as long as the moisture which is in its core escapes outwards;
et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament;	And press the belly of the woman as long as the fetus descends, and if it does not descend, it is necessary to instill in the woman a purging of fenugreek with sesame oil
puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre:	then make her vomit and expectorate of phlegm, and keep her mouth and nose covered for an hour.
si istra maintenant l’enfes.	if now the fetus has descended.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc;	And if her two hands issue fiercely, if you can, make her lie down gently and softly.</start_of_turn>
et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut;	And if they cannot enter, if put the woman on her seat, and hold her feet high.
puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement;	Then loosen the seat on the ground, and hold the woman, so that she does not move at the loosening;
et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	and if her hands cannot enter, and her belly is dead, if she grasps the hands at the waist that are put before, and pulls out the child, and keep them even.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	From the issue of the child on his feet.
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut;	When the child comes on its feet, if you can push upwards;
et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz;	and then twist it back and forth, until it is even.
puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	Then take hold of the feet and extend them back and forth.</start_of_turn>
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi;	Can he jump up to his knees, if the order has commanded, and make him vomit from the congestion;
si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	If he can jump up to his knees, if God wills it.</start_of_turn>
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	If it is not forced, as we have said, if the limb hangs too far forward or backward, as long as it is in accordance with the natural figure.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For in such a case it is readily done.</start_of_turn>
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier;	And if he does not vomit, if as we have seen, say to take muscle powder of almonds, and oil of poppies, and beeswax, and grind everything together in mortar.</start_of_turn
et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz;	and put on the woman's nature inside and expel this swelling, then make her sit in hot water until the ribs are cold;
et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre;	and when she is wet through, make her wear a collar of myrrh, and put on her clothes, and leave her for an hour.</start_of_turn
puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	Then make her sit on a chair, then make her vomit and strain her mouth and nose, and take her pulse gently, for now the fever is coming down.</start_of_turn>
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	because of the discharge from the child on his genitals.
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc;	When the limb comes in this fashion, if he puts his hands together and together;
puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit;	then either he should lean his head down on his collar, and hang his head down, and leave him still;
et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval;	and fold his hands together and together, and then take his hands in his belly, and press his thumbs against the ribs, until they appear in the belly
et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains;	and if the limb does not jump, if he takes his hands and moves them, then move his hands up his belly, and then take your hands away;
et ewe l’enfant poc et poc;	and there you will see the limb straight and together.
et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	And instruct the woman to hold him still until the limb is set.</start_of_turn>
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	And from the issue of the child who comes out with a large hand during
I covient engignier a ramener la main:	I command thee to feign an engagement to restore the limb.
s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler;	If it cannot be restored, then raise the limb and alert me.
s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment;	If it still will not alert, then grasp it firmly in my hand and withdraw the foot from beneath it
puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit;	then restore the muscle I have mentioned before.
et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main;	and if it still does not yield, then seat it upon my lap and then attempt to restore the limb again.
et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	And leave it as nature intended, and make it expel naturally, and command her to remain still until it is cured
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	From the birth of the child on his shoulder, and he has spread out his hands, and his face turned towards his mother's back.
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement;	I command you that you grasp her hand tightly, then twist it back and forth, and then gently pull it out
et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc;	And when they are even, if put on the fleshy elevation and oil, as we have said, then command that it move freely and steadily.
et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne;	And when you have done this, if you place it on a seat, and command it to grasp;
et la fai esternuer.	it will discharge.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	From this same measure at all the second degree.
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie;	When force comes in this manner at the second, if the second grasps your finger, until the moisture is gone;
et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes;	and if it hangs on its face and on its neck, if you grasp the tumor, that it should not be retained, and the person will die
puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois:	then loosen the child, as you have placed it, and command the woman not to grasp it again
adonques si istra legierement.	Therefore if it is easily done.
de l’issue des gemelz	it must be reset immediately.
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent III ou IIII;	Therefore if it is easily done. Many times in childbirth do twins emerge, but never three or four at once;
et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	and this is not an unusual thing, and often happens.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom;	Two things are unusual and cause death, and that is when it is doubted or feared
je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude;	I know that when they are numerous, they are often torn away by the force of the lip which devours them, which is linked to the spleen
et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	and never naturally like all the others, as we have said
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait;	If it comes loose suddenly, as we have said, and the cure is as we have said, and be slight and gentle in what it does;
et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	And make haste as it were to health.
de plusors enfans	Moreover.
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient;	At times they are formed in the marrow of I or II or III or IV or V or VI or VII, or more, up to XV, and are all formed in the shape of a child by the measure of the thumb and index finger, and it must be supposed that the dance of faith will overcome all these things, for in this way similar things happen.
si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	If you do as it is commanded, it will be good.
de l’enfant mort	From childhood death.
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains;	When you cure the woman of the dead child or the pregnant one, as I said in the division, and there is no flight, and you are compelled by the work of your hands;…
si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort;	It must be supposed that the woman is of sound virtue, and has no accident or is not in danger of death;…
si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees;	If it is known that the woman is lying on her back, and her arms are bent at the elbow and her legs are lifted.
et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant;	and the minister should take hold of her two hands, or she should be bound to the bed if she is not treated with the descending of the child.
puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges;	then wipe her mouth with moist oil mixed with alum and rue and linseed seeds, and then anoint her hands with these oils and these substances
puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief;	then put her limbs in the bath lightly, then command her to move or she will hold the ointments that are convenient for this, and take care that the child does not appear to descend from her head
si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes;	if she feels the ointments in her armpits or neck or mouth or on her chest or on her beard or in her hair or near her ribs, and if she descends from her shoulder, she will feel or pluck and have pale cheeks
et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide;	And it is fitting that he grasps the ointment in his right hand, and puts the elbow between his two hands of the left, and holds it all his might, and pins the ointment to neither of these parts that we have said, until it comes to the empty thing.
et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	This line does not have an English translation as the provided text does not include the actual form of the ointment mentioned.
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz;	Then pinches another ointment, or if you have to take part of it out, so that the extraction is even;
et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	And then extend it evenly by moving from side to side, because it is to be held firmly in place, and that the ointment teeth hold, as it is in this form
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie;	And if any part of it remains, if one sees some of its two oils, and holds them in that part, and treats the other part
et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	If he does not move from that point, if you put on this ointment or higher up, make this for as long as it comes out entirely.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote;	If one hand comes before the other, and he cannot bring them back by stretching, then you must cover over the drapeil until they are both gone;
puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	Then put the thumb in the joint of the wrist or the elbow, and then you must do the same with the other hand, and hold both feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue;	If the child’s arm is thick and is twisted at the exit, or if there is swelling assembled, then you must put the bony prominence between your two thumbs, and make the swelling and draw out the pain.
ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui;	Or you will bind it to the instrument which is called “almidach,” from which the form comes with the instruments or bandage which is after this
et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment;	And thus make him lie down with a great natural inclination.
et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer;	And then hold the bones firm like a clamp, and if the dislocation leaps forward, it will strain at the forceps, if it be fractured, until the moisture that is or has issued forth;
et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues;	and if it cannot rest, if the limb breaks into pieces at the bone that you put in
et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	and if it is swollen in the belly or under the ribs, if you must pierce as much as the moisture comes out.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if it is swollen above its feet, if the attraction is slight, and the movement towards the mouth of the marrow is less arduous.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main;	And if it is bruised in the belly or the side, if you must extract it with a drape covering the hand;
et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre;	make the belly or the side until the moisture that is there comes out.
et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris;	And if another limb is affected by bone swelling, and the head of the dislocation remains fixed, if you see the limb flex from the armpit downwards, grasp it as far as the armpit;
puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer;	then grasp it with one or two fingers, and pull forcefully.
et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses;	if the armpit is retracted by a thick scab that has come away, if you are unable to pull it out, you must administer oily and fatty things.
et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	give poultices, and soak in hot water softened and moistening.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif;	If the swelling is on the chest, and you set it even, if you administer what we have said for a living child;
et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	and if it does not improve, if you pull it out piece by piece, and leave nothing of the second part behind.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris;	And when you have done this, if anything like what we have said above comes to pass in the marsh;
et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	And when you have done this, if anything like what we have said above comes to pass in the marsh; if blood comes out, even if it is restrained by the water, and if there are other cures.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut .i. autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman in whose womb two infants were conceived, and as soon as one was born, the other expelled it.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time, there came a swelling in her belly, and it burst open, and it began to swell greatly
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I called for help, and I thought for a long time, and I could not stop the bleeding.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I put on a strong dressing, and blood came out, and after a while another one.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I marvel at mouth, for this belly has no bone.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	I thought it was the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point;	I wish the wound, and in treating bones, as long as the woman is in a better state;
et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu;	and that she does not go limp from pain in the limb; for this is a great evil.
et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	and I have never known this chapter except for the fact that when the master finds a strange thing, he must give aid.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	to reset the dislocation to its place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres;	Then comes the form of pressure, as we have said in the books;
et a II tornans as II chiés des II liiens.	And at two returns as two heads of two limbs.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux;	However, the head of the limb should be more flexible than the restricting ligature, and be made of ivory or gut.
et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi;	and be of such length that it reaches from the root of the tooth to the middle of the gum line of the upper teeth; and be long enough to reach from the socket of the tooth to the middle of the gum line of the lower teeth
et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus;	and between the two limbs be two ligatures of the same length, which are to be placed in one and the other, from the middle of the length or a little more;
et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	and these two ligatures are held in the mouth of the patient when the two heads are twisted
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles;	Another form, which is more flexible and lighter, is made of ivory or gut, according to the shape of the nails;
et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large;	And there are two shoulders which are loosened, as you see, from a palm long, and two must be wide.
et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes;	And when you see opening the arm with all the instruments, if you make the woman sit with her head lying low, her arms hanging and her legs outstretched, then take the two shoulders and join them together in the arm, and hold the head of the instruments between her thighs.</start_of_turn>
puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	Then open your hand with all the instruments, if you have made them equally tense, as much as you see opening the mouth of the arm, until it makes what it wants.</start_of_turn>
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances;	These instruments are all moistened, and are multiplied by their appearance.</start_of_turn
et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	When you look at them appear, so much the more urgent is the work, and the higher as their quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	If one does not fear the instrument except when it appears, for its need is not easily dispensable
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis;	When the second [tooth] is retained in infancy, if you command the patient to retain his tongue, and then make her spit out on her own, and you hold her hands to her mouth and nose;
et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	And if she spits out for that, well is that.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire;	If not, I take a pot, and make a perforation or incision, and put herbs in it that can open the mouth of the mare, such as alum, rue, anise, chamomile, cassia, and century;
toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu;	All these herbs, or some of them, are cooked or boiled in water over the fire;
puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris;	Then put a caustic or burn the mouth of the pot, and the other head in the mouth of the mare, and hold them tight until the vapor comes from inside the mare.
puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	Then make them vomit, as we have said
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If the second joint downwards is affected.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine;	And if it remains after this treatment, and is not better, as the master orders, let her wipe her left hand with olive oil of sesam or with alum, and then put it back in its place, and give her the second dose
et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction;	And when she has found it, if she grasps and extends it towards the front and back, so that the mare does not cry out at the extraction
mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie;	but must move slightly towards the right and left, and then treat her
si venra et se desaerdra.	If it comes and will dry out.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes;	And if the mouth is filled with pus, it is known that we have said the cure of vomiting, and fumigation with herbs.
et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire;	and if it is not from all that we have said, if you do not find it there, keep that you do not use it for food;
mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon;	but it is necessary that what is in the mouth of the pus be bound to the belly of the woman, and then be cauterized with oil tetra-pharmacon
si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer;	if it comes back and will dry out, and will come again;
mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	however, when it comes again, if there comes a bad smell from the stomach and the head, and causes the patient pain.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu:	If it is thus that fumigations are to be applied in this case.
aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	None of the ancients have proven the efficacy of fumigation with rue and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The form of the instrument in which we fumigate the woman at the retention of flowers and the secondine if it be this:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu;	It is like a wasp, and put the head under the fire, and the large hairs over the fire;
et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	Or the fumigations on charcoal, and the smoke until it is consumed, and start another one.
de percier lou fondement	To pierce the foundation
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac:	Many children are born who do not have the sense of smell, and they have it stifled by a subtle spasm of the flesh
si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche;	When it comes to the dance that it perceives that spasm at its root, and does not perceive any acute spasm, and keep the tension that it does not touch it
puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then apply soft wool soaked in wine and oil, and then treat the wound until it is healed.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	If you doubt that it will not stay in place, if you put or withdraw a sponge of lead, and leave your hands free, and be patient as long as the child sees the wound alert in bed.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme;	And never comes this stamp of sweat from the wound or the abscess;
si covient coper celui soudement:	if you cover that sweat:
si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	if it is healed, as we have said of the amount of pus
de la fistule dou fondement	of fistula from its foundation
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors;	The fistulas that come from under the foundation are nodulations, and those that come from the root of the foundation are swollen, or in the space of two parts, if there is one fistula or several
et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans;	and when that nodulation is old, if it is renewed, and incites moisture, white or thick pus, and never are these fistulas harmless;
et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	And are known by those who make egestion, or by vomiting or diarrhea when the patient makes egestion, and by sudden leaps or bounds.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge;	And if there are fistulas that reach the bladder, and reach half of the thigh;
et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	Reaching as far as the hip joint and even to the knee bone.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant:	And thus one knows the fistula that persists at the base and does not break through:
et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	And that you swallow your thumb or base, and see a thin needle of spider or iron in the fistula when there is no swelling
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit;	And if there is swelling, if you see a attempt of a thin swelling or a horsehair, as long as you feel the attempt or the hair at your thumb;
et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit:	If you do not understand, and there is no pain, no vomiting, no diarrhea, nor wind, as we have said.
saiches qu’elle ne perce mie;	if the urine does not flow freely;
si te haste dou curer.	then you must take action quickly.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula persists until the bladder or the urine duct, if in a leap the urine escapes, and cannot be retained by medicines.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu;	if it has gone as far as the hip joint, if the vein is about to burst open;
s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement;	if there is no swelling and no pain, if it has simply slipped out of place, then there is no need for medicine or treatment by fomentation
et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	and in these fistula-like conditions there is no effective cure except for work and the disdain of baseless hopes that intervene
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos;	in the case where it is neither acute nor chronic, there is hope of recovery through the application of iron, as I have shown, and the patient lies between your hands on his back;
et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre;	And he holds his legs up to his buttocks, and inclines his buttocks towards his belly.
puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	Then he attempts to stretch, or to lean forward if there is discomfort, until he feels relief or the attempt itself brings relief.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet;	If the patient feels pain in the root, if you must bite your thumb index, if he feels it again, then you must know that he has perceived it
et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans;	Or that it is discovered or that you feel between your thumb and the index finger the pulse or the nerve, then stretch that it is persistent
si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	If it does not slip away immediately, you will not be able to heal it
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc;	Every time we can well heal without them, but this is not the case here
et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit;	And the aid with which it is done, if it is done carelessly, the fire cautery must be scaled according to the size of the fistula, as it is said beforehand.
et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement;	And the surrounding area of the fistula must be scaled all around until it comes down to the base;
et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil;	Do it once or twice, until you see that these hairs have been burnt, which are like the bristles of a brush
et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	And then it must be treated with soft sponges, until the hair has come out, and then it must be treated with oil that covers the hair and joins.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If he is still sane, that is good.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez;	If not, it will not be healed otherwise.
et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur;	And if it is attempted between and does not reach the root which is or should be at the base, and between your thumb and the attempt there must be a thick covering of hair or silk, and you will see the fistula at that which covers the wound
si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente;	If the head of the fistula approaches the attempt, and remains ahead before the burn, and after the burn is applied as long as it comes up to the head of the attempt.
et sera delivré li tente, et cherra;	and the attempt will be delivered, and will recover
puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	then take away those burns that seem like a bristle of oil, and nothing will remain of them.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if he will not go without force, and if you are between him and the work, if you cauterize with fire or medicine that is strong.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses:	For fire cautery consists of two bones connected.
c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor;	namely, the burning of these hairs surrounding it, and the evacuation of blood and the drying out of moisture.
puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe;	then the treatment of soft boils buried under the skin or broken in pieces, until they leak pus, and is sufficient to burn the hair in the leak
puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	Then treat the wound of the wounds sweating profusely with dry charcoal, and these are the dry medicines.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it is restored, if it is well and does not return.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	When it is restored, if it is well and does not return, and if a fistula comes up to the root of the bone, and is loosened from the flesh, if the thumb or the root is moved, inquire about that.</start_of_turn>
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres:	If you feel the attempt, and between two is the cloth or the sponge or charcoal, or it is near to pierce, if there is no greater hope but the way of escape and of trust, by the administration of one of the three methods:
ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier;	or you cauterize as we have said, or you bind it tightly until it is healed, or if you wish, you put it to the fire if there are attempts and cure it as before.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit;	And do not go too deep, that you do not cover the dwelling that holds the foundation, and bring out the egestion in the natural way.</start_of_turn>
puis le cure, si com nos avons dit;	Then treat it as we have said.</start_of_turn>
par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé;	By chance, if you are healthy, or you loosen that covering and the mucus then that it is cut from its roots, or by force or by some pointed instrument.
puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues;	then remove that fleshy thing which is in the wound, as you wish;
puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement:	then study to restore the wound and to stop the fistula in the lower part of the root
si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	if there is something more serious with the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere:	And never are there fistulas according to this method.
et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	and when you touch the attempt in the fistula, and it is either at the root or costs the underside of the skin, if you take a pointed attempt at the head according to this form:
Et i boute .i. fil tort en .ij., et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And there is always a thread torn in two, and you must pull the attempt all the way through the fistula until it is at the head.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement;	If it is a man in the margin of the bone at the root, then draw out the thread of that which is pierced, so that you swallow your bone or root.
et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II;	Draw out the head of the thread and reunite the two bones together, and strain one against the other, and leave it hanging one or two inches.</start_of_turn>
et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent;	And do not restrain it until these hairs which are between two bones, and which cause pain, disappear.</start_of_turn
puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	Then cure the wound until it is healed and healthy.</start_of_turn>
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not perforate, if you force it to pierce in every way you can, it will not be too much.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it is not right to force it too tightly with the stitches, and then cure it as we have said, while it is still healthy.</start_of_turn>
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans;	The shape of the spiny spine from which the fistula is made if it is moist and soft from a part and trenchant.</start_of_turn
et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	And on the other hand not, for this we must not do, as you see here:</start_of_turn
des emorroydes	Des emorroydes.
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres:	Wounds are of two kinds:
ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement;	Or else they are within the foundation, like grains of resin; and there are small and large ones, and in direct proportion with the blood, and there is one or more of them, and they push out the foundation and head of the foundation.
mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors;	But those which are pushed out have much moisture, and are clotted with blood or a yellow citron or blood, and have the color of urine.
et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz;	And the cure for those which are within the foundation is that you command the patient to cough forcefully so that the foundation comes out, and they will appear like threads
si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines;	if you are in a hurry, and you have nails or hold it with your finger, then you must break it at its roots
et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot;	If the joint uncouples does not hold by its moisture, if you take hold of it with a drapeil or a bandage, or with a piece of chammel;
et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere;	If you pull it out again, then hold it firmly, and sprinkle over it warm powder instead of cautery.
ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	or you burn it if it is said or by the physician of cautery, because the other cures are as effective when they are sound;
et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement;	and if the foundation cannot bear, if you bite the patient with a biting and rough plaster to uncover what is or is under the foundation, so that it can recover openly
cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere;	cannot the patient endure it, and if the thread is strong of the foundation, if it is a light cure
et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	And let him grasp them at your finger or has pliers, and hold them close, then cure them as we have said, until they are healed, and that he fear not the incision by fire.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere:	If you must bring the suture back to this method:
pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large;	Take a thread and pass it through a needle, and then pass the thread under and pierce the needle from the other side, and twist two threads of the thread from the needle, and if it is thick;
et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc;	And strain the thread taut, then knot the thread, and pull out the needle, and make sure that all the others are in place, and leave one to correct the excess of blood
puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose;	Then put upon the foundation a soft drape of oil rose or beeswax, and put upon the foundation, and command the patient to rest.
et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then leave them until they ache, and when they ache, if the treatment for swelling and other treatments, as long as they are well.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	when the fire is finished or the foundation is firm</start_of_turn>
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	There are often dry fevers in the intestines, and by constriction of nature, and when the disease is old and medicine is not worth.</start_of_turn
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir;	If you suspect that you have reached the point of a spasm or a nail at the edge of the nail, which does not allow it to dry;
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient;	then treat it until it is healed if necessary.</start_of_turn>
et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez;	and if it does not heal, if you repeat the scraping more vigorously than before, until it bleeds, and be scraped away.</start_of_turn
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat it until it is well.</start_of_turn><end>
dou fremit	indeed.
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont;	Formice is a small outgrowth that appears in front of the bone, and will bleed freely.</start_of_turn
et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	And never does the true warmth touch him, and he feels as if dead from fear, and comes throughout the body, and more hands than in any other place.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor;	If the pain is great, take a goose quill or a strong vulture quill, and put that quill on the fear, as long as the circle turns the fear all around;
puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	Then twist your hand all around the quill as long as you can encompass the fear all around, and put it under the root, and pull out the fear from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see that it is done with a needle or iron in this fashion, and be discreet of your steps and cautious of your hands.
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser.	Do not be afraid, for holding at the side and pressing will suffice
Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	And if you see, if you cauterize the fear, if it is in front or chief of the cautery.
de la forme dou clistere	And if you see that it is done with a needle or iron in this fashion, and be discreet of your steps and cautious of your hands, do not pierce, for it must be held firm, and must be pressed. And if you see that you have cauterized too far forward or behind the cautery, stop immediately.
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet;	Never make a blister of silver or gold, or of melted lead or millet.
et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	and never make a blister of these small and large things, according to the things which accompany them.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Those who are feeble and painful in the treatment of children are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	Their form is small and great if it is due to a wide belly, or the belly is bound according to this manner:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez;	if there is a discharge or the belly is tied, if you see it, and if you pull it out or pierce it;
et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I;	and if there is a hole in the rib or in the side; and in the one there are two holes, and in the other one there is one hole.
et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre;	and if the belly or the owner puts medicines in a bladder of gut or parchment, or if you pierce all around the holes, and between each hole put one must of space, and then put in these holes one strong thread of strong thread twisted in the shape of the cross or in the shape of an anchor, and reassemble the belly as if it were a needle
et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize;	And when the medicine is dense, if the thread has been placed in front of a strong wire, then clench.
et c’est li forme dou cercle:	It is like the shape of a circle
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement;	And let the medicine neither too hot nor too cold, and join the head of the clamp with oil or balm of egg, or something similar, and tighten it lightly
puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet;	Then grasp the minister with both hands together, until it is well seen, then withdraw the clamp, and leave the patient’s legs in place, and if the medicine breaks through, if it can be helped;
et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	And if it sleeps all night long, if it is more useful.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	If he sees it in the disease of falling of the belly, and the physician hastens to go out, if he recommences as long as he is well.</start_of_turn>
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant;	And if swelling appears on the surface or foundation, or abscess, if the clamp is as subtle as for a child;
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	And thus is the form of a subtle blister on which the skin is strained:
des plaies	wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies;	We have already said in the previous section the treatment of wounds.
or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	or you may say the treatments of hands and surgery, according to their accomplishment
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse depending on the way they are made, and depending on the parts of the body from which they are made, and how they are made
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses;	The things which are done for wounds are made with the bite of a stone, and the size of a nail or a staple, or of an arrow or a tube or a saw, or similar things;
ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres;	or they are made according to the conditions of the flesh, as for example a wound that bites on the chin, or on the head, or the arm, or the belly, or the liver, or similar parts
et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	And I shall tell you the treatment of a chest wound, and I shall begin with simple head wounds, for the memory will come back to you in this chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut:	I say that when a simple wound comes or an abscess bursts, and the bone is not broken, if you take care that it is not from a stone wound or similar things, and the skin is entirely ruptured and the wound is large, and you doubt the depth of the wound, do not hesitate to cauterize.
si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree;	if you do so too soon after the wound, and there is still blood coming from the wound, or if the blood is flowing in the opposite direction to the part that is affected;
et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	and listen to the patient's swelling from wine and meat.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char;	and if he does not recover, if he is vomiting his food, and does not drink wine, does not eat meat;
et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice;	and take out the wound, if there is pus coming from it, cover it with soft cotton soaked in rose oil only, or in styptic wine.
et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés;	If there is no clot at the wound’s base, if you put a bandage on the wound when it is fresh with all its blood, and it is not moved by air, dust, etc., I will tell you about it later.
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If blood has moved, put on some ointment until it has healed.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large like the size of a nail and similar, and the layers do not want to stick together by tension, if you join them together with stitches, as I will say for wounds on the belly, from the stitches.</start_of_turn>
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope;	If the wound is exposed to bone, and pus, and only holds at a point, if it is grasped,
puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	then cure the wound with medicine, and restore hair that has fallen out in place of skin, and instruct the patient to eat fatty foods, such as testicles and bread, as well as poultry, and similar things.</start_of_turn>
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure;	And if you find hair or decay on the bone, if it grasps the bone firmly, extract it forcefully, then cure it.</start_of_turn>
et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil;	If there is an artery in the wound or vein, which without support, and it cannot be held by medicines, if the artery is displaced, if you find it dislocated, tie it with a thread.
et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	If that does not help, if you must cauterize.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere:	And if these wounds are small and simple, suffice with a mild treatment:
et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And put on this powder that will harden as soon as it comes into contact with blood
Et li maniere de la poudre si est:	The way of using the powder is as follows
pren encens une partie;	Take an incense and mix it with a part of the powder
sanc de dragon II parties;	With two parts of dragon's blood
chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc;	chalk three parts, and the powder finely, and apply to the wound, and hold firmly until it has healed well and reunited with all its blood;
et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle;	And then bind it well, and leave it loose, if it does not swell.
car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	for one does not keep the medicine until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And never do we make this charcoal burn only, when we have no incense or blood of a dragon, but only when the wound has not moved.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre;	And if it has moved the wound, even in this state, if one does not put on this powder immediately.
mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe;	but put on some astringents or poultices made of barley flour soaked in water and honey, until it stops bleeding
puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat it with other cures until it is healed.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz;	and if a bone breaks with the wound, and it is small, if you have grasped the wound carefully
et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	I will tell you later about the breaks of the head
de la plaie dou col	of the wound of the head.</start_of_turn>
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	The wound comes with the head and it is simple, if there is no difference between it and that of the head, but if the neck or the artery is cut.</start_of_turn
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire;	If that is the nerve, if there is nothing else to be done, let the cure alone, and do not put anything restrictive, for it does no good and makes the nerve shrink.
et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres;	And do not put anything rough on the wound, for the substance of the nerve is cold, and its continuation is with the brain, which is the most sensitive part of the limb
mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	But if the medicine is soft, like warm water with sweet oil, and mixed with rosemary oil, and vinegar washed in sweet water, and other stones of the earth, and moist compresses.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the wound is large, if the bone and the surrounding tissue are bent, then cure it until it is healed.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu;	And if the wounds are deep and closed and full of pus, if the opening or more downwards lies;
et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est;	If the artery is cut, and blood flows out, if swelling, and pus, and cautery must be mixed together is
et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel;	And if the bristles of the beard are cut, or the hair of the head, and the cord is held, by which the meat goes, if the hair on the edge of the beard is cut, do not touch the beard but return it to its natural shape.
et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then the pain will subside, and leave them for some days, and cure them with liberal applications until they are healed;
et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier;	If the wound has made an indentation in the bone, if the marrow;
et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue;	and if there are pieces of bone, if the marrow is split, you must leave as much as possible of the wound open, and keep it clean and aligned
et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	And if the wound is fresh, if powder is sprinkled on the wound as I have said
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there is bone in the wound and there is fistula, if the cure be as I have said in this chapter.</start_of_turn
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	of from a wound of lance or knife</start_of_turn
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne:	If it is from a lance or a knife, and the wound is deep, if you see that the wound is spitting blood rapidly, the patient cannot remain still.
saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz;	Then the wound is deadly;
et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide;	if it is not deep and is fresh throughout its extent, if you do not immediately put powder on it, do not bind it up with the blood until it has clotted, and renew the application of the powder, and comfort the patient
mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor;	but if there is an attractive dressing, and you tie it twice tightly;
et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors;	if there is no dressing, put in the wound a great deal of cotton to absorb the moisture, and make the patient rest on the wound for three days, or four, or more
si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne;	If there is no spasm, do not tremble male of body, nor stretching of limbs;
et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	And when you see the bones set, if the wound is saved.</start_of_turn>
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Cure the wounds of sutures and others, as long as they are healed;
et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule;	and if it cannot heal, and there is an opening, then leave the wound open that there is fistula.</start_of_turn
si la cure si com on doit.	If the cure is as it should be.</start_of_turn>
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant;	And if the wound is an incision of sword or knife, and it is simple, or more so on the front or back, if the cure of what is in front.</start_of_turn
s’elle est grans, de cousture;	is great, of stitching.</start_of_turn
et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez;	And if it is small, like dust, and is lodged in the bone, and breaks into pieces, if the wound is deep, and the surrounding tissues are severed if they are loosened.
et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions;	and if they are not loosened, if it leaves the wound open, if it aligns the extractions.
et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	and for other wounds, as for other members, the judge will determine as we have said
dou derrompement dou ventre	as other limbs are the judge of such things as we have said.
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis;	The breaking of the belly is great and mean and small.
de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus;	There is no greater wound than a wound of the intestine, or no less dangerous than the intestines themselves, because of the introduction of worms.
et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut;	And the suture is more painful, and no wound is better than a great one, because in this case we must return the intestines many times to close them;
por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II.	Forasmuch the intestines swell greatly that they feel the fruit, if they return to the point, it is worth little to make an incision; for in that case one should retain the intestines in their place rather than make another incision.
Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres:	And the wounds of the intestine that are in the belly are in three ways:
les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies;	The two common incisions are in the belly and the incision of other wounds from bone to bone and two other incisions are common with other wounds;
et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	and all of them are more pure with the incision of the belly, and I will say one thing and leave it at that.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres:	I say that when the wound is small and there is nothing wrong with the intestines, and there is something to be done, this is by one of the two methods
ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	Or for the slightness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestines are swollen by the fruit.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere:	And when it is cold, swallow the cold in part slowly:
moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	wet a sponge or I make a towel wet in cold water only, or thou wilt burn with cold water stinging and pricking and spiking, and raise the intestines until the swelling is bony
et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	and never do thou make this wine restraining, and it is mute that thou art sure to cure by swelling
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose;	and when thou seest the swelling depart, if moisten the intestine with water or elevate and twist and soften be cooked, for by this is aligned the entrance to everything.
et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes;	If it cannot enter, if one makes a hole in the wound with the instrument, we grasp the blood clots.
et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait;	The first treatment is to make the wound small, for we must not cut excessively without necessity; it should not be large.</start_of_turn>
et c’est li estrumens por le fendre:	This is the instrument for cutting.</start_of_turn
si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	If the cut is too deep in the curve and does not yield, and when this happens, take the form of this.</start_of_turn
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	And when the wound is swollen and the intestines protrude, if you stop bleeding in accordance with the natural form in its own place, you will have done well, for this is worth doing.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief;	When the wound is large and is in the lower part of the belly, if you must manage the patient lying on their back, and raise their legs above their head.</start_of_turn
et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre;	And if it is in the lower part of the belly, put the head and the heel higher than the lower parts, and in the same way if the swelling of the belly is in one of the two lower parts, put your hand under what is above so that the upper part is higher than the lower part.</start_of_turn
et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	And so it is necessary to administer what I have said in large and moist wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres;	And small wounds do this that you have noticed, then take hold of your hands I administer pity which holds all the way around with its hand, and gather the layers together.
et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort;	This is the common method of stitching, and take a needle or more, according to the quantity of the wound's size, then leave a little space at the edge of the wound, and pierce a needle or there put a strong thread.
et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble;	And pierce the two holes in the leather with the two holes in the sponge, which is to soak the leather through, until you make it pierce from that part, and gather the two heads of the sponge together the three together
puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille;	Then the strain of a double thread around the needle of two parts, then unite the two ends of the wound immediately, and then leave one space of an inch, and insert another needle.
puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte;	Then tie the knot of the thread as you did with the first needle, and do not cease until you have made as many knots as you have seen fit for the needles, until the whole wound is secured.</start_of_turn>
et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer:	And let the needles be neither too thick nor too thin, for the thick needles will hold all the hair, and the thin needles will not penetrate well.</start_of_turn
por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes;	Therefore it is recommended that they be of moderate size.</start_of_turn>
et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure;	And do not press the needles too far into the hair and skin, for they will hold and tear the wound before the suture is complete.</start_of_turn
et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee;	And then grasp the head of the nails, so that they do not bleed the patient at night; and put a bandage or cloth over the head of the nails to hold them, and leave them until the wound has healed.
et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II.	And this method of stitching with nails is more convenient for small wounds, because there is a nail or two under the skin.
Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien;	The second stitching is common, and it is that you join the two nails of leather and the two nails of silk together with a nail or there is one thick middle thread;
et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras;	And when you have pierced these three nails together, if you leave the nail at the start, in the manner in which you began to sew, it will hold the edges together
et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi;	And put space between each stitch the thickness of a candle stub
ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	These wounds are seen in the home, and I sewed a wound which had a horn or belly, which was injured by a knife, and the wound was more than a palm of great size, and there were intestines well two palms of great size, and the wound was in the middle of the belly.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	I will restore the gut when it has been outside for twenty-four hours, and it was closed for fifteen days, and I treated it, and it healed.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle;	And the blood flowed so abundantly that it seemed he would die, and this was a miracle;
et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines;	and I did not care for the ointment, because I was in a place where there was none, neither medicine;
et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	and put more oil on the wound two times a day, and poured honey on it until it healed
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture:	Or you will tell me two ways of sewing:
pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens;	Take the needle and pass it through from the back of the part until it reaches the center;
quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer;	When it has pierced the thumb on the right side, if the head of the thumb is swollen or bruised or if the needle has gone in too deep, withdraw the needle from the other side of the part until it reaches the base of the thumb.
et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	And you must understand this suture as if you were making leather, and that you leave a space once the swelling has gone down, and you take it up again from the other side until the suture is complete
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere:	The second way of stitching is as Galiens does it properly, which is to join the two parts naturally together, and to press one head of the swelling against the other head, in a similar manner
fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac;	Burn an awl or thorn near the edge of the wound, and make the wound pierce only slightly, and leave the hair in place.
puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac;	Then withdraw the needle, and make it pierce from the back outwards until it reaches the center, leaving the hair in place
puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit;	And make the wound pierce on both sides until it reaches the center, at two other awls that are on the other side
et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	This is the usual method of suturing and the most common.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune;	If anyone doubts this word, and no one testifies, we must suture the belly with two needles, or there is a thread in the gut
et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies;	and must push one needle from one side and the other from the other, in the manner of those who suture wounds
et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	And the stitches that when the rotation is inward of the belly, if the stitching is greater than others on the belly.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies:	The judge of the wound is like the judge of other wounds:
et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout;	and when you find the wound fresh with all its blood, even though it has moved, if you stop the bleeding and the swelling.
puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe;	then put on absorbent powder around the wound, and if it has moved, do not put on any dressing that is present until the wound has healed;
et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach;	and close the wound, and keep the dressing firm, and the bandage tight
puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then treat the wound like the others until it is healed.
et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	If you have no medicine, put on a cloth, until it starts to bleed profusely, cotton wool, and move the limb twice as much as necessary until it is healed.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples;	For in many situations where wounds are simple, you need no other medicine.
et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles;	If you doubt that the wound will not heal, moisten the principal limb with warm oil of poppies or rosemary oil, and put on compresses; soak the wound and remove the discharge.</start_of_turn>
et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine;	If there is pain or putrefaction in the bowels, and it happens often, if you mix vinegar and black wine together, and do the same if the putrefaction reaches the intestines.</start_of_turn
et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	The spleen and the large intestines are easier to heal than the small intestines.</start_of_turn
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	The intestines which are called "jeuns" cannot heal when they are swollen, because of the swelling of the veins, and the subtlety of the whole body, and the proximity of their nature to nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres;	And if the thread breaks from the wound, if it is returned backwards as with the intestines, while it is fresh;
et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres;	And if it is black and has become towards or black, if you must know that you must bind the black part, for there are veins and arteries there.</start_of_turn>
puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	Then bind that which is between the shoulder and put the two heads pendulous from the part below the wound until the thread comes out to align the extraction when the thread breaks, and the wound will heal.</start_of_turn
de la routure dou boueil	because of the wound
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance;	When the intestine is round and the wound is small, if you can restore it in small pieces, because I have seen that one bone has been fractured or belly of a spear;
et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez;	And it was the wound on the right side of the stomach, and it became filled and turned into a fistula, and in this there was vomiting and flatulence.
je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	I put it to cure as much as I could, and did not cease to undermine until it was healed, and the pus was drained.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre;	And when I saw it healed, I doubted whether the patient did not have pain in his belly;
et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans;	and there was no longer any pain, but he remained in better condition, eating and drinking;
et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere:	And they say that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it must be ligated carefully:
pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus;	taking forceps with great strength, and gather the edges of the wound, and when the forceps have grasped the opening, if you put two fingers on the lip, so that it bites its lip above
et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise;	Then he grasps the head, and if it will not slip, put another support afterwards in that manner as before, until the wound is completely healed.
et cout la plaie.	He closes the wound.</start_of_turn>
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere:	If the head of the intestine is perforated and there is no further discomfort for the patient, and it can be tied up with a fine thread which is cut from the intestine itself, in part as before.</start_of_turn
pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure;	Take the head of this gut thread that is coming out, and then tie to the head of this thread a thread of linen twisted, then pass the thread through the needle, and stitch the gut, and hold it in place.</start_of_turn
et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance;	And this method of stitching is not fierce but according to the way of the vein and the hope.</start_of_turn
et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	And if the wound is great and wide, even if it is in one of the greater intestines, if there is no swelling or contamination, it is only because of its delicacy.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	or that it is a fistula, or that it is simply
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	Wounds and abscesses, when they swell, if they are called universally "fistula", and even when they are closed and swollen.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil;	The fistula is, in truth, a necessary hardening and whitening of the nodes, or there is no pain, and it is as limp as a goose feather.
et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse;	never in clear water, and sometimes thick;
aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez;	never once, and sometimes rather;
et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes:	and I have spoken of this in the division of wounds, that every wound that is not sanitized, and there is pus, must be caused by one of the seven causes:
c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors;	namely, by the smallness of the blood or by pus;
ou por sa malice;	or for its malice;
ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char;	or because there is much hardness within, and on the lips, that they do not allow new hair to grow.
ou il i a trop de bowe;	or there is too much tension;
ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit;	or the limb is twisted, and the matter is of bad quality
ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure;	or the medicine is not good for the treatment
ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence;	or because corruption is like a pestilence
ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature;	or because the property in the area is late digestion and late recovery, and escapes by nature
ou il i a voinnes ou os:	or there are veins or bones:
et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	and I have already mentioned these causes, signs, and treatments in the division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	Or you must know that I shall tell you of the cure for fistula, which is made by an operation of the hands.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors;	The wounds that fistula arise in all members are painful.
car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez;	for there are fistulas that arise from great veins, and arteries, and nerves, or at the surface of the skin, or in the intestines, or the bladder, or in the ribs, or the scapula, or in any joint of the hands or feet.
et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	and if a part comes from the root of the limb and some remain.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance;	And all these fistulas of this kind are of grievous healing, and there is nothing but toil and ignorance.
et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier;	and if there is no fistula that does not go beyond that I have said, and you have undertaken treatment, and you see it diminishing, if it is right, if the pain ceases;
et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit;	And if a fistula occurs, as when a worm attempts to plunge into it, for the worm will bend inwards towards the curvature;
et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie;	And if the fistula has holes, and you do not manage it well with your attempts, if the worm bites through one of the holes, for moisture is short from one hole to another, and it fills the cavity.
puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent;	Then when its reason becomes evident to you, that there is bone or nerve involved, and the limb is bowed inward, and ask the patient well about the pain he feels when you press your hand, and the place or where he feels it
et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens;	When you truly know the place where it is, and if it is far from a joint, or a nerve, or an artery or a vein, or other bones that I have mentioned, if the limb is placed as I have said, and the bones are firm and the corrupted flesh is removed from it.
et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons;	And then the treatment must be complete when it is healed, and if the fistula is well formed from the right side, if you must break it, just do so; then put in ten soft compresses in medicine, and keep them until the medicine consumes the excess that is remaining at the bottom.
et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And then put in greasy ointments that are healing and safe until they are healed;
et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	And if it is not healed by this, if the burn it as we have said, and if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, if you must break it.</start_of_turn>
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit;	If the vein or nerve does not cause you grief or principal limbs, as we have said.</start_of_turn
et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez;	And if the bone is discovered, and there is corruption and blackness, if the wound is such that the corruption is all bony, then treat with greasy ointments that are healing until it is healed.</start_of_turn
et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font:	If he is not cured, and his bow is bowed as before, his limbs that you do not wish to leave until they are healed must remain fixed until they make.
si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu;	if he groans and wishes as long as you are at the bottom, and breaks all the corruption, then restore the limb.</start_of_turn>
et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	and if he is already cured, that is good.</start_of_turn>
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir;	If not, fix his limbs until the corruption is completely gone, for you will not be able to do anything further.</start_of_turn
si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature;	if there is no other remedy except to leave it to its natural course.</start_of_turn
et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un;	if there is a slight fracture and you want to treat it with tension, if you extract with an instrument that is appropriate for this, and if there is a major fracture, if you touch it too much, do not leave it untouched.</start_of_turn
et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	And if moisture opposes you, and there is no error or fear, then grasp tightly with hand and moisture and chalk, and deliver the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os;	And if you do not hold them off at once, if you put over the wound something that causes putrefaction, and leave as long as the lice are soft against the bones, then there will be less suffering of the bones in the end.
et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie;	And if it is a great bone, such as an arm or thigh, if you remove the corruption as long as the marrow is completely bony, then restore the wound.
et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os;	And if there is a great part of the corruption, and it comes up to the bone’s marrow;
si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez;	then grasp firmly and cover all up to the corruption, and then treat as long as it is soldered
et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	And I will tell you of a fistula that occurred in my own leg, so that you may take example and aid in your work.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir;	And I tell you of a young man who was about thirty years of age, who had pain in his leg caused by something within his body, until the matter came out through a large abscess; and there was no other cause known to open it
mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors;	but he became mad with fever and sweat as much as the abscesses opened, and corrupted much matter, and became a fistula, and there came out much pus that all these things caused great suffering and moisture in the body
et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors;	and he remained sick for two years, and there was no known art to heal him, until I saw him again, and I saw his leg and the medicines that were given to him, and what cured him was the pus that came out through the abscesses.
et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	And became red the skin of the young man, and had the color of citrine.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	I bound a thread in one of these holes, and then encircled all the holes, and found that one followed the other throughout the limb.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens;	And I grasped it then, and struck in one of the holes until I discovered a part of the bone, and found it corrupted and putrefied, and it emitted corruption until the corruption reached the innermost bone.
je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai;	I saw that which appeared to me of corrupted bone, and I cared that there was no other corruption, except for that which I had seen;
et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder;	and I began to restore the wound with soothing medicines for a long time, but I could not close it
et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu;	and then I recommenced, and discovered the bone as before, and found the corruption continuing in the bone, and I treated it, and then I held it, and I doubted about closing the wound
mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines;	But I can do no more than I can grasp hold of the edge of a bone, and I will force it out completely, and then I will restore it with medicines.
et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	And he was healed and strengthened instantly, and did not want to renew the work for fear of the patient's weakness, who could not bear it, and for the fear of death which I avoided for him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	For often there is the evacuation of blood, but he remained entirely well; and in place of the bone there grew a hard scale, and it was of good fortune and caused no hindrance or any adversity in any way, neither to the spirit nor to the body.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere:	And if the bone is broken in no limb of the body, if you can bandage it in this manner:
pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut;	take hold of it, and strain it at the head of the bone that is open, and command that no one stretch it upwards;
et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char;	and put another layer of linen more thick than the first layer, and bind it over the part that is torn from the bone, and stretch the head, so that if you force out the corrupted flesh from below, you uncover the flesh above the limb where you are bandaging, so that the flesh does not bleed the flesh
et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue;	And put I a sponge or a bowl of salt on the bone to cover the corrupted flesh.
et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	And must cover so thoroughly as we can see and feel the corruption, and cover it once more.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute;	And if the bone is corrupted and does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part, if you uncover the flesh entirely;
puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit;	then put I a sponge or a bowl of salt, and then cover from one part to the other the corruption, and be it from the edge of the corruption as far as I have said
et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part;	and if the corruption is in the joint, if you join the corrupted joint, and cover the bone or what it contains on the other side;
et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper;	and if the corruption is in the continuation of the two joints, if there is no other vein except to cover it.
et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert;	If the limb is corrupted or swollen at the wrist or elbow, if the swelling is great, indeed inquire concerning that corruption, how it has appeared.
et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire;	And move it in every way that you wish, but that the vein or nerve does not hinder you
et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce;	When the incisions are made and the tissues are closed over the bones, there are many things to consider, concerning the position of the bones and the appearance of swelling, and their thickness and thinness, and their greatness and smallness, and their hardness
et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument;	Therefore it is necessary to consider the appearance of any imperfection in this work.
et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies;	And the work will show you the instrument that you must have, according to the knowledge of this art, and the testimony of the manners of diseases
si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	If you think the instrument which you have grasped is sufficient, then hold it according to that which is commanded.
dou feu	If you think of the instrument which you must employ in this case, according to what it is able to do.
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer;	The head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, or by pressure, or by force
et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre;	and when you have treated the inflammation with medicine, it does not help; if you cover that limb until the inflammation subsides, or if the inflammation returns, for the patient escapes by this means or by the greater malice of the defect of the limb
et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors;	and the sign is that the limb becomes black, as if burnt by fire, and afterwards the blackness, for that inflammation of the limb spreads throughout the limb and takes hold of all the bones;
si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	if you are in a hurry to cover it, and if it is from the bite of venomous creatures such as scorpions of the sea and vipers, and similar things, if the inflammation is at the root of the bone, if you touch it, and does not give you space to move your hand
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras;	And if it comes up to the hand, if the nail is at the joint, so that the cuticle does not reach the elbow;
et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute;	and if it comes up to the forearm, if the nail is at the wrist, so that the cuticle does not reach the forearm.
et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut;	and if it passes the wrist, that is death, and there is no remedy but the quantity of its virtue.
et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet:	and all that you can do when the cuticle comes or is bent.
s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe;	if it comes to the first joint, if the nail follows the other joint;
et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet;	and if it comes to the bone, if the nail goes through the whole bone.
et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil;	and if it comes to the leg, if the nail is at the knee joint
et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort;	And if it comes from below the knee, if there is no other remedy but to leave the patient to die;
et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers;	And if it comes from below the knee, if there is no other remedy but to leave the patient to die; then grasp the limb with one hand below and above, and with one hand support the ligament below and the other support the ligament above, and cut the flesh between the two bones at the width of a nail, until the bone is exposed.
puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	Then grasp the limb with one hand below and above, and with one hand support the ligament below and the other support the ligament above, and cut the flesh between the two bones at the width of a nail, until the bone is exposed; then pull out the bone or cut through the flesh, and put some lint on the wound so that the dressing does not touch the sound tissue, and make the patient another wound and incision around the wound
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans;	And if blood flows when you work, if you cauterize the wound immediately, or put on some restraining powders;
puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then return to your medicine as long as it is accompanied, and then bind the limb securely with a strong tie, and treat it until it is healed.
et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet:	And I will tell you that I have seen at home in this very place:
il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet;	there was a blackness that seemed to burn like fire, and that corrosion first appeared in the middle of the bone, so that it consumed the whole bone.
et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez;	and when we saw the corrosion, if we covered the bone, and it healed;
et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions;	and long after the corrosion had gone away, it returned to me, and I put upon it things that rebounded after the removal of the callous, and it did not cease the corrosion
et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere;	therefore I cut off the limb, and I did not dare to hope to save the matter
et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible;	And I doubt also that if I cut off his hand, he will not die, for the strength of the man was feeble.
et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez;	And he awoke completely, returned to his land, and took hold of his hand, and was healed
et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	I have heard of nothing like this except in the case of necessity
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe;	Blood often comes out of the vein in the bone, and it stays for such a long time that it makes great swelling
et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz;	Then it returns and bursts, and in that jump there is a bursting of blood, and it stays in its place like vessels
et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»;	The skin which is under is also as thin as draped cloth, and does not reach the bone, nor the nerve, and such diseases are called “sane”, and are not called “fistula”.
mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»;	But if it is so elongated that it reaches the bone in the marrow, it is called a fistula.
et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz;	and the wound if it is that you can embrace that skin all around, and even when it is subtle, like a drape.</start_of_turn>
et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	and does not remain because of its corruption.</start_of_turn>
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi:	And if you have bound that the skin is split, and the corruption is not in the marrow, and the skin is thick like hair, so the surgeon must take care of the fistula.</start_of_turn
regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite:	watch if the wound is great, and that the swelling is of foul odor, then apply Egyptian medicine which is made for this purpose.</start_of_turn
prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel;	Take ease, and oil, and lard, equally, and put them on the wound over the vessel in the fire, until the medicine is red, and becomes as thick as honey.
et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus;	Then take what you need according to your need, and make it hot and sweet with honey, and clench your chest, and restrain the opening.
et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant;	Leave the medicine in for two hours, then remove it while squeezing out the excess.
fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor;	Do this several times, until the wound is cleansed and the bone is strong again
et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez;	Never wash with vinegar, when this medicine is not present. Take vinegar from the root of the vine, and pour water over it, then let it drain, and clench, until you are sure that the wound is well healed
et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet;	And if the patient is unable to bear the pain, neither Egyptian medicine with its unguents, if he is immersed in a bath of water and honey or there is a little bit of clotted blood;
ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain;	or you bathe him in honey and wine, which has the property of softening and washing away, and the wine makes the blood thin.</start_of_turn>
et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin;	When you have done this, and you are confident that the pain has subsided, if you bathe in what causes the swelling to rise, and you take a plaster bandage and make it with rose oil and wine.</start_of_turn
ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens;	or you bathe in some medicines and ointments, of which I have spoken about the properties or treat with ointments.</start_of_turn>
et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez;	And if the opening of the wound is too small, and the cautery needle cannot enter, if the space has been enlarged by the point of a spear, put in an attempt of Egyptian or balsamic ointment, as much as it has been enlarged.
et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	And if the wound is too wide, if the nail and the cautery leave so much swelling, or the needle can enter, and if the opening is above the navel, if the hip bone or lower part of the limb is below it
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char;	For when the wound is deep, if it does not leave a scar.
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere:	And if you do not cover the wound below as you see, if it appears in such a way that the wound moves below where it is, for when the wound is deep, if it does not leave a scar, and if you do not cover the wound below as you see, if it appears in a bad way
que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe;	When the bow is correctly positioned below, and nothing of the bow is left out;
et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain;	and take consolidating medicines to bring about the healing, and cover with a linen cloth that covers the entire wound
puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois;	then put forces where the wound is greatest at first, because there is often a swelling on the other side of the drape as much as there is on the wound itself, and put it on the wound so that the bow is aligned, and do not remove the great drape until after the swelling has gone down once
et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste;	and that which is outside the wound often helps to set the bow, and it is necessary to remove what is causing the bow to become loose, whether it is venom or pus or enough, or digestion, or indigestion
et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez;	And take heed if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not; and when your medicine is complete and you see the nature that the swelling is above the wound, if the swelling has already receded, approach the patient cautiously.
et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	Then loosen the dressing in the morning or evening; and when you loosen the wound, if there is another drape in place, and renew the dressing.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if it is found to be dislocated again after being adjusted, the limb remains stiff and does not yield.</start_of_turn>
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	If subtle drops appear after a long tension, do not fear for your life, for health is approaching.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire;	For there are some people who are late in their healing of wounds, and those who make the matter worse
et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie;	and if the swelling in the belly remains after treatment for a long time, swelling that has not receded;
et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine;	and if the swelling returns, and is prolonged, if you give moist medicines and dry in action, if like ointment diaphetic, because there is a great part of vitriol, and that is the last medicine;
pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance;	Take oil of rue and roses, and vinegar in equal measure.
puis le confit et en use;	Then soften it and use it.
et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu;	And this itself makes honeyed ointment that engulfs, when vinegar of dyafinit is not present, or you take alum and aloes and incense, and grind them, and sprinkle on honey when it comes out of the fire;
et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire;	Then I apply it as a bandage, and extend it outside, and never administer an aristologist for a long time, and root of lilies celestial, which is as much like wheat and barley flour;
et en use de simples ou de compostes:	And use simple or compound remedies.
broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use;	Grind them, and make powder, and sprinkle on honey that I mentioned above, and use it.</start_of_turn>
et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens;	If the cure is prolonged, and has not healed from this treatment, then the abscess must be opened, for corruption has spread deep into the bone, or there is stiffness of the limb, or swelling.
si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	If the cure for the fistula, as we said before.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	of the abscess incision.
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois;	The swelling is an abscess that originates from the boil of the hand, or the heel, or by chance originates in other places;
et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute;	and when it is inflamed, and we do not take care, if it comes to a boil, it bursts and brings forth pus until it bursts the root of the boil, and by chance it bursts all
et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	and comes the corruption up to the bone, so that there is great pain, and the limb is large and dark in color
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	When you have cured it as we have said in the division, and the cure does not help, if you must, take away all the superfluous parts that are remaining from the swelling, then cauterize the wound afterwards.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne;	The cautery is a great aid when the bone is sound, and the nail is healthy.
et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout;	and if the nail presses on the marrow and begins to prick, and the blood boils, if you do not quickly remove the splinter from the nail that has pricked the marrow, and pull it out completely, and cauterize the wound with mild and gentle heat, and apply some medicinal ointment to stop the bleeding.
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat the wound as long as it is healthy.</start_of_turn>
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner;	and if the bone is corrupted, if you cauterize and break, because as much as the bone is corrupted, it cannot be healed.</start_of_turn>
et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	and if you see the bone cracking, if you break it as it is before said, then treat it until it is healed.</start_of_turn
et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier;	If he is fierce, and foams at the mouth, and feels great pain, if it is suspected that the injury is serious, you must first stabilize him.
puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor;	Then grasp the bone of the armpit tightly with a cut across below, and guard that the cut does not reach the cartilage that is under the bone, for the patient would feel too much pain;
et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	and if there is movement, put something above which will soothe it.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	the pain of the hand must be treated.
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	The two joints which arise in the hands of some men by chance are always fleshy, and in some there is bone, and never is there a nail, and never are any born in the root of the joint, or are they born in our hands from the two joints.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet;	He who is born without need does not move, and he who is born at the joint of the bone, by chance moves;
la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere:	The size of the bone that is fleshed is slight, in part only
taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	its size is at its root from a broad bone
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer:	He who is born at the root of the jointure if he is grieved must be cured.
si te tien dou coper.	if he persists in tormenting you
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	He who is born or must afterwards in no wound, if you must, first cover the rounded fat until the bone, then grasp the bone to a suitable width like that, and then cure until it is healed whole
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The wounds that come with childbirth, or with injury, or with fire, or with other things.</start_of_turn>
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz;	If it is possible to bear with this discomfort, if it must be healed according to their natural forms;
puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent;	then put between two bands or cloths soaked in rose oil, so that it does not stick;
ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	or you put between two pieces of soft lead, until it is well joined if it is possible.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	When it comes to any of its two ends with the palm, if the wound closes so that it is sufficient.</start_of_turn>
des vils	stink.
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors;	These veins are large vessels covered with black mucus filled with sorrow, which comes to cause pain in many limbs
et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	and more often cause those who travel on foot and work and carry burdens than others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	It is therefore necessary that you do not give any purgatives of colchicum, and then the rest of the balsam.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres:	The cure of fire is as follows: two methods.
l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir;	One method is with the forceps, and one treats the black blood by burning it.
et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	The other method is to ligate the vein, and then burn it thoroughly.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere:	The size is as these two methods allow
arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil;	The limb should be made hot with strong heat, until the great part without being split is soft, and then strain the limb of the patient from under the buttock down to the part below the knee
puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir;	Then ligate the vein in one, two or three places, of a large size, and then burn from the head to the tail, as much as the patient can bear;
et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire;	Then the leech is taken, and it is commanded that it should seize hold of flesh surrounding the black mole.
et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	Then the evacuation and bleeding recommences when the veins are full, and harms the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere:	The nourishment of the limb is in this way:
reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes;	raises the limb of the patient, if there is any hair, then puts it in water or oil, and raises the limb of warm water until it turns red, and swells the veins;
et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville;	and if you have no oil, if the limb is burnt by fire, then grasp the limb at the long bone at the shoulder or at the ankle;
puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent;	then apply leather to the burn, and loosen the vein from below, until it appears when it is felt
et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche;	And on the wound one sees red and black, and when it enters or leather seems just like a white thread.
puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois;	Then one should stretch the wound, until it reaches the leather, and then pin it with a lesser weight, and then put a weight on it in another place in the third degree;
puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers;	Then pull the leather over the wound until it appears, then tie it firmly, as you have done previously, and pin it with another weight as you did before
puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille;	Then pin another weight, or several if you need them, and then tie it, and pin it at the root, and pull and tie until the second degree
puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope;	Then pull out the weight degree by degree, until it is all gone, and then pin it
et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse;	And if you do not handle and lift it, if there is a nail at the end of all its might, hold it fast and pull it out, and there will be blood, and turn your hand from one side to the other, until it is gone.
et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide;	Hold that it does not slip, for if it slips, it cannot be handled or lifted, and this brings harm to the patient.
et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset;	When you have finished treating it, put out the limb from the wound with vinegar and rose oil
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And keep it until it is healed.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie;	And if the limb is contracted and twisted and bound together, and it is not straight, as we have said, if you must force it open, but do not cover it up
et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	And thus it is with us that we have said before.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne;	The shape of the fire from which we take hold of the bone is crooked, and does not tear me, except that it takes hold of the vein;
et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	It is of great curvature, for if it were slight, it would tear the vein, but being thick as we have said, this is the shape
de la voinne civile	of the civil vein.
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor;	This vein is enclosed in the limb, in hot parts or where there are no herbs or trees, and in the earth or where there is no moisture;
et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	And sometimes it happens elsewhere except in the limb, and this comes from the rotting that comes from the decay of the skin, as it comes from the inside of the serpent's body and outwards, enclosed between the skin and flesh
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	And if there is a sign of the beginning of this vein, that is, if there comes into the limb a very great swelling, then it chains the blood, and the vein begins to swell like a plant root.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe;	When the arm is dislocated, if you wish to cover it, take a piece of sponge from one and a half fingers’ breadth to two and a half, and hold it, and leave the sponge on the limb; every time that it points downwards, if you cover the sponge and the thumb, hold them.
et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue;	If it is too long, if in its course you cut off a part, and cover the remainder, do not cover it at its root until it is fully healed;
car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie;	for if you cover it, if it returns to the bone, it brings about inflammation and pus or swelling, and makes the disease worse.
por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors;	Therefore it is necessary to treat it thoroughly and leave nothing or bone behind
et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse;	And never has this vein escaped me when treated with five palms of length, or with ten; and once it escapes from ten palms of length, when you grasp it, if there is even a hair or a wound, and the blood flows until it stops.
et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	And either empty the contents that are within, and bring medicines to the place; without causing any swelling, then cure as with abscesses.</start_of_turn>
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains;	And never has this vein been grasped by the hands, even when it bursts at the joint of the thumb or the little finger, and there comes blood from a wound; from which it leaps again.</start_of_turn
cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	Cure in this way as we have said before.</start_of_turn>
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	And never has this vein hands rained, even when it opens at the elbow, or at the wrist, and there comes moisture from the rupture; cure it therefore as we have said before.
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer;	This disease is called in our land "beef disease" because it often causes swelling of the buttocks, and is like a small wound between skin and bone, which rises throughout the body, upwards and downwards, and the patient feels it well in every limb, as long as it tears the skin or goes away, and leaps fiercely.</start_of_turn
et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre;	And it is said that from any humor, when it comes and bites like serpents and worms and beetles or belly;
et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil;	and there is doubt of its malice, for when it goes through the body and ascends to the head, and comes to the surface, by chance it returns and destroys the substance.
et ceu avient maintes fois.	and this often happens.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait:	When you see it cured and treated, if one cannot drive it out until it goes away:
si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire;	then you must certainly bind up the limb above and below with a strong and tight ligature, and then support above and support below, and when it is moved into the fire it will be consumed and will die
et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit;	And the greatest harm that it makes is when it contaminates the oil, as we have said.
et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer;	And if you see it coming or near the oil, immediately grasp its bristle and hold it above, and push it away forcefully
et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	And you must use the patient for the application of external medicines to dissolve bad humors caused by bodily humors, and feed him nourishing foods rich in protein
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	When you see it cured and treated, if it will not go away, then do this: bind the limb above and below with a strong thread, then put a cautery on the surface and burn it until it dies; for the greatest harm that it does is when it runs counter to the oil, as we have said; and if you see it coming or near the oil, strain from it the hair that grows on the edge, then put a cautery on, and burn it. And use the patient of purgatives of corrosive medicines for the bad humors that are carried, and give him nourishing food.
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre;	This ailment is called in our land "Vakirir," and is a pain that comes in the joints, and which passes from one limb to another
et je vis ceu que je vos di.	I saw that which I told you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais;	I was called to a sick woman, and saw her arm swollen, and discovered a small swelling in the belly of her arm;
et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre;	And thus afterwards, the limb will rise up like a worm at the shoulder, more erect than anything else, like a living silver when it breaks from its root to another.
li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais;	The pain departs from that root and rests in the shoulder, and then afterwards it is corrected throughout the limb, until it comes to the other arm
puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	Then it was told to me that it twisted back towards the limb, as I saw it
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I was amazed at how it twisted back inwards towards the body, for I had never seen such a disease in this way before.</start_of_turn>
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme;	However, I would advise that if you wish to move the limb from one place to another, you must not cause pain in the limb, but I do not wish you to move it, as I have seen it in women
et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte;	and I thought that it was because of that that the women had dry limbs, and their veins uncovered, and because of that appeared that constraint of that stiffness.
et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	And they do not appear to me according to this reason to those who are fond of such things, and who have moist skin and veins filled with blood.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer;	When you see this disease cured, and the patient feels this pain, if it appears to you as we have said, if the lymph below and above has become swollen, and then lies upon them as long as this constraint of the wind opposes;
et cauterize le leu;	and burn the flesh
et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	and if you do not see it at your eyes, if you cure it of that which evacuates the wind, as foul pills, and oily pills, and similar things
des saiettes	And when you see the healing of this disease, and the patient feels the pain, if the swelling above and below has persisted, and then press over until the wind pressure is overcome; and cauterize the limb. And if you do not see it in your eyes, if he is cured of that which causes the wind pressure, as foul pills, and pilules of serpin, and similar things.
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	The towels are diverse, according to their appearance and according to the nature of the wound or the pain they relieve.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees;	The diversity of them is such that some have large points, and small, and hairs, and pus;
et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces;	And those which have two angles, and those which have tongues, and those in which there are pieces.
et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres:	And those which break in no limb break in two ways:
ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	or in the principal bone breaks, as with the skull, forearm, heel, shoulder blade, ribs, intestines, bladder, and similar members.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent:	When it breaks in no place of these members, and the sign of death, which I will tell you later, will teach you:
si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions;	if you know that you must extract this shard, for death comes afterwards in various positions.
et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	and when this sign is not present, do not teach me, for the shard does not go deep, if you follow, and cure the wound.</start_of_turn>
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole;	And the sign of a fractured skull when a splinter pierces the bone, and leaps the blood that is above the skull, is when scraping and soiling and vomiting and nausea, and redness of the eyes, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasm and mixture of senses, and vomiting of bile.
et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles;	and sometimes there is no wound, or no ear;
et par aventure pert la parole et la voix;	or by chance it causes the speech and the voice to stammer
et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char;	and leaps from a white moist wound resembling a boil, and also like burnt barley.
et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	and if this sign appears, if you hold back treatment, and withdraw the splinter if it has not penetrated
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide;	The sign of the splinter when it breaks or curves is that it is close to the left breast, and it feels as if it were stuck in something hard, without emptying;
et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope:	And by chance the eye turns just like the pouls, and in dark blood, and comes cold sweat and cold sweat, and fainting.
saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	The eyes then sense doubt that the death is coming.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of a wound that never heals is that there is no scab on the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient turns pale, and breathes heavily and sweats profusely.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes;	And if the eye is struck in the corner of the eye, if it is taken out of the small bones.
et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire;	it spits greatly and suffers great pain and breath is suspended
et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	and all the limbs are moving around
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	If the arrow comes out or remains in the flesh, by chance there is no sign of indigestible meat in the wound.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	If the arrow comes out or remains in the flesh, and there is no sign of feces in the intestine, if there is no hope of recovery, do not attempt to extract the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor:	and if the eye is struck in the bladder, and it urinates in leaps and comes out running, and the patient feels great pain:
saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	The wound is mortal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	As for the other limb, if the face, the neck, the chest, the armpit, the groin, the buttock, the thigh, and the leg are affected, and the like, there are many possible causes.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the stone is in the nerve or artery, and it is not venomous, as I have mentioned before.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis:	And there is at home a woman who has a lash or mucus in the root of the eye:
je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	I grasped it, and by force from the other side I drew out the fat of the ear, and it was cured without harm.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles;	And I pulled out a splinter from the fat of the ear, at the root of the hair, and the splinter was restored, and did not reach beyond the tip towards the head, and the splinter was as large as a Turkish bow, all in all it was a perfect cure for the ear
li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	The pain was cured, and no bad effects followed
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles:	And I pulled out an arrow from the throat to the chin, and the arrow was Arabic in the ear
je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	I soothed the barbs, and held it tight until I pulled it out, and the chin was cured
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit;	And I took out an arrow from his side, which was in the hip or belly, and I thought he was dying.
et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition;	and when he had not passed three days, if he did not recover his health;
je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	I cut around the arrow, and I pulled it out, and I pulled out the swelling, and there was no further harm done.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus;	And if I took out an arrow from his side or from his back, and the wound was deep, then;
et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	I left the arrow in, and I did not constrain his natural inclinations, and I found no discomfort in any of his natural works.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie;	And when another man had an arrow go into his face, and the wound was deep, then
et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor;	And so it often happens that great pain accompanies this.
et mout d’autres semblans.	and that of other things.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie;	And to carry out an arrow at home of a prince the king, that it was stuck deeply among the bones, and was a weakening inclination to the lower part;
et estoit li saiette toute reponue.	and the arrow was completely withdrawn.</start_of_turn>
Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	I was called to care after three days that it had been stuck.</start_of_turn
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	If I find the wound very inflamed.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie;	I attempted to remove it with all my strength, and I did not feel it.</start_of_turn
et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	and there was no other sensation except for pointing and pain in the lower ear.</start_of_turn>
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast;	I thought that it was the tip of the arrow. I put on the therapeutic plaster plaster of digestion, so that it would not swell.</start_of_turn
et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	And there appeared to me the wound of the arrow.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis;	I held the hands above the wound, and closed the wound again, and held the patient firmly until the arrow was removed from his body;
et il le me dist.	And he told me.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu;	I put on the wound a corrosive salve with my hands, until it was complete, and held it, and I felt the head of the arrow which was coming out at the root
puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement;	then I closed the wound with that corrosive salve until the tip of the arrow was visible to me
et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir;	and it healed well in three months, and then it grew so wide that I put in stitches, and held one side and the other, and I could not bear it any longer
adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	Therefore, I will persevere in subtle methods and contrivances of various instruments, until I have made the grasp truly firm, as is appropriate for this ailment, until I have finished this chapter and restored the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer:	And the physicians judge that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored.
je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	I restored it therefore, and the wound was healed, and the patient was completely cured
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre;	Or as you have said concerning the quality of the extraction of some clots, if you place your remedy on something that I do not know, for the books do not teach me everything;
mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	but you know the masters compare well with great things, and with what is present and lacking, find nine works, and a new instrument, following the order of things that arise in this art
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres:	I say that the arrows do not emerge from members or are fictiously bound for that matter.
ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part;	or by liquid discharge or they enter, or by another way.
et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	and that which comes forth for liquid or enters, is an arrow broken within flesh, and never comes out again
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue;	and if it does not come out now, let it stay as long as the flesh is swollen, and rejoice in its issue
et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor;	and if it is bound in bone and cannot be extracted, if you leave it alone for a while, and move it every day.
et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	then it will come out, and if it does not come out, if you prick through all the soft parts, as long as the flesh is swollen, and then take it out
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide:	And if the splinter is fixed in the bone of the head, and goes as far as one of the ventricles of the brain, and some of the things I have mentioned before to the patient.
si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	If you do not treat it, but leave it as it is, even after some days, for if the splinter goes up to the surface of the skin, that is death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	And if the splinter is fixed only in the bone and does not reach the surface, and remains in the patient for some days without any other accident, if the limb is not treated properly.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit;	If it is firmly fixed and cannot be extracted, if you administer tarriers around it, as I have told you.
puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then cure the limb until it is healed.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente;	And if the splinter is replaced in the bone so that it cannot be seen, if you have tried everything;
et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble;	And if you feel it, if the pain has no palpable cause;
et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans;	And if you do not perceive it from the wound, and from the depth of the wound, and there is neither bone, nerve, nor vein, if the pain persists as long as the wound is great.
et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire;	And if you see blood in the wound, if there is a swelling in the wound, if there is an object caught in the wound, or if the limb is fractured, do not pull out the arrow until you have broken or softened the swelling of the wound as much as possible.
et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	Be cautious not to break the arrow, but grasp it more firmly.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you do not succeed at once, if the limb remains bent over, then grasp it firmly, for the extraction will bring relief.</start_of_turn>
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre;	If blood continues to flow from the wound, follow what is said in this chapter about treatment;
et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement;	And take care not to cut into the nerve or the vein, and put in place as you wish to remove the arrow, either forward or backward, or firmly or gently.
et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	Put the patient in the position in which he was when the arrow went in, for this is the greatest help, and if you do not know how, follow what the signs tell you
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment:	The arrow that comes from another place, or if you see no wound, or the skin is swollen in that place if you see it or feel it.
taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai:	Therefore, take hold of it until the nails can grasp, and then extract it
si saut fuer maintenant.	If the arrow comes out now.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is held in the bone, if you round your hand around it until it enters the bone, expand the bone, then draw it out.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer;	And if it cannot be pulled out, if you leave it in, and then begin the extraction again until it comes out
et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust;	And if it is from an arrow, it is, if the wound is great;
et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument;	And if it is from an arrow, it is, if the wound is great; and if you see it administered immediately, if it is administered with a pointed instrument that grasps the tip of the arrow between the teeth of the instrument.
et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	Then hold the wound firm, and if the arrow is grasped, hold the instrument pointed inwards so that the tip of the arrow is grasped by the teeth of the instrument.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	And if the wound is surrounded, then you must take hold of all the surrounding flesh or the venom is there, if you believe so; then cure the wound as it seems right.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope;	And if the arrow is torn or broken or in the belly or in the bladder or in the chest, and it is close, and you must cover over it, if you cover it.
et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est;	Keep covering the vein and the nerve, and then extract the arrow, and then close the wound if necessary.
et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And the treatment must be such that it is harmless.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The shape of the tweezers with which we treat the splinters is similar to the beak of an eel, and thus is the form:
Et en sont mout de manieres:	And there are many ways to do it.
grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	great, moderate, or small, according to the amount of blood
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	The shape of the tip of the bone is like the quill of a bird, to push out the point of the wound, as in this form:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	the shape of the nails to push and to grasp if it is like this:</start_of_turn
des voinnes dou cors communes	From common veins.
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir:	Of veins from which one has bled for a long time, there are some which have had or will have sixteen inches, that is to say:
II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»;	Two veins which are behind the ears, which are covered by hair
et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans;	and two arteries which are in the temples appearing;
et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»;	And if two veins are two cubits long, which are called "aspires,
et li voine que est emmi le front;	and the vein that is at the front of the eye;
et li voinne que est au chief dou neis;	and the vein that is at the back of the eye.
et les II guindeges qui sont ou col;	and the two strings that are either yellow or white.
et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»;	and the two veins that are under the chin, which are called "augeherich.
et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	and the two veins that are beside the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras:	The common veins are those that are in the armpits of the arms:
l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»;	one is the cephalic vein, and is on the left side of the chest, and they call it the great vein
et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»;	The hair is called "fast", and is composed of the cephalique and basilique; and they call it the people "belly of the head".
et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	The basilique if it is thick or dull is called "belly of the belly"; and they call it the people "belly of the belly", and is above the navel, and is the one from which one sees, which manifests openly on the pouch.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains;	And the saving is the vein which is between the auriculaire and the anulaire, and if it has two veins;
et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes:	and in the limb and the foot are three veins:
l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit;	one if it is thick the bulge of the pouch of the left costa, and the second is sophene which is at the ankle of the right costa
et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei;	et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei.
et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	and the vein which is called "nesse", which is at the ankle of the other limb; and in the other limb are three veins similar to these.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine;	The blood of the veins that are behind the ears helps as old purges and eliminates; and it causes emigration.
et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre;	and the quality of the healthy person, as I have told you, is that you raise the head of the patient and rub the body or the veins are rough;
puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief:	then tighten the patient's neck with a screw, as long as the two veins which appear behind the ears rest in two loops depending on the head:
quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche;	when you have done this, and you feel the pulse from these veins, if it signifies an embolism
puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues;	Then take the lancet, and hold it by the edge of the vein until it reaches the bone, then keep your hand over the upper part of the vein, and press and squeeze the skin and the vein well; two should pierce through, and make blood flow as much as you see;
puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee;	Then strain and hold it tight, until it is healed;
et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	And I have already said concerning the incision and the cautery or the first book.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz;	The blood of the two arteries that are in the two temples, if it is like an ancient emigration, sode, and obtalmia accustomed, and at the root of the tears there are blisters.
et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis:	And the quality of the patient if it is like I have said:
et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement;	And it is that the patient strains his neck, so that the two veins open wide.
et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche;	he feels a tingling sensation in his teeth, and then he groans loudly.
puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit;	then he takes hold of the vein in his upper arm with his index finger, grasps the lancet, grasps the vein in his upper arm and holds it, just as you would with the two lower veins, and makes blood flow according to your need
puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton;	then he releases the patient, and puts his hand on the vein for an hour, and then puts on a bandage
et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee;	and then he binds it and leaves it until it is healed
et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	and as for the other things we have spoken of them in their place and their treatment and their extraction, or the beginning of the book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor;	The blood from the front vein is worth as much as that from the cephalic vein has ancient diseases of the face, has emigration, and redness.
et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere;	and if the patient turns his head violently, as when the vein bursts open.</start_of_turn>
puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	then take the instrument which is called the "forceps", which has this shape:</start_of_turn
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues;	And put the point on the vein, and hold it with your hand, or with something else, and let the blood flow out according to the quantity you see.</start_of_turn
puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	Then loosen the patient’s neck, and tie the vein until it is well healed and never do it with a wide flame.</start_of_turn>
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus;	However, it is not right for the flames to be too great;
et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	and the latter [hair] through, for the bones are near, and by chance break the flames when they are slight.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice;	The blood of two veins that are two cubits long if they aid the abscess, and the swelling, and the redness, and the yellowing in the fat, and diseases of the face
et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant;	and the quality of their blood is that if the patient strains his neck by turning from side to side, as before;
puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	then the latter, and let the blood flow slowly, a long flame a wide base, because there is no fat
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise;	and if the flame is slight, by chance it will break;
puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	Then make the blood flow out freely, as much as you are able, and then hold it on a cloth, and bind it firmly.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene;	The blood from the vein does not flow if it is clotted, and if it is forced out, and in diseases of the face, such as measles and redness that comes on the face, and even when it is old;
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre;	And if the patient is spitting blood, then strain his neck to your left hand, and take a piece of charcoal long, and put it between the two nostrils, because the vein does not open very well indeed, and you must begin to correct it now
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree;	Do not go too quickly, and make the blood flow out according to your need, and then hold it for a night, because it is often restored by rest.
et c’est li forme dou flaime:	And this is the form of the fire:
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes;	And this is the form of the fire: the blood of the two armpits assists in the expansion of the spleen, and in the beginning of mixing, and in the mouth of diseases, and in spitting, and in corrosiveness, and in herpes, and in stone-like things.
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit;	And the quality of the blood is that if the patient pulls out his collar with one hand and with the other, as we have said;
et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est;	Or let the master be above the patient’s head, and the patient sit on one seat, then open the vein widely, and take blood steadily, or as much as is necessary
puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle;	Then do the other part in the other vein, and remove the ligature, and tighten loosely the veins moderately, so that the patient does not strangle
et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	And let him leave it until morning, so that the wound is healed.
de la sainie des leivres	Of the blood of the livers.
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The blood of the veins of the arms above helps to clot in the mouth, and to corruption of gums, and wounds of the arms, and toothache and pain.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit;	And if you must make the patient sit in front of you, and hold his neck as I have said.
puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires:	Then open the eyelid, and look at two veins, one on the outer eyelid and the other on the inner, and know them by their darkness, and by the fact that there are small black veins running alongside them
cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	Therefore close both of them, and if you do not recognize them, and you are in doubt, if the larger one is at the corner of the eye, and both of the lower and upper veins as well, for this is a mean method
de la sainie desoz la lengue	And of the blood of the veins the tongue.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche;	The blood of the lower veins flows after the blood of the cephalic vein, and this is at the widening of the throat, and it has diseases of the eye, and diseases of the mouth
et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire:	And if the patient faces the sun with hands clasped before him, tongue lolling out, and looks at the ground beside each rib, there is a black vein.
saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	Then one must grasp both [arms] firmly, and do not move them too much, for these are the arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres:	The common veins which we commonly grasp are healthy in two ways:
ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»;	or if you prick at their root with a blunt lancet like olive oil, which is called "anesil".
et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	They are wide and slippery according to the size and distance of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The flame of the fire cautery is known to be round, and is wide as you see:
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble;	And it is necessary to open the superficial veins filled with thick blood which contain much blood and disorder;
et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	And this is the form of the olive flame:
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	and is more pointed, and is for healthier veins, or there is citrine blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre;	And this is the form of the olive flame: the blood of the basilisk, which is one of these veins, helps with ailments such as those that are in the throat, or the collar, or the teeth, or the belly.
et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	And it is necessary for the patient to keep his body still and to stop the artery that is near
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit;	If he bites the artery, and blood flows out, if the bleeding continues, if you have said so;
et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	You must not be hasty with the flame, but must keep it at a distance as if it were an animal.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre;	And if the basilisk does not clearly appear, if you must grasp it, and bind another one instead
ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras:	Or you want no rain from it, or you keep in its place the vein filled with blood in the arm:
elle apert manifestement;	it opens openly.
et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	and the head of the shoulder is dislocated, as we have said
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz;	and if you see the blood spurting, if you must indeed take hold of the limb, touch the limb until you see the pulse;
puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil;	then sign the head of the dislocation, and then join the limb, and keep the vein filled with blood open
et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere:	and beware that you do not damage the artery when you see the limb swollen, for that is the artery
eschui la donques.	indeed.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere:	And if you see it swell up like the urine of a child, and it is neither red nor pale, know that it is without an artery.
haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient;	Quickly then, put your hand over its length, and hold it steady, for many times it has happened to me
se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides;	so that the limb remains still and does not move the patient;
et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	or until it has healed properly.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient;	if it is not bleeding and you feel pain, and the medicine is not present, if the artery is opened, for the head of the shoulder is pulled out.
et estainche li sans.	stop the bleeding immediately.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor;	and take a piece of sponge, put it on, and take one of them and place it well until the other side is reached
se li sans estainche, c’est bien;	If he does not stain them, it is well.
se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc;	If not, if the physician does so as we have said, with powders that stain blood
et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	and the stainings do not last long in various situations because of the little movement of the wound and the swelling.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit;	The blood in the vein helps to heal it from the top downwards, and from the outside inwards, because it is composed of the fatty and bony parts, as we have said
et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner;	and it is important that the nerve that is outside should not be too deeply bruised, and if it is too deep, it will tear the nerve, and it will swell and the wound will either be scarred or will not heal at all
et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil;	And this nerve opens many times, and if it does not open in some homes due to its subtlety, it is certain that you must use an anesthetic instrument.
et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	And hold the nerve still at its root.</start_of_turn>
Et se il a voinne entre les .ij. ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if there is a vein between the two nerves, if the vein is long.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz;	The blood of the cephalic vein assists, for it pulls blood towards the head, and helps the eyes.</start_of_turn
et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	It is certain to make the patient feel better by pricking with the olive or myrtle flame, for this is the safest of all veins, for it has neither nerve nor artery.</start_of_turn>
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence;	However, it is necessary to inquire about the degree of pain beforehand, and grieve nothing if it is the first time, and we begin again;
et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	And by chance the swelling goes up to some homes, which cannot be forced out the first time, but it matters not.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of the blood is according to your thoughts.</start_of_turn>
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir;	The first thing you must know about health is that blood must not be forced out except for the preservation of health and to repel diseases to come.
et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute:	or be made in one of the three veins that are or should be seen to be well-formed;
c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique;	namely the cephalic, facial, and basilar veins;
et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent;	it must be done at the beginning of the prayer before fasting, and after meals when the signs of fullness appear
et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	it must be done the first or third hour, after two or three hours or three hours.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens;	The blood which is administered for diseases has no definite measure, but when need arises for urine or stool, in all hours and at all times.
et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	and it is not permitted to give blood to children under twelve years of age, nor to women who are pregnant for more than four months up to seven times.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez .lx. ans.	Must not be given to those who have passed 60 years.</start_of_turn>
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz;	When anyone sees a bloodletting, in whatever way, if it is commanded to evacuate the intestines of a light fistula, if there is much mucus retained, so that the veins do not draw out the useful humors from the principal parts
ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques;	and it is not right that he should be too fat with meat, or that he should be very drunk, as much as there may be force in him, or hydrops
et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors;	And if he suffers from vomiting, pain in the belly, and swelling of the belly, and frequent urination, and sweating, and guarding, and lying in bed, and all his forces, either from the weapon or from the illness;
puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir;	then conceal the humors, if they are not great, by meats and by drinks and by medicines, if you can find any good ones.
puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit;	then give him a bath or a wash, if nothing else hinders, to conceal the blood, and keep him warm from the belly to the chest, as we have said before
et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses;	and keep him away from work, from worry, from luxury, and from similar things.
et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans;	keep him bound and quiet, and let the patient be higher than his companions, and massage his arms two or three times, then gently pull out the thread below moderately, for if it is too tight or loose, it will not be able to correct itself without
et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on;	And then he wipes the limb with his hands, until the veins swell up, and one can feel them.
puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	And then he wets the limb with a little oil, then puts his left hand on that vein below the limb a little above or below where he wants to make the incision, so that the vein does not burst and cause injury.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus;	For there are veins that run like strings to the patient, and if they are filled with wind, so that when one puts on the flame and takes it away, it cannot open the vein, and thus is this the result of that
et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	And if he severs the vein, if the wound is too wide, because of this one must be warned about these things.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin;	And if the vein bursts the first time, that is good;
se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	otherwise, if it bursts again later, a little more than before, if the swelling has not subsided.</start_of_turn>
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras:	And if the swelling has gone down, and the patient groans, if one leaves the arm hanging about for an hour or two, and does not bind it,
par aventure i venra apostemes chaus;	it will burst again.</start_of_turn
ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait;	do not enter or bathe, and then burst the blood again.</start_of_turn
et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement;	and if the wound is small, or if it lacks a visible mark and you doubt that there is not as much blood as you saw, if you are confident in the wound itself with all your might.</start_of_turn
et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez;	And the work of a physician must be with great care, even if the illness is acute.
car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	for often in such work, when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile;	If you see the limb inflamed, do not immediately resume the bleeding, but apply a layer of oil over the wound, for it softens the flesh of blood, and hinders the pain in this limb that the oil covers
et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc;	and also administer oil to the wound to staunch the flow of blood.
et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu;	and this also causes a tingling and swelling of the limb when applied to the limb;
si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	if it is applied too thickly and comes away when too large
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre;	And if there comes a large boil, which happens many times, even when it is not seriously infected except for this time or the opening of the vein is small, if you are hasty, put on the sponge soaked in water and in silk a little cloth, and hold for an hour.
et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie;	And do it afterwards when the blood has stopped flowing from the vein, and if it remains fixed after a few days no black or green discoloration, if that does not happen to me.
et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	And if you see, put on no other dressing or unguents made from beeswax, mastic, or the like.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique:	And many times there comes a boil and the appearance of blood in the basilisk’s urine.
met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	Put your hand on it, and if you feel the limb soft under the compression of the hand, it is that bad appearance
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere;	Listen then, do not put anything of what we have said upon the wound, for by chance in the court without an artery;
mais li fai I emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Listen then, do not put anything of what we have said upon the wound, for by chance in the court without an artery; but it makes it swell dry to harden the limb, then cure it with another cure, until it is healed.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And take out each piece of blood according to the amount of its virtue, and its color.</start_of_turn>
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges;	For if it is without color, if you leave it festering as long as it is red,
et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez;	and if you see it black, if you leave it festering as long as it is subtle.
et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	and if it is too thick, if you let it cool down.</start_of_turn>
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges;	And it is appropriate for the one who is plain and strong, and has the skill of extracting blood, to make the wound larger, and the flame wider.</start_of_turn>
et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant;	And for the weakling, do the opposite, and bind it firmly so often, and must bind it firmly by cutting across, not by pricking.
et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	And this method of bleeding saves the blood from decay and swelling, and is more effective than letting it drain for a long time.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates;	And for the one who has a swollen limb due to the bleeding, bind soft bread soaked in pomegranate juice around it
s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	if he is pale, if he has three or four bleedings, and if he is of a pale complexion, mix before the bleeding soft bread soaked in fragrant oil of poppy seeds, or in beeswax with aromatic spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cloves, and fragrant oil
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	If he drinks at the blood, after the issue of mouth blood, it is to be believed that he will vomit bile, an odorous liquid, and use other things which we have said in the division or chapter on syncope, for the evacuation of the belly.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he sees that his arm has turned pale, and he feels well again another time, if it is possible by great bleeding, let it rest still and still, according to the quantity of its continuous virtue.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine .vij. houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And whoever has seen his arm swollen after the first bleeding, and has strong swelling, if he remains thus for thirteen hours after the first bleeding, or after the twelfth hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And whoever has seen himself well on one side, if he must remain well for the second or third day.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre;	For there is much blood in the limb that is already pale, and it causes fever.
si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson;	If it is necessary to handle a great quantity, and to widen the opening as much as necessary;
puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens;	Then you must provide all the necessary precautions, and place your hand over the wound when it is healthy, so that the blood does not flow in place of the flesh, and this often happens when the patient is negligent.
et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus;	Do not attempt anything if you see the limb slip again, and do not open the wound a second time; the opening is closed, so press firmly on it
ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz;	If it is crooked, extend the limb as much as possible, because that is better;
mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois;	But leave it until it heals a second time;
ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	Or you apply the point of the flame until the blood vessel that is frozen at the opening of the vein bursts, and place over it a little piece of cloth wet with water, and press lightly.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein has escaped, if you leave it alone and do not restrain me, until the swelling subsides.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if necessary is to drain blood the second time, if the same in this limb or in another vein, or in the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein in the arm is saved in place of the vein of the head because it is composed.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges;	And if the patient grasps his hand in warm water, until the flesh is red;
puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc;	then bind it loosely, so that the vein opens well, and do not make it too wide or long;
et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez;	and if it does not open, keep the hand in warm water until the blood has clotted sufficiently; then withdraw the hand from the water and leave the blood to drain naturally until enough has drained out
et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit;	and if it is in this state, do not put the hand back in the warm water, for it will swell more in the water than it did before.
et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	The blood of this vein is more precious than all the others, for there is neither artery nor nerve.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere:	The saliva from the thumb of the right hand is worth for all the diseases of the liver, and this is the manner:
estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie;	The saliva from the thumb of the right hand is worth for all the diseases of the liver. Strain the hand and hold it in hot water, until the belly is emptied if you see it.
et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien;	And if the side of the hand turns pale, and if you embrace it all the way round, if it does not grieve anything
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	and does not swell too much, for the nerves are all loosened from their sheath, and then reset the hand in hot water, if it is not frozen in the wound, and do not touch it
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have treated the blood as much as necessary, if you put oil and lint on the wound, it will help to hold it together, and put on a bandage.</start_of_turn
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The blood in the left hand is worth to the disease of the mice, and do the same as I have said concerning the right side.</start_of_turn
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	The blood of the spleen is worth for all the diseases which are caused by the heat of the body, such as diseases of the marrow, retention of flowers, diseases of the rains, and of the cramps and old legs, and similar diseases.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet;	and the quality of its saliva is that the patient should soak in hot water, and wipe over the belly until it is limp, and lie down under the joint of the thumb.
et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains;	And if the vein is at the ankle, and below the heel bone there comes out a torrent of blood.
saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	pure or more copious rain, or at the ankle, that the limb is swollen.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant;	If you see blood dripping from the heel bone, beware of the nerves that are loosened, and the limb will recover as if you were grasping it
et soit li flaimes anesil.	or the fire is extinguished.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if it does not recover, if you reset the limb in the water, and let the vein drain well.</start_of_turn>
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz;	If the patient must be treated again the second time, because the first treatment did not work, because the pus is salty.
ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	Do not doubt the nerves, as we have said, and do the same on the opposite side evenly.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The blood of the sciatic vein is at the ankle of force, and its blood is worth the pain of the groin, when it is for blood that is clotted.</start_of_turn>
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne;	If the blood is thick and the patient groans or sweats, and pulls the limb away from the ankle twice, because otherwise the vein will burst;
et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant;	and if she opens, if he is sound in every way, as much as you can, and through and through.
et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	it is worth noting that you must hold her firmly, for her spirit is strong, and she is easily restored by hand alone.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners;	and if you do not find her, if she is sound neither head nor tail, nor in the least towards the little toe, and you guard against the nerves;
et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint;	then do as much to staunch the blood as you see, and then loosen the ligature, and put on cotton and bind it tightly
ele est maintenant sanee.	she is now healed.
des sainies de ventouse	of bloodletting
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre;	Wounds are made of horn, or spider’s silk, or hair
et ventosation si est faite selonc II manieres:	and the cautery is done in two ways:
ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	or by cutting and drawing blood, or by cutting.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres:	Or by cutting and drawing blood, or by cutting. And this bleeding which is done by cutting is in two ways:
ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu;	or it is at full heat, or by cutting.
et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief;	or bleeding which is done by cutting and by extraction of blood if it is done in twelve weeks of summer, when one is all swollen at the head;
et li autres est emmi le col;	and the other is at the collarbone
et II autres en II costeis dou col;	and two others in two ribs of the collarbone;
et li ventouse desoz lou menton;	and the wound from the bleeding fills the mouth
et li ventouse des II espaules;	and the wound from the bleeding fills the space between the ribs
et li ventouse sus les crupies;	And the sponge on the crupies.
et les ventouses emmi les II bras;	And the sponges cover the two arms
et les ventouses des II jambes;	And the sponges cover the two legs
et les ventouses des II chevilles;	And the sponges cover the two ankles
et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne;	And the sponge does not touch blood, for there are many veins that are scattered in the flesh, and because of this one must not make any bleeding from a vein;
et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	One must only apply it [the sponge] when it is necessary, not with fire or sensation of fire, in no disease that comes from congestion, until all the swelling has gone down
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens;	And if by necessity of a disease it is necessary to sponge, or for custom, if one administers it carelessly at the beginning or at the end, and over and over again, in every embrace;
car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief;	For there are some who, when they are blown about by the wind, bear a heavy head.
et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz;	and there are some who suffer swelling and redness in their face, and on their head, and at the collar, and they have swollen eyes.
et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc;	and there are those who spit blood in their mouth, and have lost their tongue, and swallow blood.
et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	and there are those who faint, and see stars and blood and mud and similar things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés .iij. houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, and especially when it is wet and moist, we command them to fast for two hours after dinner.</start_of_turn>
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors;	Blood from the wound helps to relieve the pain of the head … which comes from the eyes, and it is not possible for me to know anything other than that after the evacuation of all the fat
et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement;	and this vomiting is in place of the blood of the head, and it is not possible for me to know anything other than that it is from those who are of a cold complexion in use, or who are consumptive, for this causes them great discomfort
et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	And for this reason, I advise you to refrain from using it in cases where there are cold or chief fevers.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And if the patient is conscious, if he becomes dizzy, it is necessary to place the suction tube one place further down the throat due to the doubt of dizziness.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion;	The winds of the head are in lieu of the blood of the chief and of the bile, and for this reason it is worth more for its stretching out of the spleen, and for the splitting of the channel of the marrow, and for all, and for distension;
et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	I must advise you not to force it, for if it is held too tightly, it causes disgust or swelling of the belly or the chest or the head.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique;	The winds cause two costels of the head if it is worth as much as the pains of the chief, and oblation and vomiting, and strangulation, and toothache, and it is in lieu of the blood of the bile
et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	You must command the patient to grasp his hand to put it in place, so that he does not obstruct the artery or blood vessels nearby.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche;	The windings of the nose are like the cause of oral disease, and corruption of the gums, and similar diseases that are in the mouth.
et est en leu des sainies des II levres.	This is related to the health of the two lower teeth
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	The winds blow cold from the coast and cause disease that comes from heat and swelling.</start_of_turn
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes;	The windings of the tonsils are as much as three veins of the arm, because it draws blood from these three veins
et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	Command the patient not to move too much, for the blood vessel is delicate, and knows that there are nerves and arteries nearby.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire;	The swelling that is on the rump is like blood clots at the foundation, and there are diseases from this; you must make the swelling large and round, that it has mixed well together
et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit;	And by chance, if it were subtle, if it should break;
et i fai grans plaies.	And thus it makes great wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors;	The veins of the leg swell open widely, because they draw blood from all over the body, and cause the ancient pains of rain, and of worms, and of the bladder, and cause swelling of the flowers;
et sont en leu des II sophenes, et des II chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	and are in the place of the two shoulders, and of the two knees, and all of them grow pale after a long time, and cause death in many cases
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc;	The method of placing the vein is that you must put it on empty first, and then temperately, and put it on immediately, and move it equally, and do not stop doing this until you see the limb red and swollen, and when the blood appears red;
puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez:	Then be fierce, and reset the incisions, and take care in the arrangement of the limbs, for there are some who have twisted their thighs, and clear pores.
si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes;	if it is necessary to wound once only, and make large incisions, and a deep wound;
et suce legierement.	and do so gently.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir II fois:	And if it is not large, if you can wound twice:
la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	the first time to make the opening of the blood less painful.</start_of_turn>
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois;	and if it is not very thick, if you can wound three times.</start_of_turn
et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	and when our veins swell with blood once and twice, if we stop wounding only once.</start_of_turn>
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent;	And if our veins burst with blood, if we should often renew them;
et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif:	And if they are not immediately apparent, if they are fiercely inflamed, and if they are perceived to be clotted, it is prudent for those who have thick skin and brittle veins, and who have swollen pores, to administer purgatives of oil that are both aperitif and dissolving.</start_of_turn>
se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite;	If this is the case, with violet oil, or sweet almond oil, or pumpkin seed oil.</start_of_turn
et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	And if in wine, with rosemary oil, or lily oil, or chamomile, or something similar.</start_of_turn>
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the swelling is great and cold, if take oil of marigold, or balsam, or oil of ivy, and the like.</start_of_turn>
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	And if one has stubborn pain and large pores, one must not put oil on, but it is necessary to wash after the evacuation of rose water, or cold water, or black bile, or pumpkin seed water, or porcelain water, or something similar.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And he who has moisture in his mouth, if he rises easily, or from a surge of mint, and thyme, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans;	These who have large superabundances may rise from old wine, or water of hemlock, or decoction of ivy or chamomile, or other things of that kind.</start_of_turn
et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II;	And it is not permitted for the physician to use the vacuum before the bath, neither during the bath, but after the bath for an hour or two.
et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	And do not sleep afterwards the venting, and must keep awake when it is necessary to vent and when it is vented.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez;	And keep oneself from eating anything cold, and if it is too hot or inflamed;
si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses;	If it is possible that he grasp cold things, such as pomegranates and cucumbers and lettuce at ease, and similar things;
et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	And eat barley broth, and broth of barley, and soft meats
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons;	And he who has a cold complexion, let him take syrup of honey, and fragrant wine medium, which is between wheat and barley, and eat little, and eat barley broth and little oilseeds and herbs;
et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier;	And when it is windy, if he must drink more than eat;
et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz;	and must give to others homes no time a tickling or mustering before or after, for to comfort the principal limbs.
et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	or be silent about it, but I must tell you that only those who are hot drink it.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne;	The winds that cause wounds are those that are put on the liver, and on the wrist, and under the heel, and on the belly and the buttock and the groin and the hip, for these members do not suffer wounds above the joints, and they do not make them except to draw blood from one member to another, as we do when we put them on the armpits when we do not want to bleed
por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre;	to overcome the stiffness that is in the limb, as when we put winds on the belly and the buttock to soften the limb.
et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu;	And the bone causes pain, when there is an operation or a stone, for the bone, by its attractive virtue, attracts the operation, or deserts the stone from its place.
et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement;	And it makes swell when it is placed on the liver and on the spleen when there is retained wind, and these swellings are administered empty so as to suck up only;
et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	And never are they administered together with fire, and never completely filled with cold water, as in diseases of pleurisy, and in such a manner we fill the swelling with hot water so that there are herbs covering it
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The form of the compress administered with fire is thus:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre;	And there are two palms and a half of barley, or cost the entrance between the mileu and I little hole, as to pierce an arrow, and be of marrow, if so that it does not grieve the patient when placing it on the limb
et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent;	And in the middle put a twig of flax or iron, to hold a tampon in place, and let it be great or small according to the ailments and the extent of those who take it.
car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	for the swellings of the limbs are different from intestines, and fats from bones.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre:	And must be placed on the limb:
empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide;	holding the tampon of cloth or linen, and put it between the thumb and the ventouse, so that it sticks to the end of the ventouse without burning the patient;
et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse;	and put it on the limb, and must be put either on the wound that we have said, so that when it is seen, if it goes away, we will know that the ventouse is in the right place
et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	And hold it firmly in line as before, and repeat often, if you are skillful.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement;	And in the chest where it is administered for the disease of pleura, at all times, there is no swelling or perforation, and it is only administered when it is plain water, and is placed upon the limb only lightly.
et c’est li forme:	This sentence is incomplete and does not provide any meaningful translation.
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus;	They are only administered in limbs or where we cannot put compresses because of their small size, such as the palms of the hands and the gums, and similar things
et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans;	and in the places where there is no hair, such as the nails or teeth, and other things of that kind.
et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren;	and the quality of the patient is that when you find blisters that are soft and clear without any sign of puncture, if you take hold of them;
et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres;	and put on them a nut in warm water, until they are familiar, and they have nothing in their bellies.
et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues;	and then be cleansed of vein and vacuum, and then rub the limb until it is red, and put on the bandage.
et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	when they are full, and cheerful, if it is possible to put on a vacuum, put it on, for this is better afterwards
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint;	If not, if you lift the limb easily, and then with water, moist well, and then press it;
et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés;	and if the limb is too red afterwards take off the bandage, and put on a cloth of linen in cold water, and put on until the bandage is loosened
et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez;	And if it does not mend by itself, put upon a broken glass vial or scraps of glass, and similar things, until it is extended.
ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant;	or you take half of a clove of garlic and leave it on the limb until it blisters; then it will stop bleeding now.</start_of_turn>
et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	and if you have more pain, take other unguents.</start_of_turn>
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent;	And if the unguents do not help, rub the limb with fresh blood, or put in an awl as long as it does not go in, and then put it back on, and as soon as it feels blood, it will heal.</start_of_turn
et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	And when you see that it is bleeding, put over it a little bit of aloe and a bit of burnt wool, or charcoal, if it will stop bleeding now.</start_of_turn
Ci comence li livre des brisures	This marks the beginning of the book of broken bones.
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and is the restoration of fracture and displacement.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent;	Saichiez, dear son, that in this chapter the fools gather, who do not see in any of the ancient books, neither in any letter, anything like it.
et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin;	and for this reason is it strange in our land, for I have never found anything like it before
et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie;	I do not know anything about it, except by the science of the ancient books, or because I have studied so much that I have treated this science, and by experiment, and by the custom of my life
et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	I have described it in this chapter what is contained in it, and I have summarized at the end, and I have made it clear the shapes of the instruments that are brought in, as I have done in the two preceding chapters.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	It is necessary, therefore, that our words or prologue of this book should be an image of the truth and the chapters or lessons should place their understanding, and remain on the truth, so that those who are proved right learn and master this noble art, and learn it from others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars;	I say that whenever a break or dislocation or twist or fracture occurs, if you must hasten the patient to safety, do not neglect the patient from either side, if nothing else hinders you, even if you are weak of limb or young or old.
ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois;	or if the patient is tense or too cold or too hot;
et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre;	and eat cold dishes, such as cold broth, mustard and chamomile, and do not drink wine, do not eat greasy foods or eat too much meat, until you are certain that there is no break or fracture of the limb.
si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	if the patient recovers somewhat at first, use the first remedy that you find useful.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the fractured bone begins to heal, if you must restore the patient, do not nourish the patient with meats that cause great swelling, or that have viscosity, such as wheat germ in water, and pork, and testicles, and spleen, and veins, and fish, and large wine, and similar things.</start_of_turn>
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For in part nourishment returns muscle and more quickly the fracture breaks.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans;	Know that bones that are broken in pieces and decrepit do not mend well by themselves, neither by soldering according to their nature because of the drying up of the limbs, nor because they are too brittle, as in the bones of small children.
mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant;	but there is no cure, rest on the broken bone and keep the great tension that is necessary to join the limb together, until it is firm as it was before
et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	and do not take away from it any of its substance, for because of this we must nourish it with great foods, as we have said
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And know that fractures are of various kinds in many ways.</start_of_turn
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there are fractures that go to the marrow, and others by bending, as with the size of a pen to write.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if there is a fracture with a wound, and a fracture with a whole small fissure.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu;	And with some measure, there is its own engine and its own instrument in restoring, according to what comes to mind in its place.
et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main;	and it is known that the breaking of the bone is because its substance is twisted, and opens well by driving out, and some by pressure of the hand;
et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure;	When there is no swelling or touch, and the patient does not feel much pain, there is no fracture.
mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	but it may well have swelling, or tear, or a small fracture.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	If it is not possible to move the limb by hand, but medicines come after, then hold it firmly now.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne;	And the blood that comes from the fracture, and is in the joint, it must now be put back in its place equally, even as if it were alive.</start_of_turn>
et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez;	and if there are afterpains that come, if you leave them without treatment, until the afterpain is calmed.</start_of_turn
puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces;	then put it in its place gently and steadily, and the blood that restores it is less heavy than the restoring of those who have fragments.</start_of_turn
puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	Then the stretching, as it should be after.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main;	And if there are broken bones, if it extends from two parts, if it is hands or feet, or at your hand if it is a small limb, or at two strings, or at a string and your hand;
et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor;	and put the limb in its natural position, so that when the broken parts of the limb are relieved, if you maintain by all means the adjuncts to their places as much as possible, and keep that by your work there comes no further injury or pain to the patient
et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	and adjust well the two heads of the bones according to the best forms.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien:	And feel well the hand if you think that it is not well:
si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	If the swelling subsides beautifully, and does not irritate me too much, do not press so much as those who make it come by their work of incision and contraction of the limb; for we have seen many times.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere;	And when the limb is fixed, if the patient is very painful that he does not move it, neither waking nor sleeping, neither turning nor doing anything else;
et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	Beware that the limb is well secured that he does not feel any pain at all.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor;	For when he feels no pain, if it is not fixed, and you can put it in a position where he feels no pain.
et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez;	And keep him straight, so that there is no twisting when you restore it.
et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	And the quality of a broken limb is as I have told you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	The limb is braced in various ways in small and large sizes and shapes.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans:	For there are small limbs, such as bones and thumbs and the like.
si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz;	if it is possible to cover them with soft and subtle cloths.
et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe:	and those that are large, such as bones and legs:
si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche;	if it is possible to cover them with a wide and strong cloth, because large wounds embrace the whole limb and restrain it equally from all sides, so that there is no slackness
puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure;	then I will bind the limb lightly, three tours or four according to the limb, and I will restrain the hand one inch above the break, and I will loosen the break a little, so that the break moves a little
et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet;	and soften the limb a little here and there, as much as you take a great part of the limb itself, then take hold of the limb once more, and turn the joint back into its socket.
puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus;	then bring to the lower part of the fracture, and hold it moderately, not too strong or too weak, as we said earlier.</start_of_turn>
puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	then put between the joints some strips of linen or bandages, so that they are all even, and then bind everything up above with a bandage, and then put on your splints well made, if there is no abscess or swelling.</start_of_turn>
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors;	And if there is swelling or abscess, put on something soothing to the abscess, which will stop the swelling, and leave it like that for a few days.</start_of_turn
puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	Then strain upon your thumbs, and let them be half of a broad cane resting steadily, or of wire from which you make nails, or of round stones, and let them be in this fashion:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres;	but it is necessary that the thumb that you place on the fracture be thicker and wider than the others.
et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor;	and be as long as it is necessary for the part of little or great size;
puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure;	Then hold the bones as before, just as you did at the first hour, and then bind them with a thread following the breeze, as before on the brimstone.
plus estroit est ensus, adés moins;	The closer the binding is, the less;
et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol;	And make sure the thread is medium-sized, neither too thick nor too thin, and made of soft linen
car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	because if the thread is thick, like those fools who make their wounds with linen cord, it is a great error, for the ligature will not be even if it is too taut.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	If the patient is nauseated by the nails after stripping in the flesh, if you put down nails of linen or coarse cloth, it will not stain.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is with the splinter, and the nerve is fractured, I will speak of the cure later on.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	The wounds that it is not possible to restrain with the hands must be grasped from the toes of the limbs which break first.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant;	For when the limb is large, one must not force the bones into place before five or seven days or more, according to the severity of the wound that has escaped.
et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion:	And thus the manner of ancient plasters to restore fracture, dislocation, and torsion.
et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	And thus it is that you take flour that stays as by the walls of a mill, and mix it with egg yolks, and make this confection, not too fine nor too thick, and use it. And this is the common manner of plaster that restores fracture in various positions, and even for women and young children, for there is neither too much chalk nor too little.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion:	Another manner of plaster that restores fracture and dislocation and torsion:
pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana X З.;	take pitch, lard, alum, saffron, gum arabic and mugwort, in the amount of ten to twelve parts.
mirre et aloes, ana V З.;	resin and aloe, in the amount of five to six parts
alechil VIIII З.;	The fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef;	And make powder of them, and mix it with the yolk of an egg;
se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	And if the complexion of the man is hot, use this plaster, for it is of good composition, and it restores broken bones quickly, and is worth more than many homes.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion:	Another method of plaster which is worth more than torsion:
pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.;	take mustard and vinegar, mix in the proportion of X to Z
mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.;	and mix with myrrh and aloes, in the proportion of seven to nine
acaice VI З.;	cayenne six to nine
bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	camphor ten to nine, and grind it well, and confit with water or the yolk of an egg, and administer it
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure:	Other methods of treating dislocations and fractured bones consist of relaxing the pain, removing the swelling, and using an external support.
pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	Take new linen, moisten it in oil and water, and put it on the limb.</start_of_turn>
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	These treatments do not restore me, but it is good to appease the after-burning heat, and properly relieve the pains.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez:	Another method of reduction which restores fractured bones.</start_of_turn>
pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Take dry fig leaves and ground ivy leaves, mix them together, and make a poultice.</start_of_turn
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	Another method of reducing dislocations is to restore the break of the bone and mitigate the remaining heat
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie;	Take wormwood root, chamomile, violet flowers, wheat flour, henbane seeds, one part of rue.</start_of_turn
et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Grind them together, mix with wine, and if the limb is pale, mix with moist coriander water or wine.</start_of_turn>
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	Other methods of restoring the limb are more forceful than the first, when an abscess comes to the restoration of the limb.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie;	Take root of chamomile, and flaxseed, marshmallow, melilot, and gentian, and violets and chamomile flowers, of all an equal part.
et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Grind them together, and mix with salt water, or sweet water, or with wine, according to the heat of the limb and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Hippocrates in his book does not put anything on the broken limb to restore force except for some wax and oil, and nothing else, and he says that it should be between soft and firm.</start_of_turn>
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems Galen says we must put something warm on the affected limb to restore it, such as mustard, aloe, incense and the like, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor:	Another method of treatment that is useful for wounds and pain:
pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	take mugwort and chopped onions, or fennel seeds, and chamomile, and mix them equally, and grind them, and make a poultice of it and apply it liberally
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu;	And then wash it away a little later, and take care that the patient does not feel any pain, and that the bones of the limb are not displaced
si ne lou deslie par mains jors.	If they do not loosen with hands for days.
Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant;	If pain comes to the limb, or swelling, sense rest or inflammation, if you hurry, loosen it and hold the bone in place now;
et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor;	and take a lighter bandage, and a sponge of sea salt, and immerse in water, and elevate the limb, until the swelling ceases and the pain is relieved
puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut;	then leave the limb rest for an hour, and put on dry cloth, soaked in water or oil of rose, and bind with a bandage, until you are certain that the wound has healed.</start_of_turn>
et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant;	and rest the inflamed limb, and relieve the pain, and then restart the bandage slowly, and a little displacement, and do not tighten too much.</start_of_turn
et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And must be subtle so that it is harmless.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	If you see that the abscess is swollen, red, painful, and inflamed throughout, and that it persists despite initial treatment, you must repeat the procedure as before.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII;	And if no movement appears in the limb after what has been said, do not force it to be released until after three days or four, or five or seven;
et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus;	And in no case leave it for twenty days, according to what is seen, until the bruise has disappeared, and approach the junction of the bone above
adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant;	Therefore more restraint must be used than before, and the swelling must be increased, as I said before;
et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir;	And if you see the limb become drier than usual, the swelling will not rise again;
arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure;	Then apply hot water every time you release it, and do this every third hour, and cut a little piece of lint every time.
par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement:	By this work, therefore, cut off the nourishment of the limb, and stay away from these fools who make it worse, and restore the limb promptly.
c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	It is bad, and if there is doubt and fear, I see nothing else but to leave it alone and treat it directly.
des diverses manieres de brisure	various methods of fracture
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees;	There are many ways to break bones, various figures, and the causes are diverse;
car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust;	because there are fractures that are made by the percussion of a spear, and the collar of bone all the way down to the syphus which is the socket of the bone, as in the case of a splinter or fistula;
et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	and for this reason this type of fracture is called a fracture of the bone
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»;	or the spear pierces the bone from below in a forward direction, and this type of fracture is called an absolute fracture
et est li plaie de ces II brisures grans ou petite.	And it is the wound of these two large or small breaks.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is an embedded percussion, or fracture or snap of a bone, or fracture of the bone above the joint, or other similar things.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is a burst wound, which approaches the gut that is below the bone, or it is on the bone, and is this wound great or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»;	And if the wound is sutured in the bone as finely as a thread, and the break is small, it is called a “capillary” break.
et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres;	And if the wound is made by a pierce or by stone, or by a fragment of something similar, and causes the bone to protrude, and the limb is askew like the cauldron when it boils over
si entre li piere dedens.	If there is a piece of bone between the pieces
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant;	And this is more with children who have soft bones;
et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles;	And there are many other ways of breaking bones that are described in small pieces like stars;
et je em parlerai en son leu.	And I shall speak of it in its place.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And we know of all kinds of fractures due to the separation above them, the tension at the edges, and the corrupt marrow that is above.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The blood vessels are recognized by this: when one discovers a bone, and wipes over it, if the black fracture is open
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of fracture, take care of the patient’s condition, and if you see no other mishap, like vomiting of bile, emission of urine, extension, and paleness, fever and swelling, and other similar things, if not, it is certain that the matter will not recover without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if no sudden accident befalls thee, and thou hopeth for health, if so, commence the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the swelling comes first to thee, and it be in the armpit, if so, know that it is necessary to remove the bone from the quadrant above the muscle which thou dost touch.</start_of_turn>
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it be in this state, if thou hast haste to remove the bone from the seventh quadrant above the bone, thereby that the bone of the armpit be corrupted, and comes the accident which we have said.</start_of_turn
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi:	And if a break of a bone comes right up to the cloth covering the brain, if you must make an incision there
et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset;	and take hold of the patient's head and uncover the bone in every way you can, and on the figure of the wound more cruelly than you can, and if blood comes out from uncovering the bone, or from incisions, if you can, put on some cloth soaked in rose oil over the wound
et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc;	and rest the wound until the incisions are healed, and be sure to stop bleeding
puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige:	then begin to reduce the bone, and that is done in two ways:
l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	One way if it is that you grasp the narrow tail end forward, and that is the form:
Et puis i boute .i. autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then there is another tail that is larger than the first.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde;	And the second way if it is that you have many different sized nails, some narrow and others wide, and be pointed, and be made of iron indeed.
et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	And gently work, that you do not break the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou I cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os;	And if the bone is thick and hard, if you must pierce through, even though you administer nails with washers, do not make them go through the bone more than necessary, and must have under the head of the nail a margin or a circle, that does not allow the point to pass through the bone
et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test;	And you must have several of them, so that bones do not come in place of the thickness of the bone, if you have washers for all tests
et c’est li forme des III manieres de tareres:	And this is the form of the three ways of cautery.
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes I tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez;	And the one who wishes to pierce around the bone is that you put one cautery on the bone and turn around twice until you know that the bone is pierced
puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures;	Then put the other cautery elsewhere a little later, and do this all around; then cut the space of the bone which is between the holes, and do this more subtly than you did before, and lightly, as we have said, until you have brought the bone to your hand, or to any instruments that you have like nails, pins or the like
et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	And keep that you do not touch the brain or the jaw.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire;	And when you have pierced the bone and treated, if it is possible, reset the fragment which is displaced from the bone to all other instruments resembling an incisor, but it must be more tense and subtle than the other incisor
et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens;	And if it lingers nothing of the small bones, no nails, if the bones are lightly struck by a foreign object.
puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	Then treat the wound with sutures and bandages as we have said
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus;	And the other method of work is like that of the Galenicians, which is more certain
et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	and the load is very strong, and that is its word
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is necessary first that you uncover a part of the bone, either the fracture that appears swollen, so that when you have uncovered that part, put on gloves and grasp the handle of this incisor lens, for this is its form.
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os;	Do not split it from one side, and is the part most affected by two coasts, if it is split towards the bone;
puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz;	Then hold it with a small mallet above, so that you can easily compress the bone all around, and take care of the dressing that is below;
s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	If the socket is loose with the bone, slightly move the bone because one must well position it firmly, and with fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the bone breaks but does not pierce the skin, cut the bone only slightly above; there are small pieces remaining. If you can repair the fracture, remove the sharp fragments with blunt instruments of various sizes, in order to close as many cavities as possible, according to the work and the appearance of the fracture.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If there are large fragments remaining, and after further bluntness, and it does not stop, continue to do so until it is well done.</start_of_turn>
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement;	Concerning other minor capillary ruptures and superficial breaks, it is necessary that you provide the cause in accordance with its location.
et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	And this is something that is not easily understood by one who has not studied this art
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie;	And if the surface is discovered, it is necessary that you take a drape of linen, according to the quantity of the wound, and soak it in rose oil, and put it on the wound
puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil;	Then take another drape doubled in two or three, and soak it in wine and rose oil, and put it on the first drape
et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement;	Leave the hair longer and even; do not pinch it at the root. Hold the eyes steady until they grow.
et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses;	Leave the hair longer and even; do not pinch it at the root. Hold the eyes steady until the abscess is calmed, then remove it, and give medicines such as root of iris, alum, incense powder, and arnica, and similar things.</start_of_turn>
et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication;	Make a powder of these things and apply it to the wound, and give more medicines that are bitter tasting.</start_of_turn>
et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice;	Keep the wound clean and dry, do not let it become infected, do not let it swell up, for when it swells on the head of the brain, if it is pressed and twisted, it brings great harm to the patient.</start_of_turn
car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	For when one places upon the face something biting, if it does not desist from below.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Beware then, if no other misfortune befalls the patient, as we have said, if there is any doubt or suspicion.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac;	When one puts upon the face something biting, if it does not desist from below, except for the medicine that has been placed upon it, so be it that one takes one part honey, three parts rose oil and one part beeswax, and put it upon the face.
puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat it in the manner of healing that is appropriate, as long as it is safe.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les II parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont II os;	Never break the two parts of the nail together, or only one at a time, for these are two bones;
et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	These bones are cartilaginous and do not break easily, except when forced to bend or twist, and then they are healed
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil;	If one of the two parts is broken, if you swallow your thumb or pulp of the index finger or push it into the palm, as long as it does not return to its natural position.
et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	Do it gently, and take care that the patient does not feel pain from your work.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the fracture is on the upper part of the limb, and it cannot be reached from below, it is proper that you place it even with the head of a splint as wide as a thumb.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues;	If the break is of two parts, if you do it again, and hurry to restore the first part if you are able to do so;
se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	otherwise, after the seventh or tenth day, when the inflammation of the wound has subsided, then bind up the thumb tightly with linen thread if the break is on one side
Ou tu boutes I autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est;	Or you swallow the other side if the break is there.</start_of_turn>
et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	And let the tents be so large that they fill the holes where need be.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	And they say no restorer shall move the bandages from the wound, and must die each one for himself.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin;	It seems to me that this is good, but it is fitting that they be soft in the making of eggshell and wheat flour
puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	Then leave the tent until the bone is firm and the cartilages hardened
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a I souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi;	Never put goose feathers in place of the tents, and if there is too much cloth, roll it up tightly, hold the brim steady, and blow on the patient among them
or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	or do as you see fit
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en .i. poc de dyaquilon.	And if someone’s clothes come to the neck while you are working, if you put some butter or cotton soaked in rose oil, or some potage of alum.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis;	If the abscess does not come out, if you touch it with your hand, put plaster on it with linen, wheat flour and incense powder, confirmed with eggshell, then put on light pressure, do not bind it too tightly
et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu;	And if the fracture of the bone is small and it is broken into many pieces, if the extraction has suitable instruments for this, then close the wound, and treat the surrounding tissues with char, soldering, if like plasters and ointments suitable for this.
et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if there is no displacement of the bone, if you cure the wound, and put on bandages, as long as it is healthy.</start_of_turn>
de la routure de la mandibule	Of the route of the mandible
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the mandible is fractured without injury to the surrounding tissues, and the fracture is slight, and not deeply fractured, except for the teeth which must be loosened gently.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide;	It is necessary, if the fracture is in the upper part, to bite your thumb of the affected hand in the mouth of the patient.</start_of_turn
et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	And if the fracture is in the left mandible, if you hold your right thumb of the right hand, and hold the fracture slightly, and support it with the other hand forward, and make it even.</start_of_turn
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en .ij., si covient que tu aministres extension de .ij. pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the fracture of the mandible is displaced in .ij., if it is recommended that you administer extension of .ij. parts, as long as they are equal.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus I drapel double;	And if movement of the teeth arises, or looseness, if strained by a gold or silver or silk thread, then put on a broken jaw cerate and put on a double drape.
et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And put on a great cushion of felt or a piece of leather equal in size, long and wide according to the jaw, and tie it on to the tooth that you put in, and command the patient to rest, and chew soft food.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet;	And if you see that the figure changes, if it comes loose at the third joint, and then reset it in place again;
et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote;	and put on a plaster on, with powder of cloves with plenty of egg or breadcrumbs, after that you have oiled the cerate.
et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez;	And put on the shoulder a soft lining, and if it is displaced again, let the patient know that it is not changing; leave it as long as it remains healthy.
maintes fois est sanez en III semainnes.	Often it is healed in three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if a wound comes out, if it threatens what we have said many times.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee;	And if there is a fracture and wound together, repair it so that no piece of the bone is left as bone;
si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	If the bone is slightly bent, it has coved things together with it
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is wide, if it has flared up as you need.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus .i. des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have sutured all these pieces, and there is no more bleeding, if the wound is wide, and put on some covering materials that cover the wound, to absorb moisture, until it is healed
de la forcele	and strong.
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc III manieres:	The force breaks many times before, over the shoulder, and the fracture is in three ways:
ou elle est brisie et desevree en II, et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer;	Or it is broken and detached in two pieces, and there are fragments, and it is the most delicate to restore
ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	Or there is fracture with wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies II ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie;	Or if there is fracture with wound, that you have two assistants, so that one holds the limb that feels the force of the fracture;
et li autres estende lou col vers la partie;	and the other extends the limb towards the part.
puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	Then put the fracture in its place, so that the form is as it should be, and there is neither appearance nor swelling
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit;	and if you have to extend more, put around the patient’s limb a round ball of wax, or cloth, as large as you need;
et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	extend and hold the fracture steady, and strain the sphere in your hand, so that you put the fracture in its place as it should be.</start_of_turn>
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule .i. oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you are unable to manage the head of the shoulder when it comes out of its place, because it will slip downwards, you must know that the patient lies groaning on his heel, and put the shoulder in its place, that is, the middle ear, and hold the minister in the lower part of the shoulder until the bone of the shoulder is raised.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus;	Then address the fracture to your shoulder, and if you find debris there, if you must, make an incision above.
et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as;	then pull out the pieces slightly, and if the bone cannot be reunited by any means, if it is at one of the incisions you have made;
mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	but hold the forceps steady, for this instrument is used to prevent infection.
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre;	and appears like a spoon, and is not at all curved, and be as wide as it seems necessary, according to the size of the bone and the extent of the work;
et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os;	and has two holes, as you see, and one is large and the other is small, as is the fracture of the wound you made when you treated the bone
et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	And when you are certain of the depth of the wound, if the wound is small, or if you are uncertain of the depth, if necessary use a dressing and bandage, according to its quantity.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille .i. drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if the wound has become infected, if there is moisture, let draping with oil of roses, and balsam, and wine, and put on it.</start_of_turn>
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier;	The hardening of the bone, when it has wounds and is in pain, is that you put on the bone the plaster of pounded powder and egg yolk, and put on soft stamps above, and put a sponge below the shoulder if you need it.
puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre;	Then take a very broad bandage of a palm width, then put on a double drape on the stamps, and plaster it on
puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant;	Then take a slender rod about three fingers wide and long, and wrap it around that bandage so that the head of the bandage remains in place;
et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide;	And place the cushion on the shoulder, and roll the bandage around the neck, and drain the sore assissle, and drain the painful assissle.
et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint;	And hold the shoulder steady, and when you see that the ligature holds the shoulder firmly, and you clearly understand that the cushion does not move from the bone socket, if you return the limb once, and when you release the restraint.</start_of_turn>
et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut;	And make the patient turn on his back, and put as little pressure on the assissle as possible to raise the limb up.</start_of_turn
si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors;	If you align the forcele of the shoulder with the displacement of the scapula, or you bind the arm to the neck, and do not release it until it is well mended, for up to twenty days.</start_of_turn
puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez;	Then resume the displacement, if you see that it must be done, and hold it tight and leave it thus, until it is restored.
et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	and it is restored in eight days, and in less time to anyone.
de la brisure de l’espaule	Then restart the dislocation, if you see that there is need for it, and hold and leave it alone until it is restored; and it is usually restored in about twenty-six days, and in less time than most men.
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement;	There is no other way for the shoulder to break or widen than by touch
si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	if the limb appears according to the figure of the fracture, and it is reset according to its natural form, in all the ways that you can
puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double;	then put out the limb powder with mill with abundance of egg, and bandage it lightly, and put on a double drape;
puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment;	then put on a broad and soft splint, a little wider than the shoulder, and if the splint is crooked in any part of the shoulder, if you use that braid of linen, so that the splint rests evenly
et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor;	And then the stretch with a great firm bend, so that the limb does not move from its place, and look at the mark of each joint.
et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit;	And every time that it moves, if the stretch is held, and makes the limb equal to its place if it is forced from its place, and lies the patient on his chest
et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en XXV.	and the shoulder is restored in twenty days or in twenty-five.
Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	When these numbers are completed, if the dislocation has been reduced, and the limb is painless, because it is not a bone that is easily displaced
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a piece of the bone sticks forward, and does not yield at all, if it remains in place, and the bone, do as we have said concerning the breaking of the forcele to appease the abscess.
de la brisure dou pis	And if a piece of the bone sticks forward, and does not yield at all, if it remains in place, and the bone, do as we have said concerning the breaking of the forcele to appease the abscess.
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc;	The weight is never broken in the middle, but this often happens;
mais il brise sovent au defuer.	but it often breaks outwards.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	When it is broken in two, if it declines with pain, and feels great pain, and is pale, and vomiting blood, and the jaw is split open in the broken bone, and one feels very well.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met I cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des II costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient;	And if the patient lies down and rests his back, put a cushion between the scapulae, then press the scapulae and unite the costae of the second ribs with your hands, and slightly force them into place until the bone is set as it should be.
puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en I drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve;	Then put on bandages and support the area under the ribcage, or with another soft cushion, and cover with a bandage, and bind it to the fractured bone, so that it does not move.
et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint;	And turn the limb round at the back, and hold it steadily, and wait a whole hour before releasing it, and if it has healed, keep the strain on it
et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures;	or if it comes loose, by corrosion or by swelling that comes from within, or pain or abscess, if you hurry and take it out, scrape the wound and address the cause of the cure.
puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then maintain the displacement, and hold it steady until it is healed.
de la brisure des costes	And if the patient lies still on his back, put one cushion between the shoulder blades, then press the shoulder blades and unite the edges of the ribs with your hands, and subtly make them even in all positions until the limb is restored to its normal shape; then put on splints and bandage with fine salt or other soft material, and cover with a cloth, and bind firmly over the broken bone, if it does not move; and turn the limb around the back and strain it gently, and award some time the limb, and if it relaxes, strain it again; and if it comes loose again, because of corrosion or inflammation that comes from the bone, or pain or swelling, if you are hasty, loosen it and remove the splint, and address the cause of the fracture; then restore the splint and strain it until it is healed.
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses;	When the bones break through the skin, it does not come forth but at the greatest distance from the back, and at the head downwards, and it does not bend forth except because they are greasy;
et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	and the scent of it is well known at the inquiry as two should do.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	The restoration is that you must put the fracture back in its place as it should be
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	And then put on a bandage, and bind it with a staple, if you have need of it
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile;	And if the bones break through the skin is declining downwards, if the patient feels great pain, and points, like from the pleura, because the bone points the cloth
et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	and vomiting profusely, great quantity of blood, which is a grief of health, and the ancient ones have put great care into it
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if these things are said, it is necessary to administer foods that swell the belly, to push out the fracture outwards.</start_of_turn>
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not do this, except in the case of ulcers that do not heal, when they have not appeared.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if they have appeared, if they are healthy.</start_of_turn>
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison;	And they say that no one has ever placed a bandage outside the limb to relieve pain, because it is similar to the reason
toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	Whatever, doubt arises that the vacuum does not suck up the superabundances at the root by the arrangement of weakness.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And they say that no one should cover the limb with coarse cloth soaked in oil, but put on bandages between the ribs to keep the wound even, then either cure with a pleurisin dressing, meat and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac;	And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot bear from the bone that points the loin, and there is doubt in the patient, if it is necessary to cut on the root of the fractured rib, and it is necessary to put in the instruments to stay the inflammation.
et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then one must cut the bone further, and treat more gently, and then stitch together the two layers of the wound, if it is large, and cure it with sponges, until it is healed
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu;	And if pus comes out, if put on moist cloths soaked in rose oil, and put on the limb;
et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and cure until the limb is healed from the opening of the wound, and be careful above the rib or it must be, until it is healed.
de la brisure dou col	If the rib is fractured,
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie;	Never comes a sudden break of bone from the collar, and then it comes to pass.
et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	and also at the spine of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	When this is finished and you know if it is healed or not, if you see his hands softened and limp and dead, and that you cannot move or extend them, and if you prick them with a needle, if there is no sensation there
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	The wound is mortal in many situations, and if you move them and feel well when you strain and prick them, the joint of the bone is saved, and the patient is cured, if you put on cure.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit;	And if anything like this comes to the spine of the back, and you see well whether there is blood or not, if you take care that the pieces are softened, and that the accident which is in the hands and on the back is open with violence and vomiting at will
et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	and when it has been softened on the belly, if you vomit violently at will.</start_of_turn>
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	And when he is lying on his back and sees the ass, if he cannot.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz:	These wounds are mortal.</start_of_turn>
si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	if you do not work diligently on their cure.</start_of_turn
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this accident does not happen, if the thing is lighter.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez;	And the cure is that if there is abscess of the caul, if you put on the spine rose oil or oil of egg yolk, until it is calmed down.</start_of_turn
puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer;	Then put on one of the comforting and drying plasters, and bind it with a thread, and instruct the patient to rest.
et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	and do not sleep on that part where he feels pain, even if he is well.</start_of_turn>
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur;	And if the bones break, if you can cover on the wound.</start_of_turn
et oste l’os, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then break the bone, then assemble the two limbs of the wound, if it is large, with a staple, and then cure with ointment that will stick to the wound, while he is well.</start_of_turn
et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier;	and if the head of the shoulder is broken, which is called the “fracture of the shoulder”, if you see your pouch of your left hand hanging down, and put it equal to the other hand at your side, then put on the plaster and the bandage if you need to.</start_of_turn
puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	Then the strain, and if there be loose bones, hold fast, and the bone, and heal the wound until it is healed.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	and the fracture of the thigh bone.
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief;	When the thigh bone is fractured, and if there is swelling, do not have fear of that, for there must be some degree of pain at the head;
et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	and remain long, and bend downwards, and comes to the patient pain in the limb, and swelling, and bursting that which breaks
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure;	And the restoration is that you extend your hand above, as long as you are over the fracture;
et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li;	and the cloth which is the fracture and the figure of the limb.
et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	and if the fracture is only at the head, put it straight so that it is in its natural position
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	If the fracture is long or downward, make the patient lie on his belly, until the restoration of the fracture is complete.</start_of_turn>
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve;	And when you have set them even, if you put on a bandage, then put on a staple of wool or thread, and hold the dressing, so that it does not move.
et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	and keep the limb relaxed, as long as the bandage is even.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And instruct the patient to sleep on his side, or on his back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit;	And if there is swelling nearby, do not touch it, until the swelling has subsided, and put on what we have mentioned before
et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident;	then return to the restoration, and hold it steady if it is appropriate, if there is no further accident
et c’est li maniere.	and that is the way it is done.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	De la brisure de l’ajutoire.
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des II manieres:	The adjuncts are those between the shoulder blade and the head of the shoulder, and if it is broken, it must be restored in one of two ways:
dont l’une est que tu pren I fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	dont l’une est que tu pren I fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:
Et lie as II chiés II liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus I siege;	When one has taken one fist full of my groin, thus: take two fingers and put them in the top, and place the patient above one seat.
puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval;	Then grasp the limb with your arms beside the fist, until it reaches the elbow, and has in the middle a fist-sized bulge, then place it on no heavy thing or the assistant should extend it backwards
puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	Then put the palm of your hand together, as much as the hand can reach each other, until the bulge returns as it should
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a .ij. ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout .i. liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And the other method is if you support the patient on his shoulder, and bind the arm to his collar, and order the attendants that one holds what is above the dislocation at his hands, and the other holds the shoulder bones apart, and stretch the skin outwards.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	And if you see that the extraction is more forceful, if you strain I lift the spleen, on the spleen, and extend thumbs of the ministers at his side
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure;	If the bulge is close to the head of the shoulder, if you must put one half of the fist below the elbow and the other towards the shoulder, below the bulge
et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute;	And if the fracture is toward the shoulder, if you can put it in place easily, cautiously, as long as the fracture is even on the shoulder and on the bone.
puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	Then set the fracture firmly if possible, and hold it in place, for if it moves again, the bruise will not heal.</start_of_turn>
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a VII jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez;	And if there is a bruise, if it does not move, hold it still for seven days, and put on soft linen and rose oil, until the bruise is healed.</start_of_turn
puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein;	Then hold it still, and the way to hold it if you place the support on the fracture, then assemble the limb on the shoulder, and put your hand on the shoulder or on the chest.</start_of_turn
et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	Leave the drapeil on, and hold the shoulder steady, and on the arms, so that the arms are in their natural position, without any hindrance, or if the bones are not moved.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele I doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure III dois de chescune part;	And if you doubt that the bones are not moving, if you put on stakes, put on a larger and stronger stake at the fracture, and put between the stakes a space equal to two thumbs, and make the stake as thick as it passes through three thumbs
puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	Then hold on to the stakes as I said at the beginning of this chapter on the fracture, more strongly and less loosely
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit;	And if you see the displacement of the stakes and the tightening, as we have said, while you restore the limb fractured, and you doubt the fracture, if you leave it to join up by itself until seven days, as we have said.
puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	Then look at the third day again, that the swelling does not progress, neither does the pain subside, or that the swelling does not go up the limb because it is too tight.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	If the swelling persists, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac;	And if no such thing happens, if only after three days or more, and the patient sleeps on his back and has his hands on his stomach.
et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens;	then put the limb in a cushion made of equal wool, and look for an hour or two, whether the limb is stiff or the ligaments are softened
si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz;	if the disease proceeds by the virtue of medicine, and you do the meat that we have in front of us, in part as much as the meat is at the first moment;
et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	and when it begins to recover, let it be greatly.</start_of_turn>
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout;	And it is customary that the shoulder and limb should be taken back in XL days of every month.
et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	and then one must loosen them and administer baths and medicines of ointment to the limb concerned
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	And if the dislocation is painful and embolded, it must be loosened in two days or two months.
de la brisure du bras	... of the breaking of the arm.
Li bras est compos de II os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet;	The arm consists of two bones, which are called the "femur" and the "humerus," of which one is small and the other which supports the pouch
et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi;	and the other is large, and is the socket, towards the small head
par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	By chance the large bone of the shoulder is fractured only, or the small one, and sometimes both together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations;	When the small bone is fractured, the restoration is easy, and the healing;
et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	And when the great bone is fractured, if the healing is poor, it is more painful than when it is fractured whole.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	When only the little bone is fractured, if the limb is slightly extended, and set equal
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort;	And if it is the great bone, if the cure must be forced, it is stronger to break it whole
et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor;	And hold the pouch of the hand higher than the other, and place the little finger lower than the others, and let the patient cross over his hand himself, and put your hand in front of him higher than the patient, so that the patient does not feel any pain
puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	Then extend the forearm towards the outer side of his hand, or at the elbow, and another assistant at the other elbow below
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	Then he puts the eye steady, according to its best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	If it breaks into pieces, if you put some back into its place, and if there is none that prick at its root as before, you will not be able to restore it to its place, even if you leave it alone like we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler;	And if there is pain in the wound, as I have already mentioned in this chapter
si pren la cure.	If you take the treatment.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz;	And if at the beginning of restoration blood spurts out behind the incisions, if I drape it with cerate made of rose oil and white wax, neither too thick nor too thin;
et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	and I drape it lightly above, until the blood spurting from the incisions is calmed.</start_of_turn>
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres;	Then I place the cerate and put the dressing of fine powder with a lot of eggs, because I put in the stars, and let the star of the iris be more strong and a little wider than the others.</start_of_turn
et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions:	and the stitches that must be in six stars or arms in various positions.</start_of_turn>
soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II;	whether the iris is in one of the bones or in two.</start_of_turn
et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre;	and is more strained above the armpit than elsewhere, and all the days less in aligning, as I said at the beginning of this chapter.
et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres;	and let the cloths that are above the armpit be soft and moist, and not hard or rough.
et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	and the thread which is strained should be of linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	Et renaisse le membre et le lien après quelques jours.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez;	And if any evil accident happens to the limb, if there is itching which happens to the limb, you must raise the limb with warm water, until the itching is calmed;
et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	and let the limb not be left still
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And start the movement again, and if the tendon is softened and the bone is loosened, and similar things, if the patient endures it.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses .i. poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	If you take care that the swelling does not return to the limb, because it is too tight, then you must soften it, indeed, and leave it alone for a while, until the swelling goes down, and then restrain it.</start_of_turn>
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	And if none of these things that we have said do not come to the patient, if not until day XX.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos;	or else put the hands to his collar, and let the collars be equal, and take care of movement and contamination, and sleep on his back
et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	and the stitches that this fracture has healed in XXX days or in XXXV, and sometimes in XX days, according to the composition and complexity of the virtues.
de la brisure de la main	Of the breaking of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	From the breaking of the hand
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement;	And when the hand is broken or dislocated, if you must know that the patient walks crookedly, and stands directly before him equally.
puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint;	then put his hand on the extended cloth, and extend the minister the broken bones, and put them equal to the eyes, until they are well joined
et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu;	and put the plaster and the bandage, if they do not come, then put a splint according to the quantity of the liquid;
et soit envoloupee en I drapeil de lin.	and be wrapped in a linen bandage.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie;	And if the fracture is at the end towards the belly of the limb, if you make a ball of cloth, and command the patient to hold it against his broken limb
et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	Then the stretching of a long hair, and let the staple of the beard be as great as the palm of the hand; and hold, if it be necessary.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the break is at the wrist, if you must know, put a splint above and one below in the palm, so that the thumb is over and straight, then bind it all around the wrist, and seal the loop between the two.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient;	And if it breaks out to neither of us from the two, if it is the pouch, if you put it even, if it be necessary.
et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve;	And the stretching with the palm, and if you see that you must put a right little staple to lift the break, and it does not move
et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés;	And if the break is as the other two, if like in the index or one of the others, if you put it even, and bind it with the good side which is after
ou tu les lie toz en I tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet;	Or you bind them together holding, that the muscle is worth, or you put on a staple, as if it were a pouch
et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	Leave the hair long and even, and if you prick them at their root, fix your eyes so they do not move until they grow.
de la cuixe brisie	And if the break comes to neither of us, if it is at the elbow, if you must know; put it even, if it is necessary; and strain it with the palm, and if you see that you must put a right-angle splint to lift the break, and it does not move; and if the break is in another place, if like in the index or one of the others, if you must put it even, and bind it with the two fingers that follow; or you bind them all together, holding firmly, as much as is useful, or you put on a splint, as for a pouch; and take care in the restoration and in the arrangement of the burn, and cure what comes with it, as I have said.
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier;	The bone of the hip is often broken, and it is well seen when it turns forward and backward.
et li restauration si est c’on lie I liien desus la briseure, et I autre desoz.	When it is restored, it is held in place by the ligament beneath the fracture, and another one from above
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment;	The patient lies on his face, and extends his limbs so that his limbs rest equally on both sides
et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	When the fracture is in the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	If the fracture is close to the root of the thigh bone, if either of the ligaments around the knee joint is ruptured, and the other is stretched by the fracture.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval;	And in the same way if it is close to the knee, then either the ligament of the knee must be cut, or the lower extension must be made
puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	Then put the eye back into the socket with both hands, until it is according to its natural figure; and then put in the patch, and hold it, so that it does not come out.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure;	And if there is pain in the eye, if you leave it quiet, return to your work and your treatment.
li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	It is made in a partial manner.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus;	It is necessary that you wrap around the wound with a bandage two or three fingers wide, and keep the surplus taut, then draw up the limb until the nails reach the root of the nail, and put in a thread long between the bone and the limb, above the joint, and under the head; and keep the thread taut.
puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe;	Then draw up on the limb and on the bone the bandage, and put on the outer bandage, and put a bandage on the bone of the limb
puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure;	Then use the eighth finger between the leg and the hip of coarse hair to make them even, and start to tie three or four threads over the bristle;
et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint;	And the more you go up the bristle, and the less you strain;
puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet;	Then take two threads of the kind you have between the leg and the hip, and tie three knots that are beneath, and then release the thread from the grasp of the thumb as long as you see the thread going down;
et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	And the strain, if it does not move from its place, then leave it alone, and do not cause any swelling or any other sign.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois;	And if there is swelling, if the dislocation has been addressed, and if it is necessary to do so as we have said many times before
et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet;	If there are pieces of bone that are pricked, if you can cover them, do not attempt it.
et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer;	If you cannot cover them, if you must, cut open the limb and drain the pus.</start_of_turn>
et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	Treat it as we have said, so that it is healed.</start_of_turn>
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras;	And never break the limb while these bones are set, as in the shoulder and arm.</start_of_turn
toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	However, in the restoration of the limb when it is done, do not mislead the patient.</start_of_turn>
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en .l. jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And so, if the bone is reset in one day, or less or more, according to the diversity of temperaments.</start_of_turn>
de la ruelle dou genoil	of the groin street.</start_of_turn>
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	Hair that is in the groin has often burst, but it falls many times.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	If it breaks, if not a mere split or opening, and if there is pain, wound or sensation of pain, this is very well indeed.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet;	And the restoration is that which brings together what is rounded to its sides, as long as it is put together firmly.</start_of_turn
puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant;	Then place the support, and I put a round peg, if you are in need of it, and tighten it as it should be, then restore all the arrangements that we have said before, if as an abscess cautery and other similar things.
si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If you put a check on every accident that may occur, as long as it is healthy.
de la brisure de la jambe	And if the restoration is done, if you put everything round back in its place, as long as it is put together firmly, put the bandage on, and put on a round cushion, if you have need of it, and strain it as it should be strained; then reward all the instructions that we have said before, as in incision and other things; if you put into each accident what it should be put in, as long as it is sound. And finish the fracture of the limb.
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»;	As for the bones in the limb, there are two, of which one is called the "muscle" and the other is called the "fleshy bone".
et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	And there is often a fracture in the arm, and for this reason the restoration is as for a broken arm equally, and the work is all the same. And if the two bones are broken together, if the limb is twisted from all sides
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if a bone is fractured in two, the limb is twisted from the front.</start_of_turn>
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien;	And if a large bone is fractured, if one feels great pain, and it is well seen;
et torne desoz.	and it breaks out loud.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement;	Then bring extension, and set it even, and bind the edges evenly.
mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere;	but in this case, if the fracture is severe, and there are many pieces, that the extension is less severe and lighter
et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	and let it be as you are skilled.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren II faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz;	When you have completed your work, if you take two strips of cloth about the length of the limb from the groin to the foot, and bind the limb from the groin to the foot on one side and the other side, from the knee to the foot;
puis envoloupe en II leus I bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien;	then wrap around two layers of bandage below and above, and bind it firmly in the middle, so that the limb does not deviate to the right or left, and that is good
et aucun i aministrent I bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie;	And no one administers me elsewhere for a long time on the limb, and it is of no avail, and one sets on the limb to prevent movement, and it is done quickly in the case of fracture or wound.
et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident;	and every time one moves the limb, to see if there is any other fracture or accident.
si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	if the wound is complete, that is to say sane.</start_of_turn>
de la brisure des os dou piet	Of bone fractures which are painful.
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle there is no fracture, but in the bones of the limb there is no fracture at all, and two must suffice; and there is no other reason except for fear of death.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus;	And if there is a break in the bone, and you see these bones crowding each other, if you put the limb so that it touches the ground as if it were falling, and then put your limb back in place, where the bones were raised, and press until they return to their place.</start_of_turn>
puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a II chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	then put the dressing and stamp on, and put some gauze on the limb a little above two inches wide, and press the limb steadily, and that you have wrapped the limb with cloth and other things as needed.</start_of_turn
Et quant .iij. jors ou .iiij. seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when two or three days have passed, if you loosen the dressing, because you will find the bones equal, whether they are fractured or displaced.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main;	And if there are two breaks, if you restore them, as we have said, you must have two hands.
puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment;	Then put at each break a staple according to the length of the two, and be it a little wider; then put the pieces together as I have said, and strain evenly
et s’il en i a II ou III, ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en I drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet;	And if there are two or three, or more, breaks, break each one; then put on each break a staple according to its quantity, wrapped in one layer of linen, and strain the pieces together.
et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	And be firm on the head of the bone against the belly of the piece, so that it will hold well.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit;	Remember that there are other things that I have said about other breaks, as we have said before
et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And treat each accident as it comes.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	of the fracture of the thumb bone.</start_of_turn>
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier;	When the bones of the female have been broken, if you make her sit with her back arched, and support her behind;
puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto;	then fill the belly with the nature of the patient's discomfort, and put as much in as I stop;
puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto;	then loosen the woman, and hold her back and forth, and then pull out the cotton, until it comes out of the nature, and bring back the bones with the stop;
et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor:	and when she has urinated, if the bone is pulled out by the cotton, and when she has urinated, she will recover, and do this for seven days or until it heals
si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature;	if it is restored the fracture, and if you see it, take a bladder of Berber, and bind it to the part with a bandage, and put all the bladder in the nature;
puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens:	Then blow into the cannula until the bladder is evacuated completely.
la nature si revenra li brisure;	When the nature returns, the bursting will be finished
puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then fill it with cotton and leave it untouched for a while, until it is healed.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche;	When the bone of the arm or the woman breaks, if you restore it as we have said concerning the thigh bone;
et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	and are not hidden from those who study and use it, and understand my book
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration:	For the bursting signifies in many ways the right way to restore:
enten le donques.	therefore take it.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge;	When the limb is broken, take a gooseberry and put it on the limb;
puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse III jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	Then cover the wound with a bandage, and leave it for three days or until it has healed. And it will be perfectly healed.
de brisure avec plaie	From the break with wound.
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is necessary for the one who has a fracture with wound, even if it is large, as if it were the bone of the thigh or the shoulder or similar, that it be set now, as the pain that we have mentioned testifies.</start_of_turn>
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound is well healed, if there is only a stain of vitriol, if you have nothing else, then resume the fracture in this way, or in that way, as soon as possible, for if there is no further displacement, the fracture will heal on its own.</start_of_turn
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if there is displacement of the bone, if you leave the fracture undisturbed until the swelling subsides, as long as the displacement is not too great, and do not touch the bone or the surrounding tissue, for you will risk causing further damage.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the bone breaks are apparent on the surface like a discovered wound, then you must know that you must press them lightly with your hands, with a small extension.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a VII dois ou VIII de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie;	If swelling does not appear to you to put your hands even, if the ravine has this instrument which is of iron, which has seven or eight inches in length, and its breadth is in accordance with the quantity of the wound;
et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne III ou IIII, selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure;	and for this reason it is necessary at the root that it grasp three or four inches, according to what is necessary in the wound cure for breakage;
et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	and be round and somewhat large, so that it does not press too much on the limb at your work, and be before and behind, and large from the middle forward, thus:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent;	It is called "palainche", because it must be placed over the visible head of the bone.
et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	And once again, when it returns, let them be equal, one meeting the other.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And if the fracture is slight and the instruments cannot well grasp the bone, if you must copy the head of the bone as long as the instruments have possession of it
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir;	And if you cannot restore the bone, as we have said, if you see the handle of a usable instrument at this point, or to cut or scrape, to your power;
puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	Then pull out what is stuck in the bone with rough scraping and little grease.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	And when the bone is set back, and the patient feels great pain afterwards, it is likely that the marrow is not in its natural position.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit;	If you do this as long as it remains in its place, then moisten it with black wine vinegar, and do so diligently;
et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption;	and do not put anything on the wound except butter or anything else that may cause putrefaction and corruption;
puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure;	Then administer stars when you have restored the bone, and leave the wound open, and cover the dressing all around, according to the size of the wound, and take care that the wound is not strained with the breaking
et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois;	And often have they done this thing to fools, and have made the patient mad, or caused his death, or corroded him never.
et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	Or let them be softer and more flexible than the other breaks.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles;	And if the wound is small or great, and you doubt that there is bad blood flowing, as we have said, and you feel pain in the limb, if it does not suffice to put on stakes;
mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	then cover the wound with a thick cloth instead of stakes, and bind tightly.</start_of_turn>
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	When you see after one or two days that the wound is swelling, if the bone that you put on top has remained there for a long time, and if you put on healing dressings, like with tetracycline and similar things.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre .ij. fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And it is necessary that you bind the limb three times a day, in the morning and evening, until it is healed and sound.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And it is necessary that the limb be immobilized in part as much as is possible so that it does not bend excessively easily.</start_of_turn>
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if the limb persists in its displacement, and it cannot be reduced but returns to its place spontaneously, with small pieces of bone, because it is necessary that you reduce the wound with care, and pull out all these broken pieces that cause this pain.</start_of_turn
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	If a fistula arises in the body, or any other kind of corruption, if you must cure it, according to what is written in this chapter above.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse;	And when a bone is broken, and is opened on the limb, as the bone of the thigh or the shoulder, and other similar bones of the great limbs, if you do not treat it, for often death comes from this, but leave it until it has healed.</start_of_turn
par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues;	By chance, after twenty days or thirty, the wound will have healed; then cure the wound if you wish.
et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	and if you do not wish, leave it as it is.</start_of_turn>
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	From the beard which comes out from the beard hair.
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre;	We often come after the safety of the armpit, even near the joint, and it is useful to see the position of the limb.</start_of_turn
et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	and by chance we cannot make the limb move naturally.</start_of_turn
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres:	Beware then if we are fresh.</start_of_turn
si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil;	if he has administered astringent medicines, such as aloes, incense, and myrrh, and ochre, acaice, and similar things, so that you take none of these things, or all together, and mix them with a stiptic wine or with abundant egg or with oil.</start_of_turn
et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors;	And put it on the knot firmly, and strain it well, and do not release it from the hands until it stays.
et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee;	Then dislocate it again, and do it once more, until the dislocation is firm
ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite;	or you hold it with a well-made splint
car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres;	because the owner of the splint is when it stiffens all the swellings under the limb.
et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent;	and when the dislocation has become firm just like stone, and it is necessary to support it, if the swelling above has gone down, and to make the swelling apparent
ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	or do not touch it at all, until it is firm, and cure it when it is healed.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	Weak limb after the bandage
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes:	When the fracture has been restored, and rests after the limb is weak and limp, if there is any cause for it,
de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit;	if there is anything causing it, it is because it was too tightly bound and was not properly bound as it should have been.
ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre;	or because there are too many bands on it, and cannot move properly;
ou por multitude d’arosement;	or for too many ligatures;
ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre;	or from too great movements, not without its harm.
ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	or because there is much blood in its substance, if it is weak
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui;	and the cure is to feed the patient sparingly and make the limb tender, until the pain is multiplied in him.
et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce;	And he gives a bath, and he does rejoice and delight.
puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre;	Then he puts poultices on the limb, so that the poultices attract at the great nourishment, and the redness often arises from excessive heat, until the nourishment reaches the limb;
et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	and returns to its natural shape
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	The limb is twisted after the disease.
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil:	When the limb is twisted after restoration, and the bones are broken open, and the limb is deformed, although it does not lose its natural work
si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre;	although those fools say that the limb must be broken anew, and many have held this opinion in our land;
et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors;	it is blamed, and there comes great harm, and by chance the patient dies.
toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses;	Toutefois, si les nodulations et la torture sont frais, si vous peut leur faire renaître d’eau chaude, ou herbes mollélifiantes soient cuites, comme feuille de vismalve, et racine, et mellilote, et cetera.
et li fai I emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus;	However, if the swellings and the torture are fresh, if you can make them arise from warm water, or cooked softening herbs such as balm leaves, and roots, and melilot, and so on; and apply a liberal plaster, as with aquaintance well made, take the nourishment of balm, and confirm with butter of gelatine or oil of poppy seed, and apply the plaster on top.
ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	Or take fat figs, and grind them with poppy seeds, and similar medicines which appease the swelling.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	And never is the bone loosened by continuous rubbing and length of time with wet hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And provide movement to the limb at the shoulder hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement;	And if the swelling is tough and hardened, like stone, and need iron, if you cover it just until the bone, with a slight incision;
et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And put cushions and study in the treatment.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	And thus begins the book of dislocations.
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation comes to no more, if you can now restore its normal position.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu;	For if we delay, if it swells up in the limb, and by chance we reset it, we will have pricked the limb on the way.
por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez:	For in this case we must not move it while it is swollen
maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors;	often brings vomiting and other pains;
toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez;	however, when this has happened, if you make the patient comfortable, then leave him, until the swelling has subsided
puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	then raise the limb with warmth and oil, and support it lightly, and treat each limb as it comes to its place
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have ordered the chapters on dislocations of the shoulder joint to the end of the foot.
des mandibules	Des mandibules.
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc II manieres:	When the mandibles are loosened and the dislocations of both are in two ways:
ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc;	Or they are a little stiff in their limbs, and soften a little.
ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	Or they are entirely loosened, and hang towards the ear, and keep their saliva in their mouth so that they cannot hold it, cannot close their mouths, and wrap their tongues with speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is small, it will often spontaneously reduce on its own.</start_of_turn>
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie;	And if they are whole and complete, if you must force them, then you must do it instantly, and do not linger;
et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars;	and in such a way that the attendants hold the patient’s head firmly, and hold your gaze somewhat below the pocket of one of his hands at the root of the dislocation of the jaw within the mouth, if the dislocation is two parts
et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal;	and the other two hands are loosened, to make them even
et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	And instruct the patient to soften his teeth, jaw, and move them all around.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And his eye should be level, until it returns to its place.</start_of_turn>
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les II mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement;	And if they are crooked, even if both jaws are together, if they are raised with sharp heat and oil, until they are gently softened;
ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	Do not force the return, as we have said before.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens;	When they are returned equally, and the patient’s mouth is closed with good sense, put on soft cloths soaked in rose oil and beeswax, then bind them lightly with threads.
et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules;	And let the patient sleep on his back, and his arms resting between two cushions, so that they do not move forward or backward, do not attempt to force anything, but gently seize meat, until the pain is gone, and keep the jaws still
et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	Then he must swallow what he wants lightly, and do not work himself to open his mouth to swallow or drink, until the jaw is well numb and healthy.
Et se les .ij. mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two jaws do not manage to be returned to their point at an hour, and are not otherwise converted at their leisure, if thereby fever and customary sickness arise, and by chance solution of the belly, and by chance vomiting of pure bile.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions;	When you see that, then know that it is a loss of blood;
et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en VIIII jors.	and often death occurs from it in nine days
de la forcelle	of the forceps.
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The forceps cannot remove from the bone without causing damage, and is useless every time it is attempted, and one can well tell.</start_of_turn
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras;	And the restoration is when the patient lies groaning on his back, and extends his arms;
et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra;	then press the limb firmly towards your palm, and it will return
puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint;	then place the bandage and bind it well, and strain it
et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer;	and the one who is beside the knife cannot unbind it
se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit;	Se poc non, et si il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit.
puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then put on the support and the bandage, and strain it, and command the patient to rest until he is healed;
et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	and in this way the head of the shoulder is brought back into its place when it has been dislocated from its bone
de la dislocation de l’espaule	From the dislocation of the shoulder.
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres:	The shoulder is not dislocated except in three ways:
de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz;	one that it dislocates at the shoulder blade at the armpit
et li seconde est a la partie dou pis;	and the second at the top of the arm;
et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc;	And by chance it becomes loosened at the upper part, and this happens often.
et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners;	and does not loosen behind for the scapula, and does not loosen from the inside for the nerves.
et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment;	and often loosens downwards towards the buttocks, even among those who have plenty of flesh, because of these jumps they suffer greatly
a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	because of those who have enough flesh, these jumps cause pain and return with pain.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And by chance it happens that there is a fracture or dislocation, and it inflates the shoulder with a hot abscess, and care must be taken that it is not displaced by this.</start_of_turn
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains;	It is therefore necessary that you expect it, until you are certain;
et adonques encomence la cure.	and then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste;	And it is known that dislocation is when it is pulled towards the buttocks, and distinguishes between the sick scapula and the healthy one, and you will find between them their diversity manifested
et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes;	And you will find at the head of the shoulder a pit, and loosen the shoulder blade at the touch of the head of the shoulder, as if it were a bone.
et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens;	And you cannot make the patient move their hand back to its place, or move in any way
et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier;	Also, if it is displaced upwards, if not hidden, for you will find it clearly at the touch
et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	And this way of dislocation is not strong enough to restore it, when it is new, or if the patient is suffering
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu;	The way is that the physician holds the patient’s hand up above, then puts his thumbs under the shoulder blade, and holds the joint firmly up at the shoulder
et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz;	And the minister holds the hand, and extends it upwards, because he puts it down.
si venra hastanment.	if it comes to harm.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude;	And if it does not come as we have said before, if it is known that the patient is in pain; then it must be that the patient be bathed in warm water
et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree;	and the minister brings comfort that is soothing and calming, such as decoction of alum and fenugreek and honey in water, and the like.</start_of_turn>
puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide;	then put the patient on his back, and put under the seat a cushion of linen even, not too soft or too hard, and put the thumb of the hand over the cushion, and hold the shoulder joint firmly, and treat the hand of the patient.</start_of_turn>
et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval;	And one other attendant grasps the head of the patient, so that it does not move backwards.
celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere:	Then the dislocation returns immediately, and if you see that it remains fixed in this manner:
et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides;	and that you make the patient groan in pain more than he suffers;
et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar;	then you must stretch the shoulder downwards towards the costal margin, and hold the shoulder away from the patient’s side, and keep the shoulder high up so that the patient’s shoulder hangs down vertically.
et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	and another attendant treats the patient’s arm behind the belly
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	If the patient is too light, if he can carry nothing heavy, the dislocation will return immediately.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere:	And so it is also remedied in another way:
et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile;	and by keeping the head of the shoulder long and tense in the earth, so that the head of the humerus is as resonant as the pestle, and is neither too thick nor too thin;
puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust;	Then let the patient lie down, but that he should have a soft blanket over, and that the patient should be quiet for a long time.
puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment;	Then extend his arm from the other side and the joint will return to its place firmly
et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure:	and if it does not return with all these things that we have said, if you do this cure:
pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	take two thumbs and three fingers wide, which has the head resting on the bone to enter under the armpit, as in this form:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide;	then place over the head of the arm a soft blanket, so that the arm does not bleed the patient, and then put it under the armpit of the patient
et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus I eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part:	and extend the arms above the arm for a long time, and hold the shoulder against the arm, and the hand on the head of the arm, and put the arm over one inch of a fingerbreadth, and let the forearm hang down, and leave the shoulder hanging down on the other side:
li jointure reva ens maintenant.	The jointure remains firm now.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is corrected, in whatever way it is, if you command that you put behind the shoulder a ball of wool as long as it is even, then put on the shoulder pad with a sprinkle of wheat flour, with incense and alum on the whole shoulder and around, then strain out behind the shoulder immediately, and turn the limb on the shoulder pad, and embrace the hand at its collar, and keep the hands still.</start_of_turn>
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost;	And it is necessary that it move slightly, as long as the limb is comfortable, for it will heal more quickly.
et puis menjuce plus aprés V jors ou VII, et le mueve;	Then move it more after five or seven days, and move it regularly
et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And if it is stiff and cannot be softened, if it is healed.</start_of_turn>
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	If the joint is forced out of place by moisture or any other cause, then you must administer cautery three times over, as it is placed before or alongside the cautery.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés VII jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis;	And if you do all of this, and it comes loose after seven days, and the joint does not stay in place, and cannot lift your arm up, then the nerves at the head of the shoulder are compressed or stretched or softened.</start_of_turn
et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	and the joint will never be stable in its place.</start_of_turn>
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure;	The dislocation which is towards the elbow, and the upper arm, or behind, if it is made by impulse, and extension of the hands, and it is administered with another binder.
et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and heals as long as it is whole.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after healing the limb complains by remaining stiff, if the patient uses it many times, while the stiffness gradually subsides, it returns to its former state.
de la dislocation dou coute	And if after healing the limb complains by remaining stiff, if the patient uses it many times, while the stiffness gradually subsides, it returns to its former state.
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient;	When the joint of the shoulder is loosened at the points, and comes back at the points;
et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien;	and is loosened all around, both front and back, and the dislocation is not properly restored, for it is seen and felt well;
et desalue selonc chescune figure.	and is loosened like a deformed limb
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	And when you join the patient with the limb, if he wishes to see it clearly.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	For the joint is tight, and cannot bend the arm, touch his shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener;	and you must immediately re-establish it even if it comes out again, for if it comes out again, if it is repeated, it will cause great suffering to bring it back
et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier;	And by chance it cannot be returned all at once, even if it is at the back.
si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	If it is more serious than the others, and causes greater pain, and by chance death comes from it.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes II mains;	When it is restored, if it is like this that we can bring it back, you stretch your hand with both hands;
et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And the arms are spread out, and the hands down towards the navel, up and down, and keep the joint together with its bones joined, or at the root of the bone, until it returns to its place.</start_of_turn>
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is in front, if it returns when you double your hand over your hand, and hold it from the root of the limb that is relaxed.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension;	And if it does not want to return to its place, give strong extension;
et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension;	and two assistants extend the limb and hold it for extension, so that it does not move during extension.</start_of_turn
puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large;	Then twist the arm from the shoulder outwards, and when you have enveloped a double-layered bandage long and wide around it.
et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne;	And when you look at the joint of the limb, if there is any oil on the joint to soften it, then stretch the joint until it snaps back into place.</start_of_turn>
et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	And when it is fixed, if you put on dry packing with an egg-shaped weight, and the strain is complete, and you support the limb at the collarbone of the patient, and leave it for a while, then remove it.</start_of_turn>
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse;	And if the joint is firmly in its place, leave it alone and leave it alone.</start_of_turn
et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis;	And if you see that the joint does not settle well, repeat the packing and the weight, and leave it like that until it is firmly set.</start_of_turn
puis le deslie.	Then he lets go.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez;	Then if he feels pain after the resetting of the joint, and it moves, if you bathe him and wipe him thoroughly, and press until it is relieved;
ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain;	or you put on the joint a fat mutton nail, then leave it in place for a day and a night, and then remove the nail, and wash it;
et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain;	and when he sweats, wipe the joint gently, and then put the nail back, and then enter or bathe.
et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and do this two or three times until he is healed.
et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus;	and if you see, put on a wet poultice soaked in urine with chaff, and strain it on;
si revenra a sa disposition.	If it returns to its place.
li dislocation de la main	The dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures.	If the shoulder joint is loosened and the return is easy, more than the others.
Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	However, it is necessary to restore it to its place immediately, while it is loosened, even if the limb is swollen or there is an abscess
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne.	And restore it if you place the affected limb on a table, extend the limb, and look at its position, so that it places its palm on the surface of the joint and holds it until it returns to its place
Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu;	However, take note that you must watch to see if it is truly in its place
adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	Then put the patient’s hand behind their back on a table during extension and reduction
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	And if the dislocation is at the back of the hand, let the patient place the back of his hand on the table, and I look put his hand on that appearance of the joint.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien.	If it comes back now, that is good.
Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If not, if the strain of the relaxed post-treatment hair causes the wound to reopen, and you leave it in its original position, it must recommence.</start_of_turn>
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte;	And if you cannot bear it, and you do not put it back after a few days, the joint will become stiff.</start_of_turn
et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout:	and do not cause any pain to the patient except when the hand is softened, and cannot move anything at all.</start_of_turn
adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere;	therefore, when the nerves are cut or the arteries are clipped.</start_of_turn
si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	if there is no other remedy except to extract by fire cautery, and by chance that is worth nothing.</start_of_turn
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse .v. jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hand is at rest, if you put on the bandage that we have mentioned, then strain and leave it for three days, then remove it and leave it be.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it cannot move well, and there is no pain, if there is hot swelling, and you rub it until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
de la dislocation des dois de la main	of the dislocation of the shoulder of the arm</start_of_turn>
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre;	Never are the thumbs desoiled at the wrist, never at the back of the palm or the belly.
adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins;	Therefore, hold the thumb steady, and support the dislocation until it returns, then keep the head of the thumb towards the part where it is joined.
et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor;	Leave it for two days, and then put it even again.
et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut;	And do not bind it, as we have said, and do not move it, and bind it tightly
et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Do it often, until it is firm, and do the same if it is desoiled at the belly of the thumb, and do as you did before, until it is healed
et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	And do the same if it is desoiled from another part.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	Due to the loosening of the scapula from the back.
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the scapula of the back or the neck is loosened, or if there are several loosenings, if there is no remedy, for the patient’s life is in jeopardy.</start_of_turn>
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I.	And if the patient egests spur or urine contrary to their usual course, they will not be able to hold it, and often their limbs will be softened, or both thighs or both arms or one.
Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars;	And often the limb will slip at three parts.
celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»:	The one that slips at the back is called "gilbosite".
li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance:	The cure is that if the "gilbosite" comes from childhood:
si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	if there is no cure or healing in all
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit;	and that which comes from sitting or from blows or from similar things, say the old methods of treatment with great words, or there is no great benefit in them;
mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	But I have abridged it according to my intention, and I have composed instruments in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit;	I say that in the swelling that comes before the bite, there is no remedy;
et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis;	And just as much as that which comes directly on two coasts, one cannot cure fire only for what comes from behind, as I have said
et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece;	And it is that the patient should extend his face on one side and suffer from his eyes, without blinking.
puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles;	Then I take a fist and put it at the head of the sufferer’s arm, and I take another and put it by the elbow, and I bind the upper part of the patient’s arm with a bandage, and I take another and put it on the thigh, and I take another and put it on the calf, and another on the ankle
et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons;	And two ministers know the limits, one at the head and the other at the feet, among the two thumbs.
et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	And be well closed, the thumb as we have said, and the eye looks put its palms on the spine, until it returns.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee;	And if it does not return by this cure, take a handbreadth long, and hold the thumb down, and the patient lies on the side, and put the thumb of the handbreadth down by the side, then put the middle of the handbreadth on the spine
et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu;	and put the eye of the thumb on the other thumb of the handbreadth, and press well, until it returns to its place
et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	and if you see that it breaks the nail that breaks at the hand.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc;	And it is that you pinch two times at the head of the patient of an arm of great size, and over the pieces two others, and between each pinch, a sow and an ounce, a palm of space of length.
et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent;	and between each pinch, I make a hole, or the knot turns right, and let the pin be firmly in the ground so that it does not move.</start_of_turn>
et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet;	and between two pins there is one pin that returns, so that the thread returns, and there are two small pins of a palm in length to secure the knot.</start_of_turn>
et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	and then the thread that is among the pins at the knot over the head, and the other thread over the pieces at the other knot, and between these two pins turn their knot to the whole thread, and the master puts in the pin even as we have said.</start_of_turn
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And when it is even, put upon an absorbent plaster with much yolk, and then press, and then support with a tablet of three fingers' length, that it may encompass the belly of the rib and the part of the spine that is sensitive; then bind with a thread, as we have said, and use the patient with subtle nourishment until he is healed.
et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant;	And if nothing comes to an end of the sickness, if it is necessary, it is to administer soothing and relaxing medicines, with the support that we have mentioned before.
et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations;	And never give a piece of lead, and never does the appearance come from behind the spin of the back, and take care that this is not a dislocation;
et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption:	it is the bone that is opened, for we must not presume otherwise.
par aventure feroit venir la mort.	By chance death comes to pass.
des dislocations de la hainche	Dislocations of the shoulder.
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures;	The joints of the thigh and the shoulder only come loose by dislocation, and do not come loose like the others;
et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc IIII parties:	The thigh joint is loosened in three parts:
dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier;	front and back, and front and back
et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	the more inward it is, the more it is loosened front and back
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu;	And the knowledge of dislocation inwards is that when one joins the painful limb with the flesh, if it is longer, and opens more the patient's belly than before, and cannot double his knee over the fire;
et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	and it is the lord who is taken away by excessive heat, for in this case the head of the shoulder comes loose
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of the one who comes to the rescue, if it is that this accident is contrary to those mentioned before.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement;	And the sign of the one who has it in front, if he has it well his limb according to the accomplishment.
toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	However, do not double the knee joint because of pain, and if you see him making a fart, if he cannot hold it back, he will urinate, and swell his belly, and when he walks, he will pass over his heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the sign of the one who comes to the rescue, if it is that he cannot expand his knee, cannot double it, and is that his limb is shorter than the other, and his ankle is softened, and that his shoulder joint is dislocated at the root of the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure;	You must bring back this semblance of dislocation if it is an old one, and it will remain according to its disposition, if there is no remedy;
et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	and do not presume anything.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des IIII manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre;	And in this case where the dislocation is fresh, and it is a matter of three dislocations, if you hurry that you turn the joint, and stretch it inwards and outwards, and move it to the front and the back;
par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	By chance, if it returns, and there is no need for another remedy.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil;	If it does not return in this manner, if you must seize it firmly, with two hands or one that is sufficient, that it be bound upon the knee;
et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe;	And another minister extends his hand downwards in part as much as he can stretch out his hands downwards as far as his elbows, then grasp it with a thread that is sufficient for the hip bone
et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien;	And another holds the head of the limb.
et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	And stretch up and down all at once, until the patient is lifted from the earth at once, and remains suspended
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as .iiij. semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This method of extension is often used in this case, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is well.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance.	If this does not work, it is necessary to apply another remedy.
Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele;	When the dislocation is in the shoulder, if it is convenient, command the patient to lie on his side, then put the limb on the root of the humerus, and the limb which is below the elbow, then stretch the limb upwards towards the elbow and towards the forcele.
puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment:	then take hold of his arms again, embrace the great limb of the painful shoulder, and extend it towards the front:
si revenra a son leu maintenant;	if it returns to its place now;
et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	and this method of dislocation is lighter than the others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres;	And if you do not manage to hold it in this manner as we have said, if it is convenient, tie the two feet of the patient together with a strong thread above the two nails, and above the two knees, and let the painful limb be extended twice as much as the others.
puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc;	Then let it hang from the top of a pole, or on the ground two arms’ length.
puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	Then command the minister to grasp the head of the limb, and let another minister hang beside the patient, who graspes the limb, for the joint now returns firmly.</start_of_turn>
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi;	And when the dislocation is out of place, if the patient lies down, as we have said in the case of hiccuping, grasp the limb properly above and below the painful area.</start_of_turn
puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme;	Then put two cushions, one at the head and one at the foot, and put one cushion between the thighs of the patient in the form of a cross.</start_of_turn
et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	And put moist towels around the area, so that it does not bleed the patient, then extend the thumbs of the ministers towards him, and the one who has the dislocation put it equal in his hand.</start_of_turn
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	If it returns, that is good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If not, put on the table. Press on it as we said in the previous case, and keep the patient lying on the right side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit;	And when the dislocation is forward, if it is necessary to extend the affected limb immediately, do as I have said.
et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	and place the eye of the pain over the painful limb, then press on the other hand, and extend it towards the navel.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches;	And if the dislocation is backward, if it is not possible to extend the limb forward, do not lift it up from the ground, but rather that it be as if it had been dislocated backward, as we have said above concerning the two fingers;
et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table;	be on its face, and the limb is extended as we have said before, and must be pressed on the joint at the table
et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz;	and will be at rest when the limb is straightened, and will be even.
adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve;	Therefore, grasp the thighs and place the support, and strain with a bandage, so that the hip does not move.
et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus;	and rest for three days or four, then remove it, and place the support upon it
et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors;	and if you see that they are even, if strained as before, and leave them for three days
puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	then remove it, and make it swell gently, until the limb is comfortable.
de la dislocation dou genoil	of dislocation from the shoulder-blade.
Li genous est desaluez selonc III manieres:	The shoulder is dislocated in three ways:
c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier;	namely, forward and backward, and downward;
et ne desalue point devant.	and do not damage it in front
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez;	and the sign is that you command the patient to bend his leg at his thigh, and if it does not move to his thigh, the dislocation has not been reduced;
et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez;	And the restoration of all is that you make the patient sit upright, and extend his limb if he can, and place your hand on his back, and place his foot on your knees.
puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment;	Then take his shoulder joint in your palms, and pull inwards between your thumbs, then bend his two ribs forming the shoulder joint.
et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement;	And another minister extends his foot, until the shoulder joint returns to its place, and the sign is that his limb is properly aligned with his hip slightly bent
et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie;	And place the bandage on, and make the limb breathe freely at the hip, and keep it bound firmly for three days or four, and then remove it
et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And do not move the patient too much, until the limb is comfortable.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	And if the limb is not at its proper place, if an extension is administered strongly, as we said in the treatment of the hernia, until it is healed.
de la dislocation dou talon	of dislocation.
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The talons never is measured, and never is fully evacuated, and always is swollen and painful.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee:	And the sign is if the ankle is swollen, and it inclines toward the part where it is dislocated.
li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	If it is slight, one must gently hold it out with the hands when it is only slightly swollen.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville;	And when it is completely drained, if you must make the patient sit upright, and hold him firmly by the leg under the ankle;
puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut;	Then pull the limb towards your right hand, then to the left twice, and then stretch it upwards, and keep the limb well stretched out
et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet;	And do this twice as we have said, while pulling and stretching the limb
s’elle revient, c’est bien;	If it returns, that is good.
se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient;	If not, if you begin the work again, for it will return.
et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide;	If it cannot return at once, if you make the patient lie face down on the earth, and place your foot firmly on the ground between his thighs, and spread out the blankets around him, that he does not groan;
puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet;	Then hold the limb firmly, and another assistant should extend the limb at his hands or at the elbow, which is placed on the collarbone of the limb.
puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent;	Then extend the shoulders of the assistants equally, and hold the dressing either beside the thighs of the patient to hold the patient when it is extended
puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	Then place the eyes equally on the dislocation at his hands, and another assistant grasps the limb firmly at the shoulder, and the dislocation will return immediately.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois;	When she reaches a point, put on the dressing and stamp above, and strain forms, and lie the thumb to the leg, and guard the nerves that are above the ankle behind, so that they are not too tight.
puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain;	Then leave it for two or three days, and if the strain subsides, if the tension is released
puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors;	Then take it off at a third or a fourth, and tell the patient to wait for three days;
et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	And if it goes before this time, it is not certain that it will not damage again.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it persists, it is necessary to know that it must be appeased, as we have said elsewhere, until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
des dois	otherwise
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When they are dislocated, if they are properly repositioned without resistance, it is a light matter.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne;	And if the dislocation is not in any knot of the bone, it is to be known that you must make the patient sit on one leg or on the table straight, and put your thumb on what is open of these joints, and press your thumb until it returns
et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie;	And when they are even, and nothing is open, if you put some salt on the plant of the foot and put it on a table for two fingers, then the swelling will form, and leave it for three days, then take it off.
et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and rest it until it is healed.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	It is from wound and dislocation together.
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert:	When the wound comes with the dislocation, and it is seen to be restored, many times it has been that the patient died:
si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis;	if you are not presumptuous in the cure, if you do not know the art and have not used it for a long time, and if you are not merciful and compassionate and late, do not be bold;
et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit;	and use at first soothing things about the abscess, and leave the patient in the hand of God, if you do not see hope of health;
et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne;	And when you see hope, if you now restore the limb to its place, even if the incisions remain open;
et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis;	And when the limb is in its place, if you administer calming things around the incision, and cure the wound, as it should be, with dried oil;
et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples;	And if there is a fracture of the dislocation, and minor bones are fractured, if the bones are displaced, do as we have said in simple ailments;
et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	And take care not to enter the way of fear, as I have said, for this will bring you harm according to your Creator, and for the preservation of your soul and body.
