O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	O you, most dear sons, I have finished this book which is the latest fruit of the science of medicine, and I have completed it by its demonstrations and pronouncements.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it has come to my mind that I shall accompany this treatise with another part of the work of hands, namely surgery.
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of hands is rare in our region and is strange to all, if it is not known and learned, and if only the small descriptions in the books of the ancients remain, which the hands have done
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And thus comes the error and the emptiness, and are closed the understandings and is aligned the science.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	Or it seems to me that I shall make it alive altogether the order of this physician in accordance with the way of exposure and declaration and abbreviation; and I shall come together the forms of the instruments of cautery, and other instruments of the work with the arrangement of the declaration and preparation of it, as it is necessary
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And it is worth noting that none of the great masters of hands is found in our time; therefore the art of medicine is prolonged.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And thus says Hippocrates that we must not fear what is not, but rather what is; and in the arts also.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	We are told in the opening of this book that he who is ignorant of the things to be foretold should fear nothing that is unknown, but rather what is known; for I have often seen more harm done by those who are familiar with this science than by those who depart from it and its principles.</start_of_turn>
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa .i. apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	For I have seen a foolish man who, having copped a scrophule or a woman’s neck, has cut the veins of the neck; and as much blood has issued from this as would fill a woman’s hands.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens .iij. jors.	And thus another evil which treats a stone of a bladder, and the stone was great; it carried away with it a piece of the bladder, and was dead for two days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And thus I have already been called to treat, and I saw the condition of the patient and the greatness of the stone, and I knew well if it were cut out, it would die.</start_of_turn>
Et vis .i. autre mire qui prist en cure .i. duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi .i. termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And thus another evil which treats a stone of our land which had the limb broken, and with the splinter it caused an injury; and the physicians of our land are compelled by strong constraint to leave the fracture above the wound, and do not allow any bleeding, and leave it until the end; and they command that it not be loosened again; and when the limb was entirely freed and the splinter was gone, it was lost.</start_of_turn>
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I beseech you to come here, and I hasten to come and loosen the limb; and when I see it dislocated, it is at peace and does not feel any pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	But every way the corruption is already confirmed or the limb is unsound, and it cannot be healed; and it does not cease until the corruption goes away from the limb as long as the limb is completely lost
Et vis .i. autre mire qui effondra .i. apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And thus another remedy which is useful for the swelling of the veins is to apply a blistering salve or poultice which is made with the malice of its lord.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For a wound that is caused by melancholy humours, it is only useful to touch it with fire if it is not in a limb where one can remove all that is corrupted.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en .ij. divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And thus, indeed, you must know that the work of hands is become into twelve divisions: that is to say, there is peril in many positions; and I will show in each chapter where there is doubt and peril.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	For you must take care that your words be guarded, lest they bring harm to your fellows. If you grasp your weapons closely and undertake your ailments lightly and firmly, and use the better way, then by the grace of God you shall come out well; and leave the perilous diseases of grief behind. Stay firm in your arms lest you doubt, and fear not for you will reach glory in this world and the next.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	He who is careless in his admonitions is like a physician who does not heed the ailments of his patients: “Do not take me for a fool in treating this disease, for I am not like the fools of the world.”
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	I have devised this treatment in three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapter deals with fire cautery and surgical instruments in general, from the head to the toes; and about the forms of instruments, and of the implements of cautery, and all that is necessary for the work
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapter deals with amputation and incision, of abscesses and wounds, and the extraction of arrows, and similar things; and concerning the order of instruments and their forms.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapter deals with restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things; and it is ordered from the chief down to the feet, and from the forms of the instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	As we have remembered from our work, it is necessary to say what is the quality of the aid and the great care of chest complexion
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the quality of the aid, and the great care, is the longest word and the subtlest science and the greatest secret response; and of this they speak more of the sages, and they agree with this; and I find that their words are burdensome, for I reduce the length.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que .ij. complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that the cautery helps universally to all complexion or where there is matter, for there are two complexions: that is to say a complexion hot and matter, and a complexion dry and matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In complexion chaude et seche, matters assembled, some declare that the cautery is a great aid; others declare that the cautery is of no avail in diseases except those caused by heat and drought.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	For the nature of fire is hot, and it must not be the cure for hot diseases by heat, nor for drought; and thus those who say the opposite that the cautery does great aid in hot and dry diseases that arise from the humours of the body
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you compare the body of a man and its moisture to the complexion of fire, you find the body cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I consent to this word.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have never seen it happen otherwise by experience.</start_of_turn>
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And in every way, I know of no other way than that which has been shown by experience, since I have known by long experience the physician of cauteries, and the diversity of humoral complexions, and the causes and dispositions of their diseases, and the results and remedies of their treatments; for other complexions we have no experience, even in cold and moist diseases.</start_of_turn
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And you must all acknowledge and agree to the cautery.</start_of_turn
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know this, friends, that fire cautery is more effective for certain diseases than burning medicine.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For the fire cautery is simple, and brings no excessive heat except to the part that is being treated, and does not harm any other part besides that to which it is applied.</start_of_turn>
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	Medicines that burn come from one member to another by transmutation, and cause disease in the limb by their severity; and by chance, the patient experiences suffering. The fire because of its height and the goodness of its substance does not make me do this, if there is no excess.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	And thus I have learned through experience and the length of my service and study in this art, and I believe in its truth; for this is what philosophers have shown in demonstrating. Therefore I apologize for the length of my words, for it troubles me not that I must repeat what is secret which is hidden or fire, and the quality of work, as it banishes diseases from the body, as the philosopher has said. Or you may consider it in your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	Know then, son, when the cauteries must be made and when they should be renounced.</start_of_turn>
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	I say that the cautery is useful in all tensions, for the harmful things that arise are expelled by the help of the cautery; and even if the cautery is for necessary pains that are pressing and urgent and cannot wait until the greater harm has passed from the limb.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And do not think, my son, that because fools make light of this matter; for the disease which is cured by cautery has no remission; and he says so himself; but it is not so simple as that, for cautery is but a medicine which moves the complexion and dries up humors which are the cause of pain, and is worth more than medicine for its haste, and for the excellence of its work and its sovereignty.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	And know that the disease never comes according to the complexion of the patient and the root of the disease and its virtue; and are gathered in him the superfluities by the acquisition of foods and similar things, if these are not administered with cautery in place or if there is much superfluity and moisture, for the cautery is of no avail for pain, and the similar things, and part of the pain does not return; but this is often the case.</start_of_turn>
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And many people do not understand that because cautery is called the last of medicine, and so it seems; but they do not believe that cautery is worth more than medicine, but their understanding is false, for it is the last of medicine because when we have administered various treatments for any disease and they have not been of avail, then we administer cautery, and it is worth more.</start_of_turn>
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Therefore, although cautery is at the rear of medicine, it is not as the fools of this age believe.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	The ancients say that gold cautery is more merciful than iron, and they do not say that fire is harmful except for the quality of the gold and the fineness of its substance; and they say that the smell of the cautery does not cause harm, but this is not true, for I have proved it, and I have seen that it is seen in many people; and gold cautery is worth as much as iron, as they say.</start_of_turn>
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	And indeed, whenever you burn an instrument of gold, you do not know how much it is charred by the color of the gold and how much it has cooled; and if you burn it too much, it will be ruined; and there is enough hindrance.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And for this reason we use the fire cautery, as we have learned it to be useful in our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	Or you have commanded this chapter from the head downwards, forasmuch that the patient will be more comfortable finding them
dou cautere olivaire	olive oil cautery
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	These cauteries are useful both for moisture and for cold, and there are two kinds which are made for the cause of a disease which is called "soda", and for the cause of many humors which descend from the head as sweat, and on the ears, and for a multitude of dreams and pains of the teeth and throat, and even for all diseases which come from cold as paralysis and soda and apoplexy and similar diseases.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief .iij. nuis ou .iiij., selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The form of this cautery is that the patient be purged with a medicinal solution modifying the head, either twice or thrice, according to what is useful and agreeable and the custom of the patient; and then restore the head of the patient.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses .ij. eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	And then set it comfortably between your hands, and put his hands over his stomach; after that put the root of your thumb on the root of his thumb between his two eyes; and there will come out his two middle fingers, if it bleeds from the base then cover the cautery which is called "olive", for this is the form:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os .i. sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren .i. poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse .iij. jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	And put out the sign of ink, and do descending and extracting your hand somewhat forward and backward; then keep your hand steadily, and renew the cautery until you see the bone somewhat; and if you do not see it, continue the cautery until you see the bone as I have told you; after that take up one fourth of an inch of solder, and put in awe and soft cotton inside, and take out the bone, and leave it for two days; after that put on a soft bandage on the outside; and leave on it until the swelling is gone. Then cure the wound of the swelling which is called "tetrafarmaçon", until it is healed.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And they say the ancients, the more time the wound remains open, the more it purges; and for this reason we must apply pressure.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And they say none of these that we must leave the cautery on for so long that any part of the bone is scorched, and then we must rejoin what is burnt of the bone and it must be cured.</start_of_turn>
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme .i. vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And they say another that we must leave the cautery on for so long that it is as wide as a woman’s girdle; and we must press so hard that the bone is forced out as wide as a woman’s girdle; and we must leave the wound open for a long time; and then we must cure and bandage it.</start_of_turn
Et ces .ij. manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And these two methods of cauterizing do not seem to me to be suitable for all bones, for in some men or when there is pain; and I seem to think that I must leave it; for the head of the shoulder is easily dislocated by continuous solutions of the body, as we have seen in other members; and even when the head of the shoulder is weak by nature, the first semblance of cautery is more salve and milder for me, and in this way I shall obtain greater health.</start_of_turn
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	From ancient times pain in the head.
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	When there is chronic pain in the head that lasts a long time, the physician should use leech herbs, pills called "cochie", and vomiting of the head, oils, and poultices; and if we do the cautery as we have said above, it is of no use.</start_of_turn>
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Take care that if the patient's pain is strong and not too severe; then burn the cautery only as much as we have said above.</start_of_turn
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai .i. cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est .i. leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	After you have burned the cautery on the skin of the head up to the bone, as we have said, and you have burned the vein which is called "vasselz"; and that is where we put sponges; and hold your hand so that you do not see blood until the bone: the patient feels much greater pain in this burn than in others, and I will speak of it later; and it is better to burn the hair close to the root than to burn the middle of the hair, and that is the form:
dou cautere dou chief	Dou cautere dou chief.
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc .ij. manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When in a part of the shoulder there is sudden pain, and the disease is widespread, and the head of the shoulder is expelled by medicines that modify it, and other cures have been made as I have said in the division of diseases, and all this brings no benefit: then one must make cauteries according to two methods, namely with vinegar and with fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope .i. poc as .ij. chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi .xij. houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi .ij. jors ou .iij.; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	The vinegar cautery is as follows: if you take a spoonful of vinegar and apply it to the skin, the eschar will be loosened and the burn will be removed. If there are two bones involved, do the same with the temple where the pain is located until you can rejoin the spoonful of vinegar under the skin; and when it is rejoined, bind and stretch it well and leave it for 12 hours; then remove it and treat the burn with garlic, and leave the wound open for one or two days; then put on a bandage as much as is necessary for support.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the treatment of the swelling while it is still sane; and if you see that you do nothing of the medicines I have written or dose them with other medicines.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	The iron cautery is performed according to this method.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	The fire cautery is performed as follows:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait .i. poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And it is called "closed" because its head is made in the shape of a cup or it has a slight curve, and in the middle there is a small mark; and put out the painful limb, and hold your hand and slightly withdraw the fire until half of the thickness of the hair is burned; and keep your hand away from the artery, which must not be burned, and there will be plenty of blood.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par .iij. jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	After placing cotton wool over the wound, take out the limb by .iij. days; then put moist cotton wool in the wound, and then cure the limb of swelling until it is healed. And if you wish to cauterize this embolism with the cautery which is called "cultellare", at the tip, and keep the artery in this embolism which is not the ancient one.
de emigraine	After placing cotton wool over the wound, take out the limb by .iij. days; then put moist cotton wool in the wound, and then cure the limb of swelling until it is healed. And if you wish to cauterize this embolism with the cautery which is called "cultellare", at the tip, and keep the artery in this embolism which is not the ancient one.
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	When you cure an embolism as we have said before in the division of diseases, and it does no good, and you see that the cautery must precede medical treatment and that it will not suffice, then you must avoid the cautery which is called "cultellare" as long as it is blunt; and sign out the limb by drawing a line half an inch long, and hold your hand once, and strain that you do not cover the artery and that no blood vessel comes loose; and take care of the jaw that it does not move when you move it, and that it does not move more than the movement of the muscle and spasm does to the patient; and take care of the discoloration of blood from the artery when it is cut, or when it is cut there is great fear and doubt about it, and that is not studied and experienced; and leave the work half done; but I will tell you later how to retain blood when the artery is cut, and I will show you in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait .ij. coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	If you see that this cautery does not suffice for the ailment, and the patient is suffering, cauterize the surrounding area as we have said, and cure the wound until it is healed; and if you see that, administer the cautery that we have said or the chapter on the extraction of the artery, with the cautery that has a pair of scissors; and this cautery is better than the former and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	If you see that this cautery does not suffice for the ailment, and the patient is suffering, cauterize the surrounding area as we have said, and cure the wound until it is healed; and if you see that, administer the cautery that we have said or the chapter on the extraction of the artery, with the cautery that has a pair of scissors; and this cautery is better than the former and more helpful.
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When in the ear comes pain from cold, and we have applied various healing medicines and other cures that we have mentioned in the division, and the pain does not subside, then you must apply this cautery which is called the “pinch,” for this is its form:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les .ij. se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait .x. poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After pricking all around the painful ear, or around the two joints if the pain persists in both, and you have loosened a piece from the root of the ear as soon as you have signed the mark; and there are ten points around the ear; after that, cure the mark until it is healed.
de la torture de la bouche	After pricking all around the painful ear, or around the two joints if the pain persists in both, and you have loosened a piece from the root of the ear as soon as you have signed the mark; and there are ten points around the ear; after that, cure the mark until it is healed.
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	Torture which must be cured by cautery is not fierce except for those that move from phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of diseases; and do not make any cautery which appears to come from drying and swelling of nerves.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de .iij. cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des .ij. levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When you cure this semblance of torture which is made of fumes of hydras and purges of head and gargling, it is worth nothing; therefore you must cauterize the patient with two cautery irons: one at the root of the ear, and the other at the temple, and the third between the two eyebrows; and put the cautery on the part which opens well, and make the cautery under the head of the ear below a little distance from the corner of the eye, and another at the temple as long as a bean; and leave the cautery on until half of the hair is burnt; and that is the form of the cautery.
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the like of a cutlass which we have shown you before is made, but it is a more subtle and effective remedy than the knife should be a larger one; after curing like this as I have said above, as long as it is not harmful.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai .iiij. cauteres: .ij. sus les .ij. cornes dou chief, et .i. emmi le chief, et .i. ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When apoplexy is ancient and you cure it as we have said above, and it does not profit, and the patient does not have fever, then you must make three cauteries: one on each corner of the head, one in the middle of the head, and one on the vessel which is called the «vasselz» as we have said above, and the last cauterize on the mouth of the stomach; and be cured as we have said above.
de litargie	De litargie.
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	When lying down. The patient must be given wine in large quantities and pounded pills that temper the brain; after which the patient raises their head and places on the skull the position of mustard seeds which is written or treats plasters; and this is the manner of cautery: as I have said.</start_of_turn>
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai .iij. cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere .i. doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai .i. cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, .ij. autres sus les .ij. cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If he is sane, well and good; but if not, two cauteries are to be made on the head, scraping downwards until juice flows out, with an interval of about two fingers between each cautery. And the wound is to be treated like the others. If you see me add more, and the patient is suffering, I make another cautery in the middle; and if the patient is well, two more on the two corners, and the wound is to be treated until it is healed. And the cautery which is called the "olive" is to be made as I have said before.</start_of_turn
de la froidor dou chief	From the coldness of the head.
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et .i. derrier et .iij. sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai .iiij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	From the coldness of the head, it must be that the head be loosened from the hair and from what has been said previously; after raising the patient’s head, then make the cautery immediately on the head and on the beard, that is to say behind and before the eyebrow; and if you must do more, and the limb is moist and the patient is pale, and the disease is violent, make three cauteries on the eyebrow of the back; and leave them as long as the patient can bear it, and keep your hand steady; after the cure while it is still sound, and is the cautery which is called “olivare” which has been mentioned previously.
de l’epilempsie	of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	The epilentiques must only use fire cautery when the patient is feverish; and first modify the hair of the head and other cures that we have mentioned in the division when the patient is great and suffering from excessive medical care.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai .i. cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et .i. cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if it is a young person who cannot endure suffering, make him gargle and chew modifying the hair of the head often with bones of meat; afterwards, raise the head slightly, and make .i. cautery as we have mentioned before, and .i. cautery on the vessels and on the abscess; and if the patient is strong and suffering, make cauteries as we have said to those who have paralysis and mollification of limbs, on the spine of the back and neck, or make the olive cautery as we have mentioned.</start_of_turn>
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai .i. cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is young, make .i. subtle cautery as follows:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When melancholy is the cause, superabundance or corrupted humors and thick phlegm, then you must cauterize with some of the cauteries as we have said for the paralyzed patient.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if the cause is melancholy, the declining superfluity due to melancholy, and the sick person is moist, then give him something to drink that will expel what is before the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai .i. torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com .i. cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After that, take the chief of the sick person; then make a circle of lint well made, as much as a circle, and put it around the chief; and hold the patient’s limbs crossed, and keep them firmly held from all sides; then present the dressing, and moisten it with old alum; and put the fire to the temper, so that it should not suffer too much; then drain the circle from within the chief, and let it cool down; do this to the sick person every week once with another good treatment, until he is healed
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	Or if you see it cauterized in making many holes throughout the burn
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	This method of cautery soothes the brain immediately; then put on wet cotton wool in the wound and grease it with geline.
de l’awe des eulz	Or if thou seest cauterize the head in making many points at all the cautery. This manner of cautery doth diminish the cerebrum immediately; and then put upon moist cotton in burrow and in grease of geline.
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When awe first comes, as eulz by the signs which I have said in the division, then begin and do give the patient something to drink that will temper the head, and keep it away from all moisture, and make him sweat or bathe more times when fasting.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as .ij. eulz ensamble, ou en .i. se li dessendemens est en .i.; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	After he has been commanded to reinsert his head, and when he has made cautery at the head, and has made thirteen cauteries upon the two temples when they descend from the brow to the two eyes together, or if they descend from the brow alone; and close at the end of the cautery all the veins and arteries that are beside the ear, and that the cautery should be long in proportion to the width of the temple; and beware of excessive bleeding, and if you see too much blood isse, if it is stained with parts of blood as you have.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les .ij. os derrier.	And I will teach you concerning the extraction of veins and incisions of the cautery how you shall support them; and never make cautery or irritate beside the two lower bones behind
dou cors des larmes	except for tears.
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: .i. cautere emmi le chief, et .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples, et .ij. cauteres ou haiterel desoz les .ij. os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout .i. petit cautere.	When the tears of the eyes are old and accustomed and are on the veins, or bleed the arteries that are in appearance near the brow; and it is seen that these are cold, fleumatic superfluities, then make the cautery as I have said at the beginning of this chapter, that is to say: cautery of the brow and two cauteries on the two temples and two cauteries or to ligate the two bones; and if necessary, make a further cautery below the eye at the root of the nose with a small cautery.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	When the tears of the eyes are old and accustomed and are on the veins, or bleed the arteries that are in appearance near the brow; and it is seen that these are cold, fleumatic superfluities, then make the cautery as I have said at the beginning of this chapter, that is to say: cautery of the brow and two cauteries on the two temples and two cauteries or to ligate the two bones; and if necessary, make a further cautery below the eye at the root of the nose with a small cautery.
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide .iij. nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai .ij. cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les .ij. sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you have applied the medicine as we have said in the division, and it brings no benefit, then give the patient two spoonfuls of wine; after that, raise the head and make a cautery or half of an olive cautery; and make two cauteries of the cautery called "clavilis" on the two nipples, one below the cheekbones; and be careful not to touch the artery.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the form of cautery which is called "clavilis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	When the oil of the patient is softened by disease and moisture, then the cautery of this burn is called "olive oil.
de coi ci est li forme:	The iron cautery is performed as follows
Et se tu vues si fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you see that you must cauterise twice on the two hairs as long as the hairs are; do not leave the hand [holding the instrument] until a third of the moisture has been burned away, as I have said
dou poil qui point l’oil	because of the hair which points the oil.
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	Never fail that when the hairs of the oil have become converted to the beard, prick the oil, and make cautery in three ways: that is, of fire or burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	Never fail that when the hairs of the oil have become converted to the beard, prick the oil, and make cautery in three ways: that is, of fire or burning medicine. For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they are born and are equal, then place the patient in a comfortable position; after that mark on the skin the figure that is like that of a sparrow's feather or like the beginning of a sign from the hairs; then put a moist cloth on the oil and a poultice of persillain on top, and then burn the cautery as follows:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi .iij. jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After cauterizing on the figure that you have marked and several times, that the hair should be as dark as possible in that place; and the sign of the health of the work is that you see the master retreat, and the hair is raised to the point of the oil; then take your hand away, and leave it be for two days, and put a moist cloth over the wound until the swelling has subsided; then cure it with oil until it is healed.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if afterwards the hair comes out, and the master is softened, then repeat the cautery on the same place as before; and if the hair is plucked out, if the cautery is done so that the master returns to its natural position, and is even, and does not prick the oil.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en .i. oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en .i., et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse .i. poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The cautery of burning medicine is that you command the patient to leave the hair long and even, then make a parchment of the shape of the ivy leaf; then take frankincense and live charcoal, each a third, and grind them together well; and make it hot, if it does not cool down, and put on the shape that you have made like the ivy leaf, and put the master on the wound with eggs; and if the disease persists with only oil, one must open in one, and if in both; and put cotton soaked in oil on the wound.  And the head of the patient should be in its normal position and put your thumb showing on the medicine, and press it once or twice every time the patient feels the bite of the medicine, because he feels the bite as well as fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done this for a long time, if the bones of medicine are at your disposal.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	And when the bite has passed, if you lift the limb, if you see the limb raised just as high as before by the contraction of fire or by incision; and if it is firm, it is well
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If this does not suffice, if you repeat the medicine from the beginning or the medicine has not worked, while your works are equal and your eyes are fixed; then put on wet cotton wool in the burrow until the hairs are grown, afterwards cure the root of the swelling which is called "dyafenis" and others, until they are healed.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	And if you have taken care of your work with great care so that there is no need for medicine as your eyes are fixed
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And if the patient’s pulse becomes weak afterwards, and the hair pricks in the oil, if you restart the medicine on that limb which is softened by the pulse, as you did before; afterwards cure until it is healed; this is the form of the pulse of the myrtle tree.
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And know that the ears of men are diverse in size and shape, and according to that which is your constraint; do not give the right answer to him who is studying this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	And know that the ears of men are diverse in size and shape, and according to that which is your constraint; do not give the right answer to him who is studying this art.
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	And know that when you cure fistula as we have said in the divisions of diseases, and your cure does not profit, then you must burn it according to this method.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	Instruct the patient to put his head in your health; and hold his ears between your hands in part that they do not move, do not let them droop; then put cotton moistened with oil of rue or in vinegar on the wound; then burn the cautery that is partly: and is shaped like a pine cone, gather that it is the cautery; if you see, if it is pierced from one ear to the other, and if you see, if it is like a tent; but whatever, what is burned is worth more for your work.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	After pressing the fistula, it swells over, and with the passage of time, it becomes soft; if it closes, if the swelling subsides, and there is a discharge of pus, then immediately apply the burn cautery, and keep your hand on the cautery over the area not covered by oil, so that your hands do not tremble; put the cautery in the fat of the oil, and hold it down.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	If you approach the beginning of the cautery up to the bone, that would be well.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	If this is not the case, if you begin the cautery once more, and if you are skilled in this matter, leave it for three days; after that, put on a wet compress over the burn, and treat the desiccation until it is healed; and if forty days pass and it is not healed, apply corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed; and withdraw according to what comes to pass in this chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	And there is a method of cautery for fistula that none of the ancients have mentioned.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	When there is a fistula, and open the vessel; after that, put in the groove I camelin bones, which is the form:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	And I make in quantity of a third of a pound; and keep your hand or forearm firmly closed, and do not move the patient in any way, until the melted wax has settled to its oil; and it is best to put it on the patient’s wound covered with a moist bandage of wool or linen: for if the wax is too soft it will be like a fistula, and too hard it will cause great marvel for cleanliness.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	And if the fistula is cured by the cautery as we have said, then it is well.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	And if that does not suffice, if you must administer an opening to the nerve, and restore the fistula to its original place as it should be in its proper place.
des crevaices en levres	from cracks in the bones
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Many times there occur fractures in bones that are called "hair," and sometimes in bones of children.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe .i. petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you have cured these fractures as we have said in the divisions, and the cure does not help, then you must perform a small incision with a cautery as follows:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And put the patient immediately on those fractures until they are healed; after curing the limb until it is whole again.
de l’aposteme de la goule	of the abscess of the armpit.
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies .i. cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou .ij., aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When a boil comes up at the root of the toe or in the heel, or in the ankle or the root of the tooth, after that it becomes rotten and swollen and becomes a fistula; and you must cure it as we have said in the divisions, and it will not profit you: therefore you must cauterize it according to the size of the fistula; after the burn or perforation of the fistula, and hold your hand until life returns to the front or behind it; and do it once or twice, after the cure of what we have said in the cures, until it is healed; and if it is cured once, it is good; and if this is not the case, if you must uncover the bone and remove the corrupted bone, according to what you find in your treatise.
dou movement des dens	When a boil comes up at the root of the toe or in the heel, or in the ankle or the root of the tooth, after that it becomes rotten and swollen and becomes a fistula; and you must cure it as we have said in the divisions, and it will not profit you: therefore you must cauterize it according to the size of the fistula; after the burn or perforation of the fistula, and hold your hand until life returns to the front or behind it; and do it once or twice, after the cure of what we have said in the cures, until it is healed; and if it is cured once, it is good; and if this is not the case, if you must uncover the bone and remove the corrupted bone, according to what you find in your treatise.
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you must cure it by medicine; this is of no use: therefore you must put the patient’s head in your hand; after that, withdraw the cautery as much as you like; and put into the cautery some hot mustard immediately, and hold your hand until the patient feels the heat coming from the root of the tooth; after that, withdraw your hand and repeat the cautery as you please; after that, fill the patient’s mouth with salt and keep it there for an hour and a quarter.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in this way, when it is confirmed that it is moving, the head becomes soft and restrained, and the moisture corrupts and dries.
de la dolor des dens	And in this way, when it is confirmed that it is moving, the head becomes soft and restrained, and the moisture corrupts and dries out the pain of the teeth.
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc .ij. manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When toothache comes from cold, or there is cold or heat, and medical cures do not help, then it is necessary to cauterize in two ways: cautery of the burr and cautery of fire.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus .i. fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	If the burr is such that you take a burr of gutta, and you put a loop at the end on a sickle or pin; after that take cotton and wrap over the tip of a cloth, and moisten the burr well, and put on the tooth that aches immediately and hold until it is cooled; and do this often until its virtue reaches the root of the tooth. And if you see if there is still moisture left in the burr and cotton on the gut, and put on the tooth that aches, and put on the iron again until the fire comes to the edge of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	The cautery must be applied with such force that it seizes like a iron or thorn, and be thick enough so that the fire does not reach the patient’s mouth; after that, burn the cautery, so that it forms like this afterwards, and place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery is cool; do this often, for the pain will be as great as if you did it yesterday or today
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And you must make the patient fill his mouth with good burr in the haste of this cautery, and then withdraw it forcefully; this is the form of the cautery:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	Do as you please with the cautery, as you wish; this is the form of the burn.
des scrophules	And the size on the pierced abscess and moisture, if it is less severe, because they are of little blood. And if there are some of these abscesses or heads or if there is no moisture, and from these are those abscesses that I cauterize or heads of an old woman; and find the abscess just like a stone, rough and white, and cannot break it; and if there is no opening, we must make as good a wound as with a stone. In other abscesses coming or heads, forasmuch as these which come from the children and have roots of the ears, it overtures if it is at any time most dependent on the limb; and it cures as it should.
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the scrofula is of phlegm and cold moisture, and is not obedient to digestion by medicines, then evacuate the cautery cheese immediately, for its form has already appeared; make two incisions on the side of the abscess to let out the fumes from the other part; place the cautery on the abscess once, or twice if necessary, until it reaches the head of the abscess; if the abscess is small, make the cautery according to the quantity of the abscess and leave it in place for three days; place a wet bandage over the wound until the abscess is healed.
Li forme de la cainne:	The form of the abscess.
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	When moisture prevails over the channels of the pores, and indeed when this comes from a cold complexion, then it is necessary to first empty the patient with soluble medicines; after that perform the cautery at the root of the throat, and keep it so that you do not go down to the stomach, and do not dare to touch anything but the tip.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	After that, do another cautery at the neck joint at the head of the scapula, and let the cautery which is called "claw" remain in its place as we have seen beforehand; and cure the limb as we have said before until it is healed.
de la toust	When moisture prevails over the channels of the pores and is joined by a cold complexion, then it is recommended that the patient be first relieved by soluble medicines; after that perform the cautery at the root of the tongue, and hold it so that it does not go down to the throat, and do not burn more than necessary. Then perform another cautery at the joint of the collarbone and the head of the scapula, which is called the "clavicle"; and cure the wound as we have said above until it is healed.
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et .i. autre cautere emmi le pis entre .ij. mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When all fevers and diseases of the pores are caused by cold moisture, and the patient has neither fever nor sweating, and the disease is ancient, let him undergo four cauteries on the forcele in the veins; and another cautery between two mammary glands; and let the cautery which is called "claw" be according to the form which is before said.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	And if you see that, make a cautery by pricking with all the cautery which is called "points" as is seen in the ear disease; and let the points stay until XXX, or until they are entangled.</start_of_turn>
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	After curing the limb as has been said before, and let the cautery be made three times according to this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais .iij. a cop.	And because these cauteries are lighter, because you make two at a time.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	De la dislocation de l’ajutoire.
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners douqueil ci est li forme:	Afterwards, support the patient on their back and chest; then grasp the thumb which is inside the armpit with your left hand; and if the joint is dislocated, if necessary, withdraw the cautery which has about the size of a hazelnut
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble .iiij. cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a .iij. ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a .iij. ners:	... and cauterize the thumb until it reaches the costae, and the escape of the cautery will be together three cauteries; and for this reason the cautery is made with the cautery which has two nails, because the figures of cautering are these two nails; and the nerves are according to the sensitivity of a limb and this is the form of the cautery which has two nails.
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce .i. nerf por coi il i a .viij. cauteres.	And never is the suture adjusted upon this nerve for there are six cauteries upon it.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After putting on the cautery, broil the hairs with a needle; then rest the patient, and do not hold the limb tight so that it is tense until it is well comforted.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	And if there is displacement below, whatever the cause, make a cautery upon the thickness of the claw cautery, or make several incisions.</start_of_turn
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	For the joint is closed, and the moisture is bony, and the patient is healed.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	When cold drinks and moisture come to the stomach, as long as they are expelled to their face, they multiply the diarrhea to him, and are customary methods of treatment, but it does no good; therefore it is recommended that the patient remain lying down on his back, extend his legs and arms.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture; et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	Therefore afterwards we make three cauteries: one on the navel and two below the ribs, for the quantity of a hazelnut; at every cautery, the needle must be clasped, and two cauteries are made on the two costae as long as the figures of the cauteries are at three angles, and have some space between one and the other so that they are not joined together when they will swell; and let the cauteries be made so that they cause the two parts of the liver to swell, and let the figures of the cauteries follow this form from the beginning.
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme; et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche; puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if you see a great burn in the stomach according to this form; and he who has fear of this burn, burn in pricking and marking on the stomach at the very point where you see of it; then burn the whole burn that is called "poins".
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the treatment of the burn that we have had before, as long as it is sane.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez; et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil; et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient; et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi; et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere; et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez; et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais; et c’est li forme:	When the liver comes with pain of fruit and moisture and great swelling, as long as it is forced out of its natural complexion by the superfluities; and the patient is cured of what we have said in divisions, and it does him no good, if he is not left quiet on his belly; and a sign of an inch of burns according to this form and this figure and this quantity on the liver, driving out the bile ducts, the spleen or the ribs of the stomach; and have between each burn the thickness of a hazelnut; and let the burns be long and thick, and do not press too hard on the hand with the whole burn; and let only half of the burn be burned, and let the patient lie on his side; and if he cannot, let him lie without moving, and extend his legs, and keep his arms outstretched; and that is the form:
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors; et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	If you are very bold, if you cauterize these sensitive cauteries, if you are subtle and prudent in the art, and take care that you do not burn everything; for you will fiercely dry up the whole body, and it will come to nothing, for the marrow is subtle in that place, and the blood will vanish.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile: s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort; et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	When the abscess is on the liver, and you know whether it is in the liver flesh or the gall: if it is in the flesh, the patient feels little pain; but if it is in the gall, the pain is violent
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste; et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	When this treatment is finished, if you command the patient to rest his head; then mark the place where the vein or abscess was, and then burn the cautery that is like a thread, for this is its form:
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers; aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez; et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	And cauterize I cauterize as long as the hairs are dark, and come until the root is strong; until the wound is fully healed; after the cure as it is for ordinary wounds when they are healed; and do not dare use this cautery for any other purpose than for one who has studied long and diligently in the art of medicine, and for whom this disease has never failed.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	Therefore one must be wary of this work, and in my opinion it is better to leave it alone.
dou cautere de pleuresin	of pain.
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize .i. cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et .ij. petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et .ij. cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et .i. cautere emmi le pis, et .i. autre sus l’estomac, et .i. entre .ij. espaules, et .ij. as .ij. costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre .ij. espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	The ancient said that we must make at pleasure cauteries of the root of Aristotle, and in part: take a root of Aristotle long, the greatest that you will find, and be dry, and be as thick and as long as your thumbs; and the juice in oil, and the print at the fire, and cauterize. I. cauterize between the forefinger and the thumb, and II. a few cauteries one inch below the beard; and III. cauterize between the fifth rib and the hipbone, declining behind one inch. I. cauterize the spleen, and I. another on the stomach, and I. between two ribs, and II. have two ribs beside the spleen that push away the cautery that is between two ribs; and do not press me your hand, but make it open just as if you were smelling.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	And they say no ancient has ever used a fire cautery resembling a barber’s scraper, and the chaff and put it between the ribs, until it comes to this abscess; and sudden pain arises from this. As we have said concerning the abscess of the liver
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	But in this work is fear or the patient is dead now, or an fistula comes which cannot be healed.
de la mice	From mice.
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent .iij. manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the disease of the mouse from what we have said concerning the divisions of the cures, and it does not help, then there remain two methods of cautery which are both good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos; et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	If you split the scapula three times or four, and bind them as long as the thickness of the heel of the hand, as the figure of the burn of the liver which we have said before; do not press too much on the hand against the burn, and let the patient rise from his back; or another way of burn is if you cut off the burn which has two nails, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; and hold the bone which is at the heel, or the buttocks of the patient come from the left side, and hold the elevation which you bind to the bone according to the bone, according to the length of the limb, and the burn should be according to the size of the limb.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	After that, if the two nerves are inflamed as far as the knuckles are perceived from the other side, then draw out the cautery quickly, and there will be three left. And if you see that, if you have cauterized all three nerves.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After that, when the cure has suffered a long tension by swelling, it is worth as much as the others of the cures which have been mentioned before.
de ydropisie	of dropsy.
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	The cautery is not worth an apoplexy, except for the manner which is called "asclytes".
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	When you treat according to the manners which we have said in the divisions, and your cure does not benefit from it, then you must make three cauteries around the buttock, one on the stomach, one on the liver, one on the spleen, and two behind the loin on the spine, and one on the heel; and let the cautery be very close to the edge of the bone
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les .ij. ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	After leaving the cautery uncovered for a while to drain the wound, do not leave the dressing on the patient after the cautery; and healing will be expedited, and the wound will be completely rejoined with the help of God.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The form of the cautery for the belly is the nail that we have before you shown; and for the back it is olive-shaped, as it is shown here.</start_of_turn>
de l’enfleure des piez	of the swelling of the parts
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	When the nails are swollen in the hypochondriac [area], and are full of yellow bile, it is recommended that you cauterize on the back of the nail between the auriculaire and the anulaire; and hold your hand with the cautery towards you.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	And do not enter too deeply with the burn, because it would cause excessive bleeding of the yellow bile, and keep the cautery in this form:
Aprés fai sus .ij. jambes .ij. cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After that, make two incisions in the groin of the leg at the point of the little toe; and let the incisions be long, one of them above the knee and the other below, in the leg; and leave the incisions open along their length to cure, that they may stay in place; after that, cure the other wounds that we have mentioned.
de la menoison	After that, make two incisions in the groin of the leg at the point of the little toe; and let the incisions be long, one of them above the knee and the other below, in the leg; and leave the incisions open along their length to cure, that they may stay in place; after that, cure the other wounds that we have mentioned.
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai .i. grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et .iiij. cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout .i. cautere clavile subtil, et .ij. cauteres sus les hainches.	When cold and moisture cause nausea and vomiting, and the protective and digestive functions which are the stomach and intestines are deflated, and cannot be cured by any means of treatment; and you see the patient suffering greatly and vomiting profusely, if you make a great burn on the stomach as it has been mentioned above or burn the stomach, and the burn circulates; and three burns around the spleen to all but the staple burn, and two burns on the flanks.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et .i. cautere sus chaicun yle, et .ij. petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	If you see abundant moisture and the patient suffering, make a cautery on the navel, that is, make a cautery on each side, and two small cauteries on the stomach below the great one, for the cure is profitable when there is good aid.
de la cure des emorroydes	If you see abundant moisture and the patient suffering, make a cautery on the navel, that is, make a cautery on each side, and two small cauteries on the stomach below the great one, for the cure is profitable when there is good aid.
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois; et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	When hemorrhoids are or have a solid base, or several, and are old and have corrupted humors that are cold and moist, and are cured as we have said in divisions, and it does no good to burn them: III on the spine of the back, which is all the distance from the armpit to the loin, and I burn on the buttocks twice; and if you think the stomach is cold, and the meat is not cooked, and you see swelling in the face, then you must burn the face once with a large burn on the stomach, as it is said before, and one on the liver, and one on the spleen with all the burn clamp; and leave the burn open for a long time tense.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After treatment, when it is healed.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	If you think the stomach is chilled, and the meat is not cooked, and you see swelling in the face, then you must make a great cautery on the stomach, as it is said above, and another on the liver, and another on the spleen throughout the entire cautery. Leave the cautery uncovered for a long time. After treatment, keep the limb until it is healed.
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou .ij., et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you cope with the thelul, if the cautery seems to scratch, then take hold of the cautery and put it all around that thelul that you are coping with; and leave the hand as long as the cautery is coming to life from the vein, without restraint; do this once or twice. If there is much thelul, if you cauterize each one as we have said; after treating the wounds, use beneficial ointments until they are healed; and if you cauterize with a great cautery on the heel, it will be of greater help.
de plaie mal curee	From an unhealed wound.
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot endure pain or opening, as we have heard, if any disease comes to pass that cannot be cured except by cautery.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	When no fistula comes, and it is swollen and emits putrid and moist corruptor, if the doctor wishes to do something, and he maintains that the wound should be washed with all the care it deserves.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	After applying the cautery once or twice, which seems to have raised the wound, and having bound it into the fistula as much as the attempt requires, and having repeated the cautery until the carrion and the corruption are gone, once, twice or thrice, as much as the amount of matter requires; and take care of the nerves that are nearby and the large veins.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	If the fistula comes close to the bladder or the intestine, if you are aware of these structures, do not make incisions except in the area of the charnut; and know that it is not always safe; after treatment, when the wound is healed, and if the structures are flexible and the matters are long tense, then wash that the structure is completely healed; but if the matters are not flexible, wash that the structure is broken and corrupted. And this is like what we have said about this area
de la maladie des reins	De la maladie des reins.
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra .iij. cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When pain in the flank comes with vomiting and great swelling, and does not abate from a woman, then it is necessary that you make cautery on the kidneys on one side and on the other alongside the cautery needle that we have mentioned before; and if we burn them in the middle, if there are two burns in a line, it will be of more help.</start_of_turn>
de la vessie	Of the bladder.
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et .i. a destre et .i. a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais .i. cautere defuers le dos, ou .ij. se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladder is full and weak of pain and moisture, and when the patient retains urine, then you must make a cautery on the lower back of the bladder, where the hair begins to grow, and on both sides; and make as many cauteries as are necessary; and make the cautery needle pierce the belly, or as many times as necessary; and make the cautery needle pierce the back, or as many times as necessary.</start_of_turn
de la marris	De la marris.
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice .iij. cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et .ij. cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the hair is long. For when the hair is cold and moist, and does not leave me to pluck it out, and the flowers are corrupted and their ends are late; and when they come, if it causes great pain: then it must be done with two cautery irons over the belly, as we said or the cautery of the bladder, and two cautery irons behind the loin; or let the cautery iron be hooked, as we said.
de la hainche	Of the groin.
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a .i. cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When viscous moisture descends to the groin, and for this cause if it moves from its place, and the sign is that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and is found to be very painful, if you must cauterize the patient on the groin at about the size of a circle, and mark in front of the limb around the groin if it turns, so that the groin is within the circle; and if the cautery iron is like that which we have cauterized the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai .iij. cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If these cautery methods are not sufficient, make two large cauteries of the olive tree; and let the cautery be as strong as the others; and cure until it is healed.
de la dolor de la hainche	If these cautery methods are not sufficient, make two large cauteries of the olive tree; and let the cautery be as strong as the others; and cure until it is healed.
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain comes into the groin, and this is from cold and moisture, and the patient is cured of this by what we have said in the preceding section; and the cure is not worth the pain, and the disease is ancient: therefore it is appropriate to purge the patient of the gross humors with foul pills, or other solid pills that resemble these.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	After the fire cautery; and the manner of the fire cautery is two in number: that is to say, together with medicinal herbs, and fire cautery.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	The fire cautery is according to two methods: one of which is as follows: you burn on the hip bone three triangular cauteries as in this form, and make them deep and large, and leave between each cautery a space equal to the thickness of an olive, and let the olive cautery be; never make the cautery in the middle of the hipbone, for there are always three of them in this form.
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you see that the circle which we have previously mentioned concerning the dislocation of the shoulder is not contained by the cautery, make part of the circle encompass the whole shoulder, and all the thickness of the arm is as before.</start_of_turn>
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	And this is the manner in which it is done in sciatica, when the pain is in the hip, and does not reach the thigh or the leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And when it comes up to the thigh and the leg, if the patient says that the pain persists, and that three cauteries are needed there, at the ankle four in total; and either the cautery is superficial or deep like a burn; and if the patient feels that the pain extends up to two fingers or almost up to the knee, if he feels the pain three or four times at the cautery which is called "poins".
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	If the shoulder is dislocated, and he does it again; and if the pain is sharp from the groin to the thigh, let the cautery be made with the blunt or circular cautery, and keep him well guarded in all your cauteries, that you leave neither the cautery too long nor do you burn the nerves and great arteries, and that you cause him no greater pain and contraction.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	I have also seen many who have cauterized on the ankle over the knee, and left them until the leg was completely limp, and the heel was also affected, and was pierced and corrupted throughout the heel.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	After such a solution of the belly, death has often followed.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	And if the pain is in two parts together, make cautery in each one, according to this manner.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	And if the pain is in two parts together, make cautery in each one, according to this manner. Make an incision like this at the hip, so that the head is as great as a nutmeg, or less, and be between the ribs, or from one rib to the other, leaving the quantity of a nut of space; and let the ribs overlap two parts, and be as round as nails, and put one handload of burn well done; this is the shape.
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois .i. cautere reont et lou laisse .iij. jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And so be shaved as much as is to his redness and sensitivity, and then put on the box of the painful shoulder, and be turned on the sound side; and burn once. i.e. burn again and leave for two days; and then make an embolus of wool, and leave the wound open long enough to tighten; after the cure of the swelling when it is healed.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Albucasim says that our physicians often use this cautery because of the fear of its after-effects, and we see that many of those who use it; and all this is done to cauterized bones, which can suffer from it, and where he is careful.</start_of_turn>
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi; et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	The burning cautery is like this: if you make an incision between the ribs with nails or a piece of iron one inch long, and at the height there are two nails, and between each there is the quantity of fat of an egg; and be open downwards and upwards, and join together according to this shape.
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche; aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	After setting the basin of the shoulder on the patient who is lying on his side, and pressing your hand firmly on the basin of the shoulder; then pour between the two circles of the arm which is burnt by the fire, and leave it for an hour with tension, and offer the patient the heat and the burn of it.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu; et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit; et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait; et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	For there is true biting like fire; and when the biting does not pass, hold your hand with the instrument and raise the arm gently, and leave it for three days, and put on ointment until the black of the scab is turned to bone; and leave it for three days until the pus has drained; and this would be the last aid after the cure of wounds while they are healed.</start_of_turn>
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument; et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	And if the pain has extended to the thigh or to the leg, make an instrument that holds the arm according to what you have done in the shoulder immediately; and this is the manner of the hot arm, and I have written or treated about the rectification of medicine.</start_of_turn>
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir; et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main; et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	Take alkali and live broth, equal parts of each, and grind them together, and put them in a new pot.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	And thus if there be moisture in the eye and it is administered in moistness of works of medicine and in cauteries of other members, for it makes a part of the eye like fire; and if there be other medicines of which we cauterize well the hair in a knot with pitch and honey and beeswax with soap, all these things mixed together.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	Galiens tells us of a cure by which some honourably cured the pain of the sciatica and the vein of the groin, and he says that we did no other cure, and that he became well once when we did this cure, and he bathed as he is taught afterwards.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie; et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	And thus take part of the green fresh chickpea flour and grind it moist with a little fat, and put on the hip and on the thigh and on the leg where the pain is, and bind it; and leave it for three hours by the quantity that the patient does not feel the burning again
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	Then let the patient enter the bath while the limb is still slightly bent, and let him enter the water, and the pain will vanish and he will be healed.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	And do not let anyone use such medicine as cautery except after the evacuation of blood.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout; et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	And Diascorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with fine needles, if it helps with moisture; and it must be done gradually
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	Take linen and soak it in oil, and pour it over the pit between the thumb and the great toe and the other which is called the fossilized pit
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains; et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee; et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	After taking fine needles dry, and burn them until they are charcoal, and pour them over the linen, and leave it until it is stained; and then move the bone again, and do not stop making pressure until you think that it is coming out until the heel, and that the pain has ceased; and this method of cautery is called "cautery of needles".
de la dolor dou dos	of back pain.
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, or by sitting or percussion or by too great an evacuation, or by similar signs of cold matter spread, of none of these symptoms is the cautery of any value, except for what comes from the infusion of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne .v. cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	When the patient is free from foul pills or other symptoms, we make three lines signed with a needle on the back, where the pain is, and in between these lines we make two or three cauteries, according to the virtue and the quantity that the patient can suffer; and the cautery is to be made according to the cautery called "points"; and if you see it, make two or three cauteries at the middle cautery according to this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	Many times this disease comes as a small pulse, and signs of its beginning are when the veins are torn when they swell, and there is pain; and you find it at the lower spine of the back and in us the appearance that comes after the others.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this and you see it healed, if you cauterize with the fire according to this fashion.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	If the fire cautery burns any part of the spine excessively.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	If you see that the burn penetrates the spine as far as the tip of the cautery twice or thrice, and that the points are close to one another.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	After that, cure the limb until it is sound, as we have said above, and beware that you do not touch the cautery to the bone that is in contact with nerves
de la dolor des jointes	of the pain of the joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When joint pain arises from moisture that has spread throughout the limb, and when pain originates from a wound, call it "podagre" indeed; and when the cause is cold and medicines fail to cure it, it is often cured by cautery in part: make the opening of the cautery around the joint that is painful, and let the cautery be of olive oil in this fashion:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	And if it is necessary that you touch the cheek of the jaw, if you touch it with the cautery, call it "point".
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if there is pain that comes up to the joints and other parts, and this happens often, if you must burn each joint three times or four times with the olive cautery; and if you must do more than this, but do not keep your hand too far away from the fire until the burn is over
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	And if the pains descend down to the groin and the back, administer the cautery as we have said in this chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	And if the pains are as far as the hands, if you prick twice at the base of the thumb; and if there remains no pain in that area, if you prick on the wrist and on the nail of the hand; and if the pains reach as far as the buttocks or as far as the shoulder blades, if you cauterize some part of it, and make the patient comfortable and give him medicine.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	For if you make him comfortable and purge phlegm, he will be healed with the help of God.
de la routure dou syfac	of the root of the throat</start_of_turn>
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When the scapula is dislocated, and the ball descends like nails and this is new, if you see that when you cure it, it does not mend the marrow; and that it uses things that leave the belly, so that the marrow descends from the belly; then make it sit on its back between your hands, and command that it grasp its wing until the ball is repaired, and keep it at your sides, and sign the incision on the edge of the scapula, and as a sign that it is like half of a circle below the bones; then withdraw the cautery like this.
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	as long as he is soft and secretes sensations.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	Then bind the belly to his body; and he will hold your hand so that they do not return backward; and work well the wounds of the patient, and put on him some lint and some silk on the wounds, and something else on his hand; then put the cautery on the sign at the top of his hand, and hold it straight and hold it as long as you touch the bone, and if you do not reach the bone the first time, do it again until you reach the bone; and beware cautiously that the belly does not swell when you are doing the cautery; that you do not burn him; and that by this means the patient does not die, or anything else wrong.</start_of_turn>
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	And scraps of hair that you do not burn down to the bone with the cautery, your work is worth nothing.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And you must know that hair must be cut close to the skin according to the measure of the patient, and of great men also according to their measure; after three days cure the leg of the burn as long as the scab has become bony; after that cure other wounds as long as they are healed; and keep the patient lying down for forty days on his back until the wound is well closed; and you must know that his movements must be gentle so that the swelling does not rise when he lies down to go to bed.</start_of_turn>
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	After forty days, when he wants to get up, let him have a well-made bandage and keep him quiet for forty days; and let him rest well, that he works a little and avoids eating too much drink and greasy food, and too much haste; and when he has learned this, if he is completely healed.</start_of_turn
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And I shall tell you afterwards the treatment of the thigh in its chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	of the route of the belly
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	When wounds come out of other parts and are known, and you see that they do not grow any more, if you do not prick them at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	but first mark the edge of the wound and make a line along the width of the wound, and another at the bottom, and keep your hand steady with the whole of your arm on the cautery clamp
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But the first cauteries are lighter and softer.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	of ancient pain in any limb.</start_of_turn>
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	When pain comes in any limb, whether the shoulder or the hip or the wound, and this pain lasts a long time, and the treatment of medicine is not worth it, then you must cauterize with the cautery which is called "points," and cauterize according to the length of the limb and the smallness and weakness and the toughness and the swelling and the pain
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	If he is sane after the first cautery, it is well; if not, repeat the cautery upon him, for it is customary that it must move to the neighbouring limb, because it is certain that you must make the cauteries while the patient is sane.
de meselerie	When pain arises in any limb, whether from injury or from a wound, and the pain persists for a long time, the remedy of medicine is not worth it; therefore it is recommended that it be cauterized with the cautery which is called the "points," or that the cautery be performed according to the length of the limb, its thinness and weakness, its toughness and its location of twists and pain. If it is successful on the first cautery, well and good; if not, repeat the procedure. Indeed, it is customary that it should be repeated as close to the painful part as possible, for it is believed that the more cauteries are made, the sooner the patient will be healed.
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	The diseases do not yield to the cautery at any time, and even the diseases that come from the corruption of phlegm and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief: I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	Can you see the cautery? Take heed if the disease is at its beginning, and if it is cured as we have said in the division, and do not linger, and you doubt that the corruption does not spread throughout the whole illness, then make five cauteries on the head: one at the new bone, and the other towards the front at the end of the hair; and two on the two horns, and one behind on the shoulder; and leave the hand as long as the cauteries come up to the bone, and as long as the scabs issue forth so that the vapors of the humors can escape; and cauterize the mouse according to what is before you.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et .i. cautere en som lou neis, et .ij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et .vj. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et .i. grant sus la crupie et .i. autre delez, et .ij. sus les .ij. espaules; et .ij. sus les coutes, et .ij. sus les tendrons dou pis, et .i. sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et .i. autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et .i. autre sus lou foie.	And if there is widespread moisture everywhere, and it becomes manifest, if you command these cauteries that we have spoken of or chief, namely cauterize on the top of the thumb and index finger, and two on the elbow of the shoulder, and three on the elbow of the back, and one large on the wrist and one other below, and two on the two thumbs, and two on the scapulae, and two on the tendons of the wrist, and one on each joint of the fingers and toes, and on the recesses of the hands; take care that you do not burn the nerves that are behind the calcaneus, and do not make any cautery on the bones of the heel or the stomach or the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	And so it is that the more often the fire cautery is done, the more it helps; and the more the patient feels relief; and so it is that the patients do not feel pain from the fire cautery as they would from the pain of a healthy person, because the body is already corrupted.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	And it must be known that the fire cautery should be great and small according to the members and joints, as you will find in handling various instruments
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	After treating the wound several times with flour of wheat and honey and other cures until it is healed
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	When swelling comes to any limb and is cured by medicines and oils and plasters, and is not healed, then you must make cauteries on the limb according to the greatness and smallness of the limb; and that the cauteries be done deep enough so that the marrow is pierced; then cure with ointments until it is healed
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	And never make the cautery on hand, foot or back, at the issue of a nerve that moves the limb, and thus if it is bony it swells; and in no way should anything intervene except one who is skilled in limbs and the issues of the moving nerves close to the bone.
de albaras	When swelling arises in any limb and is cured by medicines, oils, and dressings, and is not completely healed, then you must perform cautery on the limb according to the greatness and smallness of the limb; and either make the cautery a little deeper than the depth of the nerve which moves the limb; then cure with ointments until it is healed. And in no case must you perform cautery on the hand, foot, or back, at the exit of the nerve which moves the limb, and if it is bony the swelling will remain. And in no way should anything interfere with it except one who is skilled in limbs and the exits of the moving nerves.
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the disease called "albaras" is present, and the remedies of medicine do not help, then you must cauterize with a needle a little deeper than the depth of the nerve, according to the quantity of the tissue; until the swelling is bony and changes color; then cure with flour of times and lentils with rose oil and plantain leaves, with colon and almond, each part a third; mix them all together, and bind with a bandage, and keep it in place until it is healed.
li cure de chancre par cautere	The cure for carbuncles by cautery
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	When a boil starts, and you see it stop, if you burn it with the cautery that seems like a circle, all around the boil
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	And everyone says that it is done at the middle of the boil; and I do not think that is good, because I fear that it will ulcerate and corrupt, and I have already known several times that this has happened; and there is no greater thing than to cauter around it, with the cautery which is called the circle, as we have said before.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	of the swelling which cannot be measured
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi.	When someone has an ailment called "adubelati", and it delays in healing or because of the excessive swelling it causes or because of the decay of the patient when he is decrepit (that is, too old), and there is much blood, or because of tension; and you see it haste to heal: then cauterize around the mouth of small cauteries by pricking; after that, leave it be.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	For it will haste to heal.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see it pierce with all the cauteries, if the cautery is too hot: this is the shape:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	And place your hand in the middle of this ailment called "adubelati" as long as the cauteries perceive the pain, and let them be such that the patient feels relief in parts as the course of the decay progresses.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	After that, cure it as long as it is perfectly healthy
li cure dou feu par fer	The fire cautery. Instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	Another manner of disease that is called "corrodens" exists, and it is nothing other than the softening of limbs, for it causes the limbs to become as brittle as dry bones.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	If you see this disease in which the fire cautery can be used together with fire, then shave the hair close and moderately, according to what is convenient for the limb or the disease; after having cauterized all parts until you have eradicated all corruption, and nothing remains except the bone itself.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	Then leave it for three days, and put on the cauterized limbs, and keep them covered with ointment until the burned hair becomes ossified, and all the corruption is gone
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	After the cure of the wounds engendered by char.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	If after three days the hair does not grow back, it is good; and if this does not happen, repeat the cautery on that which remains corrupted.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	This torment is never cured by means of water medicine, but indeed the fire cautery is of greater aid, as I have already said in the division: take as much as you need.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	The fire cautery. Another method for disease which is called "corrodens" is nothing other than the softening of a limb, because it makes the limb as dry as the lines of fire. If you see this disease in a limb which can suffer from whole-body cautery, then burn the small and great nails according to what is appropriate for the limb or the disease; after that cauterize all parts until you have eradicated all the corruption, and nothing remains except the bone. And then leave it for two days, and put on the cauterized limbs, let them be broiled with oil until the burnings of the fire are ossified, and all the corruption. After the cure of the oily nourishment. And if after two days the limb is well, that is good; but if not, resume the cautery on what remains soft of the limbs corrupted. This softening is never cured by medical treatment in place of fire cautery; but every time fire cautery is of greater aid, as I have already said in the division: take as much as you need.
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	Often there arises a wound by boils that grows into a disease which we call "clos" according to our understanding, and is a burdensome burden that festers the spirit.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	The cautery for this disease is done in two ways.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	That is to say, fire cautery and warm water cautery
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	If you are to burn with fire, do as with a quill of a goose, and make it of good iron of the size that can penetrate all parts, and leave it with subtle margins; then put all around the boil, and keep your hand firmly around the boil until it comes to the front of the boil; and leave it for three days until it begins to fester; then make an ointment of wild mallow seeds boiled with oil, and leave the ointment on all night, and close it tightly and it will be scraped from its roots.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then cure the swelling by applying pressure until it is sound
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	And if there are converted by discharges of pus, and many times happen and in hands and feet, if you must bring a burn of hot water; and it is in part like this: take a fennel of rue or iron, or a quill of goose, and put it on the boil and the thumb, that is to say, nails; and put the fennel on so that it covers all around, then put on a pot of hot water, and keep your hand firmly, and press your hand by turning so that the margin of the fennel comes to the root of the boil, and can find the hot water going deep until the root; and offer the patient a pot of the biting of the hot water an hour; then leave it like that, and it will spread out all at its roots.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	So do another one, as long as you can reach all that is on the skin, then cure the wounds that cause the hairs to fall out.
li cure dou trembler	you cure the tremor.
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres ou .iv. sus l’espinee dou dos, .i. cautere entre chescune espinee; et .i. cautere ou pez, et .i. sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	When someone trembles from cold, or from a quarter-fever or from another, if you make for him three or four cautceries on the spine of the back, one cautery between the shoulder blades, one cautery or pinch, and one on the stomach at the olive cautery; if you leave it like that, it will cause the sickness to depart quickly.
des pustules puans	When someone trembles from cold, or from a quarter-fever or from another, if you make for him three or four cautceries on the spine of the back, one cautery between the shoulder blades, one cautery or pinch, and one on the stomach at the olive cautery; if you leave it like that, it will cause the sickness to depart quickly.
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	Blood sometimes appears by discharge from the skin, or boils, which come from corrupted matters.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	If it is possible at the beginning when they appear, make a cautery on each head of the boils: a subtle burn with a twig of myrtle, or when the point is grasped by the fire, or with long iris root, or the lenticular cautery.</start_of_turn>
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	And never burn at the beginning when they appear, according to this method, for they do not grow forward but are broken by the excess from which they come, and are cured; but it is necessary that this be done after the evacuation of blood.</start_of_turn
quant li artere est copee	When the artery is cut.
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	Many times there are great discharges of blood from the artery that is cut at the wound that comes from the surgeon, or at the incision of the abscess, or at the cautery of the limb, and similar things; and it is a mournful thing to extend it.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren .i., ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	And whenever this happens to anyone, if you are in a hurry to put your thumb on the wound of the vein, and you strain too much without calming the pain, and no blood comes out any more; then take the olive cautery and make several small and large burns until they are all red; then touch, that is to say, great or small as it is appropriate for the wound and the limb in which the artery is obstructed, and put the cautery on that vein or hold your thumb there, and hold the cautery as long as it is necessary to stop the bleeding
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement .i. autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if it spurts out when you remove your thumb from the vein, and the cautery is finished, take hold of another cautery that is on the fire immediately.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des .iiij. manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And do not cease to perform this one after the other until the limb is stretched out; and beware that thou dost not tear away the nerve which is beneath, and that no other evil arise upon the patient; and keep that when without excision of the artery, one cannot well reattach the limb itself when the artery is large, except by three methods which we have said: or by cautery, or by extraction when it is not otherwise treated, or by strong ligation of thread, or by medicines placed upon it which have power to reattach blood.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Who brings about the restoration of the limb with great care is by the strict draping of cloths or the putting of things burning upon, or other similar things, if these do not profit, it is of no use.</start_of_turn>
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And if there is no other remedy and there is no medicine present, if he must put his thumb on the wound of the vein as we have said, and keep it steady until it is rested from the wound and from the vein; and do not move it, but moisten it with cold water often so that it is as cold as the air until the wound is frozen and thickened and rested; and make incisions before that which must be cauterized and medicated.</start_of_turn>
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Ci encourag li seconde livre des cures de taille.
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	We have already said in the first chapter that every disease in which it is necessary to perform cautery of fire, or applied medicine, and the symptoms, causes, instruments, and forms of cauteries; and in this chapter we shall speak of these matters from the head to the toes, for we have found it easier in this way to explain what we wish to convey.</start_of_turn>
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And thus, as I begin this chapter, I must inform you, dear friend, that there is more peril and fear in this chapter than in all the previous cauteries, and for this reason it requires greater caution.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	And I warn you that you should not act rashly.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	For out of the actions of men come cures.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	if they arise from such people who suffer greatly from their ailments that they move lightly because of the fear of their disease, and from the greatness of their malice; from these things we must have fear.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse.	And from these things there are those who make you understand, saying: "Wait, I am ready"; and the disease is desperate
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	I advise you only that you allow these things which come to you which have this manner, but put more great caution in your honor than in your covetousness, and do not carelessly trust only what you are certain of, and what you have learned; and use prognosis and indication in the treatment of your diseases so that salvation be either confirmed or converted; and this will help you to acquire a good reputation, glory, and memory forever
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Very dear son, our Lords, you do well to understand and approve, and if the Holy inspiration of his hand returns to you, amen.</start_of_turn>
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Or I vos ai ordonné ce chapitre en divisant par Chapitre, selon ce qu’il est devant ou Chapitre des cauteres, que j’avais devisé de celui du chef jusc’à pied, pour ce qu’ils trouvent plus légèrement ce qu’ils ont dû faire.
dou chief plein d’aigue	Or I have commanded thee this chapter by dividing it into chapters, according to what is before or the chapter of cautery, that I had commanded thee from head to foot, forasmuch that ye shall find it more lightly what ye have to do.
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	The sickness often comes from the swelling of the belly of the child, and when the navel is too tightly strained, the head of the child is often thrown off.  Never does this happen for any other reason than that it does not go back into place
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And I have never seen such a disease vanish except in the countryside, and with all those whom I have seen, it hastens death; therefore it seems to me that it is better to leave the work in parts for cures.
Et je vis .i. enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com .ij. nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	And I saw that in childhood, when the shoulder was dislocated and the head swelled up so much that it could not be supported; and I believed that there was too much moisture, and this moisture if it is gathered in the bone above the socket, between the head and the bone; and the work is such that if the moisture is between the head and the bone, and the incision is small, you must make a wide incision; and as much as .ij. we have seen, until the moisture moves.
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai .ij. fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is greater and the incision is larger, if you make two incisions in the form of a cross, following this shape:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief .iij. fendures selonc ceste maniere:	And if moisture is on the bone, and you see the sinuses of the cheek swell out on the outer side, and it becomes taut when you press your hand inside, and this does not go back: if you suspect that the jaw is fractured, make two incisions according to this manner.
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	And after the incision, drain out the moisture with all your might.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	After that, drain the blood clots and pus, and pour wine and oil on it, and leave it until the fifth day; then remove the dressing and cure the wound with stitches and medicines, and leave the head of the wound open, and give the patient dry meat until the limb is comfortable and healed.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	And another method of incision is that you look or open the orifice of the abscess, and the collection of pus; for it is never before; never behind; never to the right; and never to the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.
de reume	When the shoulder or the armpit is open, and the injection of liquid, and you do as you please; keep away from the artery; let the vein flow blood, if the patient dies from excessive bleeding and moisture evacuation.
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les .ij. arteres.	When there is no known disease that is called "catarrh" which has boils or swellings, and the disease is ancient, and the treatment of medicine does not help, then the last cure is to cauterize with this that we will cover the arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	It is necessary therefore, when you see them covered, that the patient move his head; then press the limb with a rough cloth until the veins open, and then draw out the patient’s neck with all the cloth; then look if the vein is bleeding, and if its edges are above the ears, and if so, restore them; then sign the edges of the wound, then close one and the other with a needle of two parts, until the vein reaches the bone, and that is by the width of the head
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com .ij. dois au traver.	If you see it, withdraw the sponge from the artery and hold it above, cutting as much as two fingers must pass through.</start_of_turn>
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	When the vein is cut, if you do not keep hold of it steadily, it will continue to bleed.</start_of_turn>
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	If the artery does not open with sensation, if you know that three finger-breadths measure the space, mark the [point] and withdraw until bone; what must be done is to pour out blood if six cubits, and sometimes more or less, according to what the patient can suffer, and the filling of the artery; then look at the wound: if it remains on the point of the spur, if the cord that follows the stitches does not reach, then strain the wound and bind, and cure it with oil until it is healed.
de emigrainne	If the artery does not open despite feeling it, if you must measure the quantity of the space of two fingers, then mark it and keep it until the bone; and what is to be done with blood that must be put out if it is more than half full, and sometimes less or more, according to what the patient can suffer, and the filling of the artery; then look at the wound: if it remains on the point of the bone where the stitches were placed, if the wound that was closed together does not move, then strain the wound and tie it, and cure it until it is healed.
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When the ancient secretion comes and acute catarrh, because of the tears and the choleric humours in the temples and the ancient saliva forsened and similar things, it is treated by medical cures and other things that do not benefit it, if the arteries of the temples are extracted and cauterized, as we have said
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	The manner of extracting them is that if the patient makes the hair of his temples grow long, and understands the artery which opens in the temple, for it opens well by its beating; and is not put back violently as in certain persons who are too rough.  If it is put back, the patient tightens his collar with some bandages, then wipes the limb of any rough hair, and raises the limb of warm water until the artery resumes its normal pulsation; then take the sponge and that which is the shape of a spatula.
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	Then gently stretch the skin until you see the artery, then pull it up with tweezers, and withdraw it well from the cloths that are below the shoulder; and if the artery is small, if the nail has at the tip of the elbow, then close that part according to the quantity of two fingers
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	For if it is not firmly held, if it does not jump from me without pain in all things.
Et trai dou sanc des .vj. c/, jusc’a .iij.; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en .ij. leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les .ij. liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	Then drain blood from the groin to the navel, just over two fingers; and if the artery is large, it is prudent to ligate it with two strong threads of silk, so that no blood will remain below the support of the wound, and drain the blood; then cut away the excess that is between the two ligatures in that part, and if you see that there is still blood, cauterize with a small cautery until the hair is cut off; and that is the end of the operation, if the patient has no fever and is of warm complexion.</start_of_turn>
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	For the fire cautery is helpful to finish off moisture: because of this it is of more great aid for moisture.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de .ij. pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	For the fire cautery is useful for extracting arteries that are filled with much cotton and are placed under well-made stitches; and when they are loosened, if there is no cure for dry medicines that cause new blood vessels to grow, and stitches, until they are healed; and if the artery is not stopped as it should be with the cautery, or if you use too much of the cautery, the hand will be scorched; and if you do not have this present, if you must withdraw the hand, you must do so until the hand is no longer numb, and raise the hand with cold water until the sensation returns, and strain as it should be strained; and what is milder and lighter in the extraction of the artery is to cauterize the vein of this cautery through a cut of about one-third of an inch, but the cut should be well thick to prevent it from burning for a longer period.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the instrument is too tight, it holds less heat.
Et doit avoir entre les .ij. coutelz .i. doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les .ij. leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en .ij. leus; et soient esloigniet entre les .ij. chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And must have between the .ij. needles space one must have of great distance. Then when you have signed the .ij. loops, and you must let the loop burn over until it reaches the bone, and close the wound in .ij. loops; and be spaced out between the .ij. bones because it is not firmly soldered from this cautery in all. This is the form of the cautery.
des larmes	And must have between the two needles space one must have of great distance. Then when you have signed the two loops, and you must let the loop burn over until it reaches the bone, and close the wound in two loops; and be spaced out between the two bones because it is not firmly soldered from this cautery in all. This is the form of the cautery.
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When the tears of the eyes are descending from the veins that are above the test of the head of the sufferer, and it brings no relief from medicine what is being done, and you see the face of the patient to be swollen, and feels heat of the body if like a flame; and if there are tensed and moist if the papers are rough, and are chafed by the tears, and scorched by the heat of the tears, if there is any hope of this cure.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins; et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	For if it is not firmly held, if it does not jump from me without pain in all things. They call it the ancient "cure contuse", and you must make the patient who has this disease let the hair grow frontwise and backward, then make three incisions or an even front according to the length of the front; and let one of the incisions be as long as two teeth should be, with two costles below the paper, and keep your hand away from the continuation of the two mandibles, and let there be a wound about the quantity of three teeth between the joints; and put a piece of sponge and a cloth under the wound to soak up the blood, then tighten the sponge with two fingers, which is like this shape:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les .ij. fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	from the incision which is over the temple down to the second incision; and remove all the bone that is between the two incisions to the very surface of the bone, then make the other half of the wound down to the other second, and then take out this instrument.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	If in the first incision the instrument which is called the “cultellaire,” which is very sharp on one side and blunt on the other, does not penetrate deeply, and is smooth, that is the shape.
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	And put the knife-edge towards the marrow at the knee, and the knife-edge towards the bone, and keep it there until it reaches the middle fissure.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And cut the veins that descend from the head as far as the incision is continuous until it reaches the knee, and then do the rest in the middle fissure until the other end; then drain the blood equally, and express the limb for the blood taken; then put in the wound a small patch of cotton, and put on wet cloths soaked in wine and oil and balsam, and keep the wound closed; and at the third hour remove the dressing, and mix in great quantity of fresh rue, and treat the wound with basilicon oil and rosemary oil, and other cures for wounds in general until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
dou reume des eulz	because of the return of the blood vessels
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	When no acute cautery is done, and you see the eyes tense and small, and the pupil dilates, and the papers burn; the hair cries out, and where it breaks off, there is great pain, and the patient vomits; then the discharge from these causes is greater than from many veins, and the cure is that which is.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	And command the patient to rear his forehead, then make a great fissure from ear to ear, and another of good size at the other.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	And commence from the incision of the left temple to the right temple, and let the incision reach the bone; and grasp your hand from the nerves of the temples that move toward the ear; and when the bone is exposed, if there is blood, drain all the blood with a sponge, and then dry between the two layers of the incision and put in cotton wool, and try to hold it in place; then cover with damp cloths soaked in wine and oil, and keep it from moving about; when it has healed, it is good to rub the bone until it begins to grow back, and then treat with drying things that cause it to harden.
En teil maniere: pren .ij. parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine .iiij. parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In part: take three parts of flower of fennel and three parts of colophony, and make a poultice; and apply it to these wounds to swell up all around.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	And so be careful and wide in the opening. And as for the most subtle chief of the ear according to the quantity of the patient’s suffering, then follow with all the antidote; do this often until you see it issue. And if it does not obey to issue, if I push around the cotton around the ear as I said at the stone; and if it still does not issue, if we have said, give distillations which the ancients have proved useful in the incision of worms, and you will find them or treat with distillations; and if you distill your oils and medicines into the ear with all these instruments, in this way: Let silver or lead be split into small pieces, and above put on distillations; and pressing from these instruments, let there be a raiser and encircle the point immediately with cotton; then pour out your oil or juice, and what you see of your medicines in the can; and let the can be in the ear; then press from the raiser all around the cotton, and press your hand gently until the oil is distilled or almost until the ear is emptied; and let the patient feel within, and let the distillations be neither too hot nor too cold, for the medicine will not be so good.
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des .iiij. choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	Whatever is causing the swelling of the ears is one of three things: grains of sand, pieces of metal, stones, or other such things; seeds, such as peas, beans, or barley; or pus, which is watery and foul smelling.</start_of_turn>
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	When it is chipped in the earlobe or any other way that does not fit into the ear, do not put it in the ear, but put the ear on the sole of the foot.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus.	If you see the stone, if it does not secrete any purple oil or poppy seed oil, then order its extraction; and make him spit out the seeds, and stamp his nose when he spits, and put around his ear pieces of cloth or wool; and keep the ear down.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	Many times blood comes out because of this treatment; and if it does not come out, order its extraction as thin needles are formed: for this is the way:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If it bursts out with needles, that is good; if not, perform an extraction with fine needles; and if it does not burst with the needle, make a scar on the side of the ear or remove a large part of the ear, and wipe away what is around the scar with butter if it comes out without the needle; then the blood will flow, for often it comes out by itself; and if it does not come out in this way, take hold of the testicles and put on no instrument that can cause damage, and put a plug of cotton in; then press on the testicles above the stone or whatever it is, and the blood will flow.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If these things do not suffice, if you are in haste to make an incision, do not hesitate to perform the incision above the earlobe as well as on the abscess. Incise the earlobe cautiously first, making the initial incision at the crown of the head; let blood escape according to its quantity. Then hold the patient between your hands and turn the ear downwards, make a small incision at the root of the earlobe, either at the fat or the cartilage. The incision should be as wide as a moon until you reach the bone, and then remove the bone as much as you are able. Exude the pus from your mouth and leave the wound until it has healed.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre .i. spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	If the grain is swollen and painful, administer extraction; if it cannot be extracted, administer a sponge tencel soaked in vinegar in this fashion:
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	and order the incision of that grain.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	But do not do this until you think the grain is moistened by the moisture of the ear, until you have made many incisions; then extract with thin needles and suck, as we have said, so that the extraction is aligned
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	When the ear is acutely painful, then the patient must immediately use an ointment first, and fill the ear with much cotton.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	And if there is no longer any pain in that ear, or if the pain persists.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	If it is burst, that is good
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	If it does not burst, take many stones according to the length of your finger should tighten and loosen, and put the patient one or two of his ears out, and pull from the other side of his ears; and burn from another piece on the piece that is in the ear; and do this burning from piece to piece until the pain is all gone, and when it is burst, if you see it, take an onion, and put one of the heads in the ear, and the other head put to the fire as much as the onion is round; then do the rest of the onions until the pain is all gone, as we have said concerning the stone
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	In the extraction of the wisdom tooth, if it is of little bone, as like a flea and similar things, cure it as we have said in the division; but if it is of great bone we must feel it, if it brings about the extraction of teeth; and that is the lightest thing to remove from the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	In the extraction of the worms in the ear, when you cure as we have said in the division and or treat with distillations, and the cure does not benefit, if you must know that the ear is exposed to the sun: if there are no worms to be seen, if the boils are small, and if they are not seen, take tweezers of this kind:
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	And let the hair grow wide and abundant.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	And keep the hair more sparse at the root of the ear in proportion to the severity of the patient’s suffering, then act quickly to all the pain; do this often until you see that it is healing.</start_of_turn>
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And if they do not obey this, if I am forced to stretch the cotton wool around the wound as I have said in the stone; and if they do not bleed as I have said, administer distillations that the former have proven useful in the incision of worms, and you will find them or treat them with distillations; and if you distill your oils and medicines into the ear with all these instruments, as you see:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a .i. petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a .i. estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren .i. raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations .i. poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And so be careful and wide in the opening. And as for the most subtle chief of the ear according to the quantity of the patient’s suffering, then follow with all the antidote; do this often until you see it issue. And if it does not obey to issue, if I push around the cotton around the ear as I said at the stone; and if it still does not issue, if we have said, give distillations which the ancients have proved useful in the incision of worms, and you will find them or treat with distillations; and if you distill your oils and medicines into the ear with all these instruments, in this way: Let silver or lead be split into small pieces, and above put on distillations; and pressing from these instruments, let there be a raiser and encircle the point immediately with cotton; then pour out your oil or juice, and what you see of your medicines in the can; and let the can be in the ear; then press from the raiser all around the cotton, and press your hand gently until the oil is distilled or almost until the ear is emptied; and let the patient feel within, and let the distillations be neither too hot nor too cold, for the medicine will not be so good.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	And so be careful and wide in the opening. And as for the most subtle chief of the ear according to the quantity of the patient’s suffering, then follow with all the antidote; do this often until you see it issue. And if it does not obey to issue, if I push around the cotton around the ear as I said at the stone; and if it still does not issue, if we have said, give distillations which the ancients have proved useful in the incision of worms, and you will find them or treat with distillations; and if you distill your oils and medicines into the ear with all these instruments, in this way: Let silver or lead be split into small pieces, and above put on distillations; and pressing from these instruments, let there be a raiser and encircle the point immediately with cotton; then pour out your oil or juice, and what you see of your medicines in the can; and let the can be in the ear; then press from the raiser all around the cotton, and press your hand gently until the oil is distilled or almost until the ear is emptied; and let the patient feel within, and let the distillations be neither too hot nor too cold, for the medicine will not be so good.
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient .i. poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born without some imperfection in their ears; and the same thing happens as adults with wounds or earwax that has become impacted. Such impacts never depart without leaving a mark on the ear, if we are not able to see them; and never happens without some loss of hearing, which we see well.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	When such impact departs without being seen, it is a sign of serious disease in many cases, and in this case it is seen that you put the painful ear into the sunlight; look inside: if you see pus dripping, if the wound has all the pus, this is the form:
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	And so be attentive both front and back all around, if it does not bleed the ear; if the pus is of earwax or a piece of the ear, if you see small teeth and the lump is lighter, as much as the bone is whole.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	And if the shoulder dislocation is caused by moisture, take a slight lever and hold a little fire under it, then put or bind up the ear.</start_of_turn
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	If you feel swelling at the ear which the patient complains of, pierce lightly, and hold back the nerves of the ear; then insert a plug into the ear according to the size of the opening, and pour in oil of Egyptian origin.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Do not do anything until the wound is healed, or take a sponge soaked in rose-water and powdered vitriol; and if you see the ear flee, it is likely that you have pulled out the plug and put in another sponge soaked in oil of rose and wax until the swelling subsides.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	If there is discharge of blood, soak a sponge and cover with cold water, and place it on the ear, and use other treatments that will staunch the bleeding which are either to apply distillations.
de la char des papieres	Of paper scrolls.
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	Thus comes the paper from the eyes when they are moist and dry, if you extend them with thumbs and nails, and grasp with the tip of a spatula from their roots; then withdraw the vitreous body bruised
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And if you do not take care, if you burn with the lenticular cautery, after the incision it is worth moving; and often it breaks, so that nothing remains of their roots; and when they are burned by fire, their roots are scorched and do not come back anymore
de la gresle	Of the scab.
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	Many times come together in paper writings of ulcers of various things that seem to wrinkle in their form and in their duration, and for this reason this disease is called "granulin", and is an assembly of great moisture in the substance of the papules and the outside; the work is like this: take hold when the granulin moves from one side to the other, and it is a light matter to know; make the wound wide, then slightly burn the surrounding area, then take hold as hooks, and bind.</start_of_turn>
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	If you do not perceive that the papule covers the wound, if it does not grieve the patient; and if the wound is great, if the collection has a bulge, and cure until it is healed; and if it is small, do not use force, for the swelling will restore itself quickly and cause pain.</start_of_turn
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	And if the granulin descends downwards towards the ear towards the upper part, if you reverse the limb, and extend the granulin with one grasp, and close and press from one side to the other; and if the tissue is loosened by the incision, this will cause no harm; and when the granulin is closed, if you leave the dirty oil, cure the limb of what is left behind until the patient is healed.
de la graisse des eulz	of the fat of the blood.
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	Exinach is a fat that is enclosed in paper tissues, and this happens more in stupid people, and grieve much at their eyes, and they come with tears at dawn, and they cannot look at the light of the sun because their tears are hastening at their eyes; and because of this they sleep with their faces down, and they sleep on, and their papers are soaked with their tears which swell and appear to cover them with exinach that bursts in oil.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	And when you press your hand to your side and feel the exinach between your shoulders.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren .i. drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	If the patient puts his head in his sound health; then take one linen cloth and make a loop in the manner of a circle according to the quantity of oily exudate from the chest part, and put it on; and press on the thumbs from one side and the other, so that the exudate is assembled together like the circle; then make in the middle of the moisture a trench with a wide incision, and let it not be more extensive than the wound made to the vein; and make the leather tough as long as you see the exudate; and in various situations comes exudate from the incision, according to the shape of a white fatty piece.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Pull out all the fatty tissue between your thumbs at the back of your hands, and twist your hand to the right and to the left as much as possible; and keep that you do not put anything into the incision, until you have reached the oil, that you do not stain it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	And if it escapes not at the beginning of the incision, if you widen the incision slightly as much as it opens; then extract it as we have said, and moisten the bandage in oil and water, and put on the limb, and bind tightly.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	And if there are such people who break their bones and put on to corrupt this moisture that is remaining
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then the doctor must cure it as long as he is sane
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it comes to the vein being cut, if the cure of cautery has healed as it should be sane.
des poilz des papieres	paper hair
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc .iiij. manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When paper-like substances grow hairs, adjust them other than their natural state, and are thickened, if they prick the eyes, they cause tears like customary tears and soften the papers and mucus, up to the point of destroying the eyes; the cure for this is threefold: either by entire fire cautery, or by medicine according to what is before or alongside the cautery, or it is made by incision and suture or by strings, according to what I will say.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai .i. fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai .i. fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	You must put the patient’s head in your left hand, then draw the paper from its root; if it is straightened, it is good; if not, if there is a splinter at any point of the root, either cut off the margin of the paper or the hairs will be torn out; and take one thread at the base of the paper and draw it to the tip; then stretch in the lower part of the paper, remove the hairs that have been adjusted, over the whole area, from the large tear until the small; then draw out one thread and place on the paper a small patch of cotton and bandage, then mark on the paper a sign like the spur of a myrtle, and it is known that the sign should be according to the quantity you see that the paper that is destined for you has been elevated.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor; et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	If the vein is cut, and the cautery has healed, as it should be. If there is a portion that has gone black with thick blood, then make a large incision two lines above the navel and from the great toe to the heel; and if there is a wound from the natural hair in the thickness of an almond, then insert the sponge into one of the two angles as close as possible, then draw the edges together; then sew the two layers together with a fine needle and strong thread, and wipe away the surplus of thread from the two edges, as you see me doing; if this is not done, if there is no improvement, then leave the stitches in for three days or four. Then cure the wound with dry and constricting things, for the blood will gather up at the bottom of the wound and reunite the tissues, but the stitches are useless (as the old people say), and this is done in vain; or if there is another method: and that you mark the blood with a figure that is just like the head of a berry, as we have been told, at three inches distance according to the form that is here.
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	Then grasp what covers it with small forces equally according to the shape which is like this:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans; et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	And if you are unable to hold the nails, and the thing is not equal, take a needle or two, and pass one thread through the larger loop, and the second thread through the smaller loop, and gather between your two fingers the two threads equally; then keep your hand equally, and keep all the skin above that which you have signed, as we have said; and gather the two layers of the wound by suture, and cure until it is healed; and if an abscess comes to your incision, if you apply cerate and some other soothing substances. Never have I seen that the hair of a patient has been converted: if you use what we have said about the incision; but the suture in one and the other is more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai .ij. caines par art, et .ij. liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as .ij. chiés de .ij. pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les .ij. cainnes des .ij. parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	The cure for boils is as follows: convert the beard and hair downwards as I have said, then make three incisions by art, and three threads as long as the beard and expand with mustard seed; and put in three hairs or hold the threads. Then assemble the one and the other securely above what is covered by beard oil, and strain the three hairs of the three parts. Leave it like that for several days, and the skin which has been strained will become black and dry and will fall out, as long as it persists.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	If it is late, if the wound has a great force, then cure until it is healed; and when the wound has healed, and if there is still blood, and it will not stop bleeding; and this is the form of two nails you will make following this figure, and following this quantity of length and width.
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute .i. fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse .i. autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	The work is such that you grasp a needle with its subtle thread; and there is.i. a silken thread which is subtle; then join the heads together and do not leave one and the other subtle, and let the length of the threads be equal; then order in the chase another subtle thread of silk briefly, and do not leave the chief of the thread; then put the patient's head in its place; and let the sun go if the work is clarified, for this is a subtle and minor work; then draw out the needle throughout the chase at the root of the hair in the armpit, and make it pierce in the paper hastily as much as you can; then draw out the hair until it is at the chase, and bring back to the chase that hair, if there is.i. or .ij. or .iij. or more; then draw out your hand until the vein comes out throughout the chase in the paper with the natural movement.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne .i. poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	If the chase is treated and the hair does not come out with it, if you draw out the chase to the end of the thread that you have ordered, until the chase vein comes out from the hole and you see it by the sight of the oil; then if you draw out the chase and the thread, close the oil and leave it closed for two days or three, until the hair has grown back in its place and the wound has healed.
de la porriture de l’oil	From the putrefaction of the oil.
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	When this ailment which is called 'aleacrati' or the putrefaction comes to light, if there are two ways: one natural, and the other unnatural.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	And there comes from the wound, or from a cut or cautery, and from similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	And the way of working in this is that you make the suture, dry the flesh, put in stitches of linen, and leave it until it is healed; and do not do anything except use in the treatment of it things that dry and restrain
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	For if you do this, if the disease returns worse than before; but there is need for softening things, such as fennel; and alum or salt and linseed seeds boiled, and fat ointment melted in no oil, and it covers a cloth, and treats this.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the treasure of your cure is that you must keep guard that it does not heal in a different form than before; and these works that we have mentioned are not fierce but only with regard to this disease, that it does not return in a different form than before.</start_of_turn>
de la char qui vient en l’oil	Of the wound that comes in oil
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	This disease which is often called «axacrati», is natural and sudden.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	The cause of this disease comes from wounds and cuts and cautery and similar things; and the way of the disease progresses is that if you prick with a needle, if it has two roots, and the pith in the flesh, it causes the three-quarters of the blood in the vein to bleed out immediately; then the flesh above all the needle is raised up to the height of the wound, and the wound is about the size of a large almond.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the limb returns to its normal position as it should, that is good; but if not, take a pair of forceps and place them in the wound, and draw the limb out, make two incisions or cut through the flesh; and if the two incisions are at a right angle to the incision which you made, make one angle so that when they are put together, the limb forms the shape of a letter which does not have two right angles; then break the bone according to the quantity of its costae and the disease, of what will sustain the flesh, and then join the two severed parts together with a thread of silk; then treat this as we have said of the mollifying medicines and bandages, until it is healed
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les .ij. leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	If the disease comes from a fracture, sprain or cautery, if it is recommended that you make a full incision over the hairs of paper; and as above; then separate between the two leaves of a tent, as I have said; and must be made according to the form of the disease, for it is diverse in form, and the learned doctors appear to know everything from great poverty to great wealth as to how to restore the limb to its natural shape; and the patient himself, according to what is to be done of the work and the instruments in many situations.
dou soudement de la papiere	If the disease comes from a fracture, sprain or cautery, if it is recommended that you make a full incision over the hairs of paper; and as above; then separate between the two leaves of a tent, as I have said; and must be made according to the form of the disease, for it is diverse in form, and the learned doctors appear to know everything from great poverty to great wealth as to how to restore the limb to its natural shape; and the patient himself, according to what is to be done of the work and the instruments in many situations.
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	When this swelling arises at home in a part as delicate as the nail of the thumb is soothed with oil, and cannot move or perform its natural works, if it is recommended that you should bathe the tip of a scraper over the swelling, and hold it high up; and extend as many times as necessary, until you have reached the point where the pain is neither too great nor too slight, so that the patient can endure neither too much pressure nor too little; and that your incision, which you will make to reassemble, be light, so that the nail returns to its natural shape; and all the reassembled parts must be thoroughly cleansed, and no longer bathed in salt-laden water, but in fresh water, and oil; and between the nail and the oil place a layer of linen, and cover with oiled wool in abundance; and afterwards apply poultices and other soothing things until it is healed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	De l’ungle de l’oil
Saiches que li ungle est selonc .ij. manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a .i. dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	The nails of the oil are two kinds: one is nervinous and seems like hard paste, and the other is not nervinous but seems like white moisture frozen; when one touches them with iron and boils them, they do not burn; both seem to commence towards the great marrow, and cross so much that they cover the whole cavity, light and movement of the oil.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met .i. poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et .i. fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	And the manner of incision is that the patient puts his hand in his side, then opens the wound; and keep the hand at your side, then grasp the nail with pincers of little double curvature, and stretch it upwards; then take a needle, and put in one hair of horse, or of sheep, or of beef, and one strong thread; and double the point of the needle a little and fix it in the nail, and pierce through the whole needle, and tie the nail with a thread and stretch it upwards, and wash away to the outside of the nail all the surrounding tissue that encompasses the nail and the hair to the hair, and leave the natural fat or marrow, if there are no tears usually from the incision; and in no case is the nail stretched only with the incision and the thread, as we have said; then it is washed with all the surrounding fat so that it is like this:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	And keep that the spatula does not touch the fatty tissue and break it, and that the needle is not perceived; and after the incision pour in oil a little ball of bruised silk, and put on a collar of litarge, and leave it until the other side; then cure what is left until it is healed.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And if the nail is not nerveous, and you cannot push out the needle, and the thread cannot enter, many times this semblance of a nail of medicine is cured; and as I have said in the division, if you see it covered, if the patient is feverish, take the spatula slightly blunt as in this form:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	And remove the nail superficially, and if you see that it has diminished point and the bone is pressed, if the liquid distills from your mouth into the oil collar of litarge and red ligature and bruised silk, and squeeze out the oil until the other side; then repeat the other work as before, until it is entirely healed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing hinders thee in the oil, as with an abscess, then milk, and first cure the abscess with fire until it is healed, and then resume the work as before, until it is healed.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if there appears cartilage softened at night in the oil by great discomfort, if you suspend it to the bone, cut off a part and not all, that blood does not arise; then distill in the oil of colera red which is made of litharge.</start_of_turn>
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	of the flesh that comes from the navel.
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre; et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	The fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	But always know that you must nourish the cure of each feeble oil of the natural way; and in the work of fire; and do not stain your hand in any of these works until you see that this limb is suffering from that work.
des voines des eulz	des voines des eulz
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	The veins are red and covered in oil, and endure the sight of its work and expel the oil every day.
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en .i. cors selonc ceste forme:	And be two veins by degrees in one limb according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	And when you have done this, if there is still blood remaining, distill in the oily coliere green and red to corrupt what is remaining doubtful.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	If you cannot securely hold everything in that hour, make a plaster over the oil of calming things to soothe the pain of the eyes; and leave it until the pain is calmed and is assured to be free from post-operative swelling; then resume in the manner mentioned above until it is healed; and that is the form of the forces.
de la fistule de l’oil	If you cannot securely hold everything in that hour, make a plaster over the oil of calming things to soothe the pain of the eyes; and leave it until the pain is calmed and is assured to be free from post-operative swelling; then resume in the manner mentioned above until it is healed; and that is the form of the forces.
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	If you cannot securely hold everything in that hour, make a plaster over the oil of calming things to soothe the pain of the eyes; and leave it until the pain is calmed and is assured to be free from post-operative swelling; then resume in the manner mentioned above until it is healed; and that is the form of the forces.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a .i. chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bone is fractured, and you see the corruption and blackness, if the limb has all the instruments to be thus; it is called an "aspre chief," and is made of soft bone, like a chief rent, and is pointed as with a lime as when it is in this form.
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And place over the limb the corrupted bone, then turn it between your two thumbs, and press your hand until you feel that the corruption is gone; do this never, and then restore the limb of exiccative medicines.</start_of_turn>
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	If the limb is swollen and painful, and boils appear, and the bone is swollen, and remains so for XL days, and does not heal and is not incised, and other maladies do not come, except for bringing the fistula to the surface as before: uncover the bone a second time by iron, and with strong medicines, and when it is discovered take hold of it according to this form, and let the iron be at an angle of three, and the wound should be narrowed until the head is as low as you see here.
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	Then put your thumb on the bone below the lump, and draw your hand away from the oil, then stretch your finger as far as it can pierce the bone and the patient will feel it by that which comes from inside if he holds his hand on his elbow; and when the bone returns to its natural position, if there is something in the elbow, the patient will know.
de l’issue de l’oil	Then place your thumb on the bone below the elbow, and slip your hand away from the oil immediately, then turn your palm upwards until it pierces the bone and the patient feels it through what comes out from under his hand if he keeps his hand on his elbow; and then restore the dry medicine, as I have taught you, and when the thumb grows and persists, if there is matter at the elbow; if it is a lighter thing for the patient.
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil .i. liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en .iiij., et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the limb opens all around and there is no swelling or pain, if you suspect the patient; then grasp the limb, then apply a bandage or dressing to the wound and apply oil.i. mixed with acacia, aloe, incense and balsam, and strain the oil, and apply it over bandages and cloths; and keep the cloths in place if you take cloths that are soft enough, and double layers in three, and then put one over the other according to the quantity of wound there is between; then strain by means of a bandage stiff enough to form, and restart the dressings to suck the wound inwards; then hold the dressings and leave the oil strained out for night, and if the patient’s pain subsides, if you see the oil repair itself, that is good; if not; repeat the dressing and cloths and the limb and the dressings until it is healed.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	Dou derrompement de toile uvee
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com .i. grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait .i. fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When the dislocation comes in the armpit, then open, and comes out some papers like as many grains of resin; it is expected to see; then if you see it covered, the work is like biting a needle at the root of the lower part until the tip of it goes down, then put another needle there or there is double thread of the upper part; and make it pierce, and leave the first needle in its place; then grasp the double thread and bind a part of the thumb together, and strain it well, then draw out the needle and put on linseed oil soaked in abundance of egg; and leave it as long as the thread is tight with the thumb, then cure the oil of comforting things until the wound is healed; and never is the wound restricted by the thumb nail part of a circle of wax, until it is healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound shows great appearance, if you pierce at the soft tissue which comes from behind and comes out with oil, correct the moist vaporous substance and draw out the wound, and put it back together; then draw it out as long as it is healed.
de la bowe de l’oil	De la bowe de l’oil
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	This disease called "alcunnati" is not fierce but dull, which is assembled in oil, resembling descending ice, and it is not truly ice; and the manner in which it appears is that if you make the patient sit on a comfortable and straight chair, and you grasp the chief between your hands from two parts, and move it until you see the dullness coming towards your eyes; then either bind it tightly, and do not let it go down, or break the light, and see the patient the things as he alone would see them; and if it does not come down even after that, consider that it is ice, and that when it comes down it is not noticeable as we have said.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If you make the patient sit between your hands, then take the sponge and put it on the corner of the conjunctiva with the nail continuing with the conjunctiva and the crown, as long as the eye is closed; and when it comes out, distillate into hot scented oil mixed with honey, or into vinegar or fenugreek boiled with honey, then let it be cured of another remedy until it is healed.
des aigues de l’oil	When the belly of the oil is swollen, it is not fire that causes it but the oil itself which is thick and sticky like descending water; and it is not so. The manner in which this swelling appears is as follows: if you make the patient sit upright and straight, then take hold of his head between your hands, and move it until you see the belly coming down to your eyes; then either bind it tightly or do not let the light go and see the patient do the things he used to do; and if it does not go down on its own, give it a pinch, for it is like water, and when it goes down again it does not appear as we have said. If you make the patient sit between your hands, then take the sponge and put it on the corner of the wound. That is, by the continuation of the conjunctiva with the corner of the wound and the crown, until the belly is gone. And when it comes out, distillate it in hot oil mixed with honey, or in vinegar or fenugreek boiled with honey, and then cure it with some other remedy until it is healed.
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit.	We have seen similar symptoms to those of dropsy in division [of the body], and what is useful to know; if in this way according to the rule of health.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	You must make the patient sit between your crossed hands, pour on de la lumière from the sun, and hold the oil pure; then put the thumb of your left hand over the pupil of the eye that is on the left, or the thumb of your right hand over the pupil of the eye that is on the right; then take in your right hand, over the pupil that is on the left, the instrument which is called the "almagda", or in your left hand, over the pupil that is on the right; then put the point of the instrument below the crown by the thickness of a hair in that which there is the greater amount of oil; then move the instrument called the "almagda" cautiously, and restore your hand until you feel that the "almagda" has reached the empty space; and know that the measure of the "almagda" should be equal to the measure of the space from the cherry to the end of the black spot; that is the crown of the oil; if you see the bone in that pulp by the clarity of the cornea, and then put the instrument until it is almost gone or the liquid is, then press the eye down for a way after another.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	If he feels acute pain now, if he sees the patient in front of him and the instrument in his oil.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	After a little rest, if he feels acute pain again, if he sees the patient in front of him and the instrument in his oil, hold the force with the instrument, and when it is firmly secured and does not rise, if it is strained too tightly around the hand, loosen slightly around the thumb and little finger; then put a little more water on the wound and remove the oil from the wound.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	Then put on the wound greasy ointment or lint soaked in oil and rose oil, and bind with clean oil.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	Indeed, and those who are of our company, put on a warm compress with plenty of eggs.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if the almagda cannot enter the oil because there are pieces of bone that have too thick a hair, it is advisable that you take the instrument which is called the «alberit», for this is its shape:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	And when the conjunctiva has been pierced only, and do not move it too much, but keep it quiet, then put on a compress, as we have said; and when the work is done, the patient will wake up on his back in the dark; and let him have no movement, and eat light food, and do not move his head to the right or left, and bind him as he is accustomed until daybreak; then take him out of this house into the open air, and make him spit out what he has seen, and let him rest for a while; then bring him back to his bed around sunset; and do not do anything else until the time of the treatment or after the incision now, but make sure you feed him, for he has become hungry very quickly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	Leave the hair long and even; if you prick at the root, keep your eyes fixed so they do not move until they grow.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	Then he goes out of the house and out of the house, and he turns into his case; and his companions that no disciple must interfere with in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And one came to us from Yrach who said that in sleep he had often seen a great light appear, as if by chance, but never had anyone seen it in our land, nor had I ever read of it in the books of the ancients; and by chance it is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And these are the signs of the forms of an almond, for he who does not know them will not know their way; and they are like peas in their pods:
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en .iij. angles ague.	And their tops are of this same subtlety, and their backs in two angles like an egg
de la char sor le neis	From the shoulder joint to the elbow.
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	Never do new or old hairs grow in various places, for there are some who seem like scorpions in the mouth of a piece; and if there are such or if there is hair entangled in pus of foul colour, and if there is hair of bone colour.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	In those where these hairs are soupy and do not entangle, it is only that you make the patient sit between your hands facing the sun; and cover his nose, and pour out the ointment on those hairs, and take them away; for it is necessary to keep that which you have pressed to support the subtle acute part until you are certain that that hair is entirely bony
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout .i. des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	If nothing remains to hold it, if the vein has burst completely with delicate instruments, if nothing remains; and if without you sleeping or incisions are delayed, if support is needed as it should be; and if it is a malignant incision, hasten and cauterize as much as possible until the blood vessel is no longer stained and all the clots are gone. Then spit out or remove the blood clot easily and quickly with vinegar or wine.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	If he does not wish to work, and moisture comes up to his palate, saliva that he is sane; and if moisture does not pierce as it should, saliva that there is clotted in the bones below, because the instruments do not come out by force: then it is necessary that you drink a large thread of linen and hold his hands firmly, and have between each knot no more space than is necessary; and put the patient’s chin over the thread at the back of the mouth, and treat while he comes out through the thread from the mouth; and many times they do this to the children, and it is a light matter for one who has seen them do it; then hold the chief that comes out through the thumb of one hand, and the other chief that comes out through the mouth to the other hand, and join one after the other while holding as we are or with a thread.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait .i. mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	And be it of silver or of gold, resembling an overblown lamp, if like a chain, and guide it thus; and if you see, make a closed chain, and let the instruments be flat for purging the chief; and have one hand on the chief to hold it when we burn the oil or no liquid.
de la char sor le neis	From the shoulder joint to the elbow.
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	From the shoulder to the elbow often arises a disease called "telul," which grows and becomes very large, to the extent that it is seen as an abnormal thing; and because of this it is commanded that you should begin by applying pressure at the start, and then break the bone, then apply the cautery or burning medicine; and if you delay in applying pressure until it is large, if you do not take precautions, it swells with blood, poor sense, and great pain: for if you touch it with iron, it is an inflamed abscess. For when it is once treated, if there is no blood swelling, you can see that you can easily control it; if the abscess is of soft touch, not of blood swelling, and you see that you can control it, you must evacuate the patient and control it in a timely manner, and treat the limb with drying and restraining things.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	When the shoulder is cut and bound.
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	Do not do this until you have ascertained that the solution of the continuation has come in one of these recent works; for in some homes it is of benefit, because in others it is not.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it does not happen to any, if you see that the wound is fresh throughout its entirety; then join the two layers with a staple, and cure until it is healed. If the layers are already separated at one end and the other, if you suspect that you must support all the parts around it until they are firm, then join the two layers with a staple, and strain, and sprinkle on powdered dragon's blood, and incense. Then place over the powders a piece of firm or other adhesive dressing, and leave it until it bleeds by itself, then cure until it is healed.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The manner of the splint is that you assemble the solution: or by needles, as we have said in the belly splint; or by thread, as I have told you.
des apostemes des levres	of the fractures of the thumbs
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	At home, in the hands of the physician, are diverse wounds that resemble grains of barley, minor and greater; thus it is commanded to grasp the wound and make incisions around each hair, and grasp them with tweezers and pull them out from their root. Then apply pressure to the wound after the incision of the vitriol broth, until the bleeding has ceased. Finally, remove the dressing and cure the wound with dry things until it is healed.
de la char des gencives	From the root of the jaw.
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Many times it happens that there is an abscess on the gums that the old people call "albulus"; if you support it, grasp the root and pull out the swelling or the blood; then put out the vitriol broth or other restraining and drying powders; and if the swelling returns after the incision, and happens many times, if you grasp it a second time and cauterize: if it does not return after the cautery; this is the shape of the instruments to carry out this work.</start_of_turn>
des sordens	Des sordens.
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	The teeth are never together at the root, between the gums, where the teeth are white and sharp; and never are the teeth black and yellow and toward, until the decay comes to the gum, and the teeth are biting; if you command that the patient sit between your hands, and their head be still, and open the teeth or the gums will burst, until nothing remains; and then you will make black and green, and yellow and other stains, as long as they remain; and if one breaks what is at the first root, that is good; if not, if you must repeat the second and third time, until you have everything back; and teeth that have had to move from various instruments to repair them, as this is what the work shows, for these teeth have other shapes than those that are between the teeth. And these shapes and others will appear to you.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	It is necessary when you cure the tooth from its pain that you leave it too long without treating it, because one must not be ashamed to do so; for it is a material that is highly moist, therefore one has no excuse for neglecting it
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	Therefore, when the patient is groaning with pain, if you suspect that he is about to faint, you must be certain that he will not be able to do so.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	There is often pain in the patient, and care must be taken that it is neither too great nor too little; and make the patient groan with the pain; and although the pain does not depart completely because of this, as long as the illness persists, for we have already wanted to make them endure it; and when you are well certain that he will faint, if you suspect that he is about to faint, then you must support his head and shoulders firmly with your hands at the first moment and moment until they are well fixed; and then confirm them well. And let the patient groan between your knees, and hold him firmly so that he does not move
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	After that, if the tooth is loosened in the direction of breaking, and if it does not come loose immediately, take no instruments and hold it in the cheek slightly lower, and move it as you did before.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	And if the tooth is seen to be fractured and broken, if it is recommended that it be filled with cloths, lay or pierce it; and if it is strained secretly, that it does not break while straining; and it is recommended to rinse salt over the gum around the tooth to soften the tooth
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	And take care that you do not break it further, and leave some of it, and return to the patient with the greater pain of the first time.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	Take care that you do not do what the ignorant layman do, who break the jaw at every opportunity and do not heed what we have told them; but they bring no remedy for the great disease except for the roots which remain, or the jaw which is broken. As we have often seen, when the tooth is extracted, wash the blood from the wine or oil and salt; and if there is still blood, often happens, apply a little vitriol broth; and if that does not suffice, cauterize it.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The shapes of instruments, on which one must keep silence first, are either with long points and thick handles, that they do not double in number when you draw out the tooth; these are the shapes.
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And be of large limbs if they do not bend when drawing out, and be of iron well made, and be toothed so that one may hold them.</start_of_turn>
de la racine des dens	of the root of the tooth.</start_of_turn>
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou ij.,	When the root remains fixed at the shoulder, if you must put out the moist cotton swab that is in the wound, do so with care lest you break it.
tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	While the limb is soft, because there are teeth that are split apart like nails, which makes the head of the shoulder appear like a beak of a bird; and they must be made as with a file, and this is the form:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not suffice to withstand all these tensions, if you must uncover the flesh completely around the root, and place the instrument which is called «althali», namely tweezers, so that this is the form:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	And if it must be forced and large so that it does not break, and if the root leaps by this means, that is good; if not, if you aid with all your instruments, so that the shapes come after:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait .ij. rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you use this instrument which has teeth, so that this is the form:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	And other instruments that are before the teeth, and this instrument that seems like a great clamp, whose form is like this:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	And other instruments that are before the teeth, and this instrument that seems like a great clamp, whose form is like this; or that its force is such that it cannot break, and its jaws like those of instruments for teeth; and like other instruments which are not mentioned here; the master surgeon will find himself alone with his instrument, according to what his work and his illness show, for there are many diseases for which no instrument is taught in former times; and if it breaks not from bone or from any other part, or if it is necessary, if it seeks other instruments, as I have said, and helps him with gestures, for whose form is like this.
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And let them be large and firm to hold the bone, that it escapes not, but can hold and restrain; and then restore the limb of medicine that is convenient for this, and if there is inflammation in the bone, and it is small, if the disease has passed with all these instruments:
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a .i. petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When teeth appear contrary to their natural course, and the shape is deformed, even among women of gentle birth, if it is suspected that the tooth is deeply lodged and cannot emerge naturally, and is not properly aligned, it cannot be soothed or comforted: therefore, extract it. And if it is close to the tooth, take hold of this instrument which is like a small beak, and which is made of iron without a sharp edge at the base:
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And hold it there with the thumbs and palms of your hands for the duration of the extraction, and because of that do not move the others, and if it appears, you can limber it, if you file a piece of file like this which is the shape of it.
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	It is like filing nails; and while holding the tooth firmly with the thumbs and palms of your hands, slightly move the instrument to and fro, so that it does not move too much, and when you finish, leave no burr, for if the tooth is too deeply lodged and it bleeds the tongue, you must remove the sharp edges as much as possible so that it does not bleed the tongue or impair speech.
quant li dent lochent	When the tooth is loose.
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	When the front teeth loosen, by percussion or chewing, and the patient cannot press on anything that will cause them to bleed, and you must treat them with restrictive medicines, which is of no use; if you must restrain them with a gold wire, for the silver wire becomes green and falls out, but the wound does not move.  If the wire is neither too thick nor too thin, according to the quantity of space between the teeth; and if you see that the teeth are aligned, take the wire and pass it double between the two front teeth, then place the head of the shoulder between the teeth that are next to each other, if there is one or more of them, until you see it is level up to the sound tooth on the other side; then resume the covering up to the part where you began, and strain your hand subtly and carefully, until it does not move; and if the wound is at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	Then grasp the head of the arm with a pair of forceps, assemble them, and bring them between the sound teeth; and hold them in place until they bleed no more. And leave them in place as tightly as possible, until they loosen or the thread breaks, or the strain of another thread; if it persists and serves its purpose, that is the form of teeth and the arrangement of the two front teeth, and the two lower teeth, as you see.
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And when the tooth aches, if you put it back in its place, fresh from fresh, as we have said; and let nothing interfere that is not wise and soothing, and never make the form of a tooth of a cow’s jaw, and put it back in its place or where the defect is, and strain it as we have said, and hold and serve for a long time.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	De coper, lou liien de la lengue.
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	Never is this thread which comes from the tongue or nature that is not born anew; or by accident of a deep wound; and the work is such that you see the mouth of the patient, and put your hand in his mouth, and take hold of the tongue; then grasp the large nerve until the tongue is loosened from its dwelling, and if there is any delay or not, and that is a sign of healing, if the wound is dressed and grasped tightly; and keep that the wound is not too deep, for the artery which is from the tongue; and when you have done this, if you lift the pale and easy blood, or cold blood, then put the tongue back with a little tension; and bind the patient tightly at night, so that the wound cannot be soothed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	And if blood comes out, take out the glass vessel that is bleeding; and if it does not stop, cauterize with the lentiginous cautery, which is good for this; then cure it with other treatment until it is healed.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if you see pus of a color or black or hard, if the patient does not feel it, do not touch it, for it is a abscess; and if it is declining and there is moisture, if it spurts blood, grasp the cautery with a sponge and deliver from both parts; and if it does not stop your work, if necessary, apply a piece of vitriol to the tip until it is blackened, then return to your work until you have completed your procedure; then raise the limb easily and gently, and treat the wound further until it is healed.
des apostemes de la gorge	Des apostemes de la gorge.
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	Sometimes comes from the throat black spots which are called "godath", and these spots have two almonds properly placed, and when you treat them, as we have said in the division, and they are not healed, take care: if it is abscesses of small size and color like rust, do not touch them with iron.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	And if it is red and the root is large, do not touch it with iron, even though blood comes out; but leave it until it is dead, and then you will take it out, or it will break by itself; and if it is white in color and the root is thin, if you have brought the instrument to cover it, but look first if the abscess is relaxed and calm
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	Therefore make the patient sit before the sun, and let the arm be at ease, cover the mouth with the hand, and grasp the genitals between the hands, and press the tongue down to the very instrument, as it is the form; and let it be of silver or gold as fine as a needle.
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	The abscesses of the throat.
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have this instrument present, if you can grasp it with tweezers, know that this is its form:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les .ij. amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les .ij. amandres igament.	And if you do not have this instrument present, if you can grasp it with tweezers, know that this is its form: grasp one claw at a time; when you have grasped one claw, grasp the other in the same way, and after the incision, gargle the patient with warm, bitter, and soothing liquid; when blood spurts out, if there are pomegranate seeds or myrtle berries or similar things in the vomit, until the stain is gone; then wash the wound until it is healed. Never again shall there be any other incisions in the throat except for the two claws, if you grasp them as they are always grasped.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	And I prescribe for a woman who has an abscess in the throat, which is to say a small abscess; and I must keep the throat closed tightly so that the woman cannot breathe through the passage that is blocked, and cannot eat or drink, and she would die if she remained like that for a day or two.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	And the abscess was so large that it forced two grains of barley out through the two holes that were not closed
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	I had eaten much and drank wine in abundance, and had lain in one place, then went forth with fiery fever; and with fiery pain I bore a great portion of the bow. Then I returned to the other side, where I found the tongue bound, and the throat oppressed. Having bound the other limb in these abscesses, and having closed one part, I left only a little blood; and the woman who was with me plucked out the cord of the throat, and we began to drink water and wine, and I did not cease biting at that abscess for a long time. And the abscesses rejoined again, and filled up my mouth as much as I could bear; so I embraced it and cauterized it within the throat: and thus I went away from those parts, and only God knows what happened to me afterwards.
de l’uve	De l’uve, le feu ne doit être appliqué que quand les poils sont longs et égaux; et si l’on le pique à la racine, garder les yeux ferme jusqu’à ce qu’ils ne flottent plus.
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	When the limb hangs downward, and it is fleeing and is long, it is called "perpendiculaire"; and if it is large and round, it is called "uve".
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	When it is cured as we have said in the division, and the cure does not benefit me, and you see that the surrounding skin is calm, and it is soft, if you must, you must hold it firmly; and that which is round and thick is not long; and it is bloodstained or dark-yellow or black, if you must avoid the incision of the latter.</start_of_turn>
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	For there is great peril upon the patient.</start_of_turn
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	Therefore, when you see it, as I have said, according to its color and length, you must make the patient sit in the sun and press the tongue with the instrument which we mentioned before; then put the ointment on the limb and draw out the wound, and hold it with two instruments that I have mentioned in the incision of the two thumbs.</start_of_turn
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And you must know that you should not cover more than the excess that is beyond the natural limit; for if you do more, it will grieve the voice and the ear; and after the incision, use what we have said in the incision of the two almonds, and cure until it is healed.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	And if the patient has fear of covering, you must know that you should use an engine in the cautery in the direction of the fear.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	The manner of cautery must be gentle and slow
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	And that the patient places his head in his sound condition, and then presses the tongue to the instrument that we have said or the treatise of cautery, and grasp with live forceps, if it is neither too thick nor too clear; and use the handle of this instrument, for it is thus formed:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés .iiij. jors ou .v. Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you have put on a bandage or something to put the medicine on, if like the hairs of a sickle, put the instrument over the medicine on the navel; and the patient must rest on his side, so that saliva and mucus flow from his mouth from the medicine inwards, if it does not reach the throat, and the hiccup; then hold your hand over the medicine and press it on the navel, for the amount of half an hour, until you see it wrinkled and the medications of the medicine are appeased; and if you see that, take hold and cover with any instrument, and moisten the cotton in the medicine, and remove the instrument from the wound as much as the cotton fills it; and do this often, until the cautery is perfect, then leave it dry and wipe off after three or five days. And if you must renew the cautery of the medicine, if you renew it, and after the cautery wipe off the surrounding with cotton wool, and pack what is around the medicine; and rise up cold water, and be cured of hiccups until it is healed.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en .i. pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait .i. estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This treatment is more effective than incision, for it is cured by fumigation according to this manner. Take calamine and isops and origanum and rue and chamomile and avron and similar herbs. Assemble all or some of them in one pot, put in oil, and boil. Make sure the pot is well sealed with strong earth, and put in one instrument that has a handle according to this manner:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	And be it of silver or gold, or be it one of the bones broken in the mouth of the patient until the vapor ascends to the nose by the vinegar, until the nose be mortified; after which, it must be repeated often, until the nose dries, and keep that you do this only from the commencement of the outbreak of the fever, for many things happen; do not do this before the outbreak of the fever.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	And if this instrument is not present, if you take vinegar and put in the chief of the patient an egg shell, so that the patient’s mouth does not become too hot; for the egg shell does not make the vapor rise up through the mouth, and this is a good remedy altogether for health
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou .i. morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge .i. fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren .i. estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Many times it has happened at the throat bone or fish spine, or nothing at all; if you therefore suspect that you see something, press the tongue to the sun with all the instrument, so that you see the thing; and what does not appear to you and remains in the throat, you must make the patient vomit the morbid; for by chance if it comes out through vomiting; or the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of navel, or a lettuce root, or some hardened bread; and tie the sponge to one thread, and then transfix it. And when it comes back, if it is swollen, then draw it out; and if it does not come out of what we have said, take one instrument of sponge according to this shape:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	If the instrument is bent at the head so that it can enter the throat more easily and the head is raised up; keep your hands away from the epiglottis, for if you touch it, you will lose consciousness; do not press too hard on the bone inwards; and move the instrument only as much as necessary, for if the patient coughs or the thing is reversed, it will be all the same.
de la sansue de la gorge	If the instrument is bent at the head so that it can enter the throat more easily and the head is raised up; keep your hands away from the epiglottis, for if you touch it, you will lose consciousness; do not press too hard on the bone inwards; and move the instrument only as much as necessary, for if the patient coughs or the thing is reversed, it will be all the same.
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	Never is medicine without sense, as I have said in the division, by the cure of medicines; and when this does not help, then look at the throat of the patient in the sun, and that you press the tongue to the instrument that I have told you
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	And if you see the shoulder, if it has a slight twist at the top or has subluxation that is worth this.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	And if this is not worth it, take a purgative medicine, and make the patient swallow it down with a gulp of water; then make a slight incision with the needle and do this often.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	If the patient experiences acute pain all over.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	Then take full view of the face, cover the mouth, and make the patient vomit in the direction of swallowing, and move his hand frequently; and if the patient still experiences pain in the shoulder, then pierce him with the needle again
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	And if it does not pierce him as we have said, if you fumigate the patient with asafoetida, with the instrument that I have mentioned in the fumigation of the eye; do this many times, for it will be of use to him
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	And concerning fumigation, if you take one pot or there are charcoal pieces visible, cover the patient’s face with a veil, and in that hole put the head of the instrument; then pour the fumigation, and the patient puts their chief of the cane in their mouth, closes their mouth, so that the smoke does not go out, but comes out only at the nose; and the nose will now sneeze, and if it does not sneeze, restart the fumigation many times; and the patient will suffer thirst, and will eat dirty and vile things, and will not drink water; and then it will be necessary that it be driven out by this government.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	And the form of the instrument is thus that which we mentioned in treating the nose, if indeed it can be seen, resembles a pair of hooked tongs to enter the throat; and it has the shape of a beak of a rooster, and has lime-peel, so that whatever it grasps, it cannot let go; and thus is the form
li chapistres des apostemes	the chapters on abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	The wounds of boils are, as it is remembered in this book, diverse in perforation and size; and there are two ways in which they are similar, one of which is in their appearance alone, and the other in that they hold moisture.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	And in the second method, if it is for the arm or if it is at the bone.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	for the swelling at the head is different from that at the root, and the swelling at the bone is different from that which comes at the joints, and the bones have their judgment in the work.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	and if the swelling does not need to be pierced, as long as the limb is limp according to its completion; but if there are such ones that it is necessary to pierce when it is hardened, and does not die according to its completion, like an abscess which is in the joints
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	for when the swelling comes from the joints, and it is left as long as it is rigid, by chance if the vein and nerve of the joint are corrupted, because of this there is contraction in that limb.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	Or if an abscess is pierced too late, when it is already grown large, it will go to the principal limb; or if it is pierced too deep, if the perforation is not made high enough, it will not suffice. One must only pierce the abscess in the forward direction, following digestion, except for that which is pierced too deep, which must not penetrate too far, but must be left along, and thus an fistula will form; and it will not heal in great time.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	And it must be known that you should close the wound of the apostemes that is dead according to its companion, when the pain is calmed, and the departure of fever, and the cessation of pain and redness, and the swelling and the tingling of the head of the apostemes, and other signs; and that you should make the perforation or more dependent on the apostemes, and the place where the wound appeared; and that the perforation should be long enough for the hand or foot, or in joints and nerves and arteries, and on all bones equally or there should be no swelling.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	In these cases, the limb is hanging down by its side.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	And when an abscess is in the flesh, if it is left to fester for a long time without being confirmed in digestion, as we have said before
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	For if you pierce it before this, if it has been left to fester, it will swell and cause the flesh to burst with foul breath; and by chance it will harden the veins and pierce them to the depth of the abscess
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	And if there is no wound that is perceived according to the great pain, according to what the limb has suffered.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	And it must be known that you must bring in small wounds, small incisions; in great wounds, great incisions, and many cuts according to the appearance of the wound; and if there are such wounds or it must be suspected that the wound is deeper than it appears, and if there is suspicion of infection, if it has become as thick as a drape and is softened, if it is possible to do so like we do with boils: and if there are such wounds that are split into three angles, and such as we cope with the burr of a nutmeg, like wounds of anger; and if there are such wounds that we make circular, and other sizes and similar to those that we cauterize.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	He who has no head, if he has a superficial wound, must know that you must pierce him directly; and know that when the wound is large and has gathered great blood, and you pierce him, if you do not drain all the blood at once, but only a part, then stamp the wound up to the other side, and do not do anything else; do this many times until the blood is gone; even if the patient is of weak virtue, or a woman in childbirth, or young children, or old men decrepit.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	For indeed, experience teaches us never to hope for the issue of the blood except in the case of death of the patient; and you will not be blamed for it.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Avoid this chapter with great caution, and when you have recognized the wound, if it is small, leave the wound alone; and if it is a large wound, if there is much bleeding, do not attempt to stop it with linen or old cotton; if it is a large wound and there is much bleeding, and you have squeezed out a portion of blood, if you have split the skin of the wound, and you have closed it, do not fill it with anything but fine cotton or flaxseed soaked in moisture, and leave it for a third of an hour; then remove the bone and cure the wound until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	And if blood flows from a wound during the work, if you mix cold and pure water with vinegar, and soak it up, draw out the offending discharge many times.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If blood continues to flow from the wound during the work, if you mix in cold nourishment and healing herbs as I have mentioned previously in this book, and if it is summer or the wound is painful, if there is suspicion that there is nerve damage, you must put on tight bandages and soak with vinegar and oil; and if that does not work, soak with cold water and oil or with vinegar and oil, up to a third of the way, as we have said; then remove the dressing and dry the wound, if possible, until it is healed.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	And this is known throughout in the treatment of abscesses: or as I have said before concerning the precautions before treating abscesses, and thus in this chapter.
des soros	And this is known throughout in the treatment of abscesses: or as I have said before concerning the precautions before treating abscesses, and thus in this chapter.
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	Or care of chief comes petty aftershocks, and are managed by us as are in tapestries, as the joist of a beam, and mouthfuls of it appear like something.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	Or there are some that are fat and such as those where there is moisture like mice; and if there are such as are hard and rough at the navel, and there is no doubt that the artery will not oppose it
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	And the work of its size is that you expect all the instruments that are called "endoscopes", from which the shape comes afterwards, whatever thing it contains
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	For if it contains moisture, if the liquid flows from long ago.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	And when the moisture is drained, if you leave the peel that contains that moisture, it will return in its place when you leave it alone; then soak cotton wool Egyptian style, if it is present; if not, in water and vinegar, and apply the bandage, and leave it until the other side; and that will correct what is remaining that is demented
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the burn comes round again, as before, the second and the third time, until you are certain that it does not stay put at night; then cure the wound opportunely, as is right.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	And if the wound remains open after the fat has solidified, if the wound follows this form, long; and the pus runs out, and the edges are scorched, and put all your care in place for the dressing, or where the blood is; and if the artery is opposed, do what I have said afterwards.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	And do the same with an abscess if it is painful, and cut and cure as I have said before
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	And the size of the incision for a painful abscess and moisture, if it is less severe, because they are of little blood.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	And if there are any abscesses or swellings or if there is no moisture, and if these are old abscesses that I cauterise or swellings of a woman in her old age; and if I find the abscess as hard as a stone, rough and white, and cannot break it; and if there is no sign of healing, we must make as good a wound as if it were a stone.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	In other abscesses coming from the head or the root of the ear, forasmuch as they come from the neck and the roots of the ears, they burst open every day even the most dependent of the limb; and they must be treated as they should be treated.</start_of_turn>
des scrophules	And the size on the pierced abscess and moisture, if it is less severe, because they are of little blood. And if there are some of these abscesses or heads or if there is no moisture, and from these are those abscesses that I cauterize or heads of an old woman; and find the abscess just like a stone, rough and white, and cannot break it; and if there is no opening, we must make as good a wound as with a stone. In other abscesses coming or heads, forasmuch as these which come from the children and have roots of the ears, it overtures if it is at any time most dependent on the limb; and it cures as it should.
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	Many times these abscesses happen at the collarbone, and from the armpits, and in the groin, and never anywhere else on the body, and they are bloody, and are bound together by each other.</start_of_turn
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	And indeed, a scrophule is properly within its sheath, if not at the root and the incision at the head, as we have said; and the semblance of these scrophules is many.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	There are also bodies that contain moisture, and if there are malignes that do not want to obey health.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	In those in which you see a good disposition of the bone at the touch, and which is similar in color to the marrow, and soft in one part and not dry as the marrow of the skull, the arteries and veins, and not deep; if you must break it, and burn the soft part, and elevate the two thumbs as we have said in the apostemes of the head; and do not touch the nerve or the vein, and do not cause the spleen or intestines to move, only the hands should escape, and do not voice too loudly, that you do not break anything unnecessary.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	If you prick the vein or artery, and this prevents you from working, put in the wound a bit of vitriol broth, or any powders that remain bloodless, and hold the wound; and leave it until the swelling has subsided, and soften the wound, and begin to work.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	When the swelling has subsided, if you return to your work, as long as you accomplish it; then whenever you must do something, if there remain no small abscesses, cope and crush them.</start_of_turn>
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	And if there is in the root of the abscess a large vein, if you cannot do anything but grasp that abscess at its root, but bind it with a strong double thread, and leave it hanging free; then apply the wound with much cotton wool, smeared with Egyptian balsam, and cure.</start_of_turn
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	If you grasp all the swelling, know that you must unite the two layers of the wound, and sew them together; and there will be no remaining surplus due to the magnitude of the swelling.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	Know that you must grasp the root of the matter, treat the cause, and sew as we have said
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	The swelling that remains will disappear when the matter has been grasped and the cause treated, in accordance with what has been said; if there is remaining swelling, this is due to corruption; and when the wound is thoroughly cleansed, if the wound has been thoroughly drained of pus, as long as it is healthy.
de squinance	When the wound is well drained, if you apply an ointment dressing that is healing, as long as it is healthy.
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	The old men spoke of the greatness of the gorge; but I have never seen it in our land, and that is the writing of their words.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en .ij. amandres.	As to those who grumble, it is right that the swelling of the gorge which is called the epiglottis must be cut away; and this will not help, for all the veins and the blood vessels of the patient are at those who have placed their trust in them in the mouth, in the throat or in the ears.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the disease is in the chest of the belly, it is right to cover the epiglottis to prevent the loss that comes from strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige; et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	It is necessary, when our voices tear the epiglottis, to cut them three circles or four, slightly through, between the two circles or in the quantity of the fissure from the surface; and if the cartilage is soft, it is convenient to join the epiglottis immediately so that there is no swelling and the blood vessels are long
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit; et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix; et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	If the master is fearful, if you command him to extend the skin of the throat to the chin, then cut the earlobe as far as it goes to the nail; and avoid the blood vessels, for if you see nothing, then close the wound; and if necessary, ligate the artery, as we have said; and demonstrate by the section of the smoke of the nail that the spur has escaped from the broken bone, and by the lack of voice; and leave the wound open for a piece.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the hour has passed and doubt about strangulation persists, assemble the upper and lower eyelids of the wound with the thumb and index finger, and hold them together with the cartilage; then administer medicines that cause the hair to grow, until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	The patient must not do this until the throat is completely healed, and the patient is deemed to be dying, and the default is to leave it alone.</start_of_turn
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort; et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee; et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	Therefore, ligate the epiglottis because the patient cannot move, and he breathes through the wound; and thus is preserved from death. And for this reason they command the old man to leave the wound open until the malice of the disease has passed, and it is passed in three days or four. And then they command to suture the wound and cure it, when it is cured; and I will tell you what I have seen.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon; et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	I saw that a damsel took a knife, plunged it into her throat, and cut part of her windpipe; and I fled called for help, and found her as dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I discovered the wound, and found the blood that had issued from it, and saw that it did not penetrate any vein or artery except for the throat, and that the cause of this was the wound itself.</start_of_turn
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee; et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition; por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	I hurried, and dressed the wound, and cured it until it healed; and the damsel did not suffer except that her voice was hoarse, and returned after a while; for in the surgery of the epiglottis I did not find any fear
de la grosse gorge	of the great gullet.
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes; et est selonc II manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	These abscesses are called "throat hernia," and are great abscesses in the color of jaundice, and are very common in women; and there are two kinds: natural and accidental; or the natural one has no cause.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere; et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire: se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point; et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And the accidental one is of two kinds: one is like fat, and the other is like an abscess that comes from an artery; and there is fear, and one should not attempt to burn anything except in small quantities, and should prove and search thoroughly: if you find it like pure fat and cannot find any vein, if you cut it, just as we cut fat, and take away all the surrounding tissue if there is any; and bind it tightly, and cure it as if it were cured perfectly
des nous	And encircle all around, and cure it as it should be, until it is completely healed.
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances; et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	Many ways are there for us, of which I shall speak of all; and it is obvious that I shall tell of all the difference that is between health and sickness.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that dislocation is caused by heat and fever that persist, as long as the inflammation has not passed, and is accompanied by swelling; then rest the fever and heat.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros; et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	With health there is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and it contains the syfac, which is its own bag and is like the color of gold, and begins just like fat, and becomes large; and they are like oil, grease, or moisture, and the color is as I have said in the division
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	It is necessary, when you come to the cure of the wound, that you inquire and examine first the instrument which is called the “entromissoire,” according to the shape of the wound or chapter that follows.</start_of_turn
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme; puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	And the method of the inquiry of abscesses of the body is that you take more moisture from the wound than you find in the abscess, and press your thumbs and fingers until you feel that the instrument has grasped the knot, then do what is suitable for the size of the abscess; then draw out the entraumeatus and take care of what may spur out.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes; et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout; et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	If moisture comes too early, before the afterbirth has passed, if it happens as I have said of other incisions; and if afterwards the afterbirth does not come, even though it is fat, if it happens in a cross, and you take hold of it with your fingers, and gently push from the navel part and support the ribcage where you find it, and if you do not support it well, if you tear it piecemeal so that nothing remains.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois; et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	For if nothing remains, if it returns many times; and if some remains, and you grieve not, if you employ on the wound some corrosive powders that bite, hold the wound steady, and put on soothing things around the incision; and if it is great, if you cost two pounds of the wound, and cure what makes it swell.</start_of_turn>
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	If the vein swells up against you or another if you are hasty and use broken vitriol, and leave it for one or two days, until the wound has healed, and rest the swelling of blood; then return to the cover that was removed when it was dislodged
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule; et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule; et sont de III manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	See here the forms of the entromittent instruments, and they are of three kinds: great, medium, and small; and there are three squares of them which are called "albaret", and one which is called "breb", and there are three kinds: great, medium, and small, to embrace the fistulas. And they are like needles which are used to stitch wounds, and they are of golden, or iron, or silver, and they cost little which are yellow, and are more proven with black pitch to embrace the cortices of fistulas. And they are of three kinds: great, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the large size of the opening.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi; et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	The shapes of the sponges are like the seeds of plants, as you see here: great, medium, and small; and there are sponges which have two cortices of three kinds each; and there are sponges which have three cortices, and they are also of three kinds; and there are sponges which have two cortices, and a single cortex only, and they are of three kinds each; and all these are necessary in their place.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf; et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes; et sont de III manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois; et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus; et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	The head of the humerus is fractured and broken in such a way that it severs the nerve without cutting the vein; and from these introspective causes are the bones reposed in sleeves, so that the patient does not lose them at the opening of the abscesses; and they are of three kinds: great, small, and middle, as you see; and they are used only in the case of fracture of the limb, as the leg, arm, and shoulder, and angulations, and in similar cases; and no other instrument is ever used for this purpose except for a pair of forceps, as in the shape of fists.
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	And put it nowhere near blood vessels or arteries, never again in the same form.
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme; et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	Under no circumstances does the swelling of the breasts of some women cease when they begin to become corrupt, so that they appear like the breasts of a woman; and they remain heavy and swollen, and who would see them healed, if they were to be treated according to this form from line b. until line g.?
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures; de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.; puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif; et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	Then remove the fat and use the medicinal poultice as an astringent. Then gather the two layers of the wound together with sutures and keep it closed until it is healed. And if the wound leaks, it is because of great swelling, as with women, if it is at two ribs below the nipples, by two similar incisions. For one of them must be held by the other at the end of each, so that the greatest line contains the lesser according to this shape, from this line .b. up to the line .g. Then remove the skin between the two layers and bone the fat, and mix with what has been said of sutures and powders, and anything necessary for the cure, until it is healed. And if it is not healed, or the incision is not completely made, because the patient does not want to rest, or for the discharge of blood, if it is necessary, fill the wound with moist cotton wool in corrosive order. And leave it until it has eaten up the remnant and the fat, then cure it until it is healed.
des apostemes des asselles	And leave it until it has consumed the remnant and the fat, then cure it when it is healed.
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	And leave it until it has consumed the remnant and the fat, then cure it when it is healed
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	If there is moisture contained, it must be cut according to this form, from line .b. to line .g.:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when all the hair in the abscess is drained, if the wound is of great extent, fill the wound with fine cotton, and leave it until the other side, then extract all the cotton, and cure the swelling that arises from this until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	If the abscess looks like carbuncles, if it persists as we have said in cuts for carbuncles, and if the wound is healed, if necessary perform cautery as we have said before.</start_of_turn>
de la routure de l’artere	of the root of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme; et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont; et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans; et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	If the artery is stopped, and the skin is tough which is above, if there are many abscesses again, and also with the vein leaving and incisions; if the surgeon knows when this is due to the artery, when there are long abscesses, they are split open; and when he feels it at his side, he knows it is extraction; and when it is due to the vein, there is running discharge of pus. It is foolish to close this incision, and even when the buttocks and thighs and groin and mouth of other parts are swollen and painful.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc; puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte; puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples; puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme; puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient; puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit; puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil; et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus; puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez; puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	It is necessary to eschew the treatment of fire, and he who is at the head must eschew also, and in the one who is of swelling of the artery has become by these above the skin long; then uncover the size as we have been taught, and depart well the artery from the cloth, as long as it is uncovered; then take away a needle, and pierce until the other side, and strain the artery with a doubled thread in two layers, as I have taught you in the extraction of the two arteries which are in the temples; then point the place which is between the two links of an intro-missor until there is no more of it there; and be you delivered of the incision; then bring back the treatment as before, until the pain be gone; and if the abscess is of the size of the vein, you must know that you must keep your hand there where you put in the abscess to all the skin; then take out the needle which you have in your hand, and pierce, and there shall be two doubled threads, so that you can handle it from the other side; then tie the abscess, as I have said, or bind two parts of the two fingers with two threads; and if you doubt that the threads will hold, if they rebound a third needle to all the threads which are beside the first needle, and strain the threads in three layers; then cut the abscess as much as it supersedes in size, then cut away the excess of the wound and leave that which is bound; then put upon it a moist drape in wine and oil, and give it treatments of bands and ointments until it is healed.
des apostemes des ners	Des apostemes des ners.
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	The abscesses come from the nerves as well as from the veins, as from the nerves when they are cut or overworked, and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor; et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur; et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction; et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	And often in adjutories and in two and in all limbs or where there are joints, it is grief after incisions, and its color appears like the color of dark porridge, and is in multiple positions causing pain; and when it is strained, if the patient feels pain, and is not moved by dark porridge, but by sweat like urine; and it mutates well from all sides, neither forward nor backward, neither up nor down, and that which is in the joints does not cover with iron: by chance there will be contraction; and he who is either chief or front, makes the skin taut at the staple.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine; et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the incision is small, if he has one or two teeth, grasp it at the root; and if it is large, if he has swelling, abscess, then bone and reunite the wound at the suture, and treat until it is healed.
des grosses boces pendans	From the armpits hanging
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans; et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	Never have I seen such a thing in the belly and nowhere else, for it is a disease which is called "fungus" because of its resemblance to nails, and its root is subtle, and its head is large; and there are many small and great ones. I have seen many people who have had two or more of these in the belly which were more like fungi than anything else, and there was no difference, and they were white, and had a soft root, and were full of water.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine; si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	I saw them swell up in the belly and weighed them, one was 18 ounces and the other 6 and a third. When I opened the incision, if you look carefully, you will see that the patient is moist. The color of the artery is pale and moist with a soft root; if the bladder is large and soft, and you are present, I order the fire cautery.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer; et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors; et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	For at the shoulder comes often too great a discharge of blood, and if it does not go away, if you delay, then you must certainly cauterize; and if you see the patient shivering with fear and weakness from the incision of the flesh, if you take a thread of gut well made, and bind the artery as we have said, and leave it for two days; and then the restraint, and do not cease to drain the thread of gut until it has closed the artery; and take care by it. And if the roots are black, if there is weakness on the side of the gut itself for the belly, but you must take hold of half of it, and then cauterize that it does not return; then cure the wound, and keep that you do not take hold of the nipple which is of a dark colour and of bad sense and of milk returning.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For it is an inflamed abscess, and I will come to the treatment of the abscess later.</start_of_turn>
quant li boude ist fuer	When the abscess is full.</start_of_turn
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit; et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	If there is swelling of the belly, it comes from cautery of a wound or incision of the bladder; and is above the navel and there are some bowel movements, as in other routes, or blood which clots veins or arteries according to what is before, or windiness; and if it is through the bladder route and the issue of the bowel, if it is the color of the abscess, it is a slight thing causing pain, and has various issues.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	If by passage of the intestine, then it is more diverse; and when it is pressed, it returns, and by chance if it is choked, and expands the mouth at the entrance of the bath and with great effort.</start_of_turn>
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit; et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	If it is due to moisture, it is a slight thing, and opens readily when you press it with your hand; do not restrain me. If it is due to blood, if it opens with these signs, the abscess is large and hard, and is fixed according to quantity; and if it is due to windiness, it is rough to the touch, and the work is that you must look to see if the swelling is due to the blood vessel or the vein, or windiness.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	If you believe that you have left the cure.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	For there is doubt and fear, as I have said or in this chapter about abscesses, concerning the vein and the vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude; puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine; puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz; puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine; se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre; et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit; et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier; puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi; ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit; et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	If you believe that you have left the cure. For there is doubt and fear, as I have said or in this chapter about abscesses, concerning the vein and the vein. Keep the patient still and extend the limb fully; then mark the point where you wish to make the incision. Then take hold of the limb firmly between your hands and stretch it over the swelling. Then bind the limb securely with a strong thread or cord, and leave it in place for a while. Then remove half of the abscess and bring your finger and thumb close to the skin. If you find the intestine or bone caught, if you pull them out, leave them out. If you find the vein or artery, if they are bleeding, tie them off. Then return to your work and make two holes and insert two strong stitches, and tie the two holes together as you did before. Then strain the abscess for three days over the stitches. If you see that the stitches are loosening, remove them and leave the limb alone until it has healed. Cut away the dead tissue by itself or by trimming it off carefully, and cure the limb of this. Then remove the abscess as I have said. Drain the blood or moisture that you find. Cure the limb of this.
dou chancre	Then strain the abscess for three days on the needles; if you see it, pierce the needles, and leave the wound open until it bursts, and remove the dead tissue by itself.
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	We have already mentioned the signs of an abscess, and how it should be treated with medicine and how to shun the cautery; and we say that an abscess swells in the marrow, and has great swelling in the cure. The ancients say that when an abscess is in the flesh or can be scraped out as when an abscess is in the marrow, in the spleen, and in similar places, it must be removed as soon as possible; and when it is large and old, if it cannot be cured, do not approach it, for I know of no cure for it. No one has ever cured one before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide .i. boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And as for the work, when it is in the flesh or can be removed, as we have said, do not purge the black bile from the patient once; then make the patient healthy if there is still any swelling left; then expel the patient, i.e. give him a good drink to make the work; then draw out your needles or abscesses, and the head of all parts, and the bone of all parts without leaving anything behind; and let the blood flow freely, and expect well the limb at your hand or at nothing, and if the wound becomes infected from the incision of the artery or vein, do not cauterize too much lest it be stained; then cure with another cure until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
de ydropisie	of dropsy.
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer: lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	Nos avons dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer: lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme.
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	And be trenchant from two parts.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier; puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu; puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	And be trenchant from two parts: a point, and in such a way that it cannot be closed until it comes to the intestine when it is grasped; and do not close it; then look to see if the dropsy is ingrained towards the intestines: if it is certain that you must make an incision three fingers breadth to the right of the navel; and if the dropsy is due to the disease of the liver, make your incision on the left side of the belly three fingers breadth; and if it is due to worms, make it on the right side, and do not make the wound deeper than necessary; then pierce all the leather with the instrument, and grasp the gut, and keep your hand over the wound as wide as from the nail of a finger or as much as you can endure; then pierce the gut as far as the width of your thumb until the gut comes out whole; and that is the cause of the pain; then withdraw the instrument and go. This is the form of the instrument.
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus; et II d’autre part, et I d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	And it is similar to a silver nail, broad or thin, and has at the upper part a little hole; and where it costs on one side, three holes; and two on the other side, and one on the other; and the head of the nail is cut off like a pen, and this is the form of the incision which they write to cut off the head.
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort; mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit; fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	And at the top of all this is the staple, so that when the instruments come to the height, if they suddenly rise up onto the instruments; you must immediately empty out half or a third of the contents, for if you empty out more than that at this hour, by chance the patient will die from the resolution of his spirit from the weapon, or he will bleed profusely, or he will approach death; but empty out according to the quantity of its virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the virtue of the patient signify, and his pains; then take out the instrument and retain the liquid, and it is retained now by the nail which stops the hole which is above the socket, as I have said, that you pierce according to this manner; then put the instrument back the other way, if you see the patient suffering from this, and take out a small quantity of liquid. Do this under no circumstances, and keep using it until it no longer remains but a little bit of liquid.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	And if you doubt the patient, and you see him mouthing with pain, if the surgeon treats him with charcoal from a sepulcher or sand cautery, and by mouthing with sweat or bath and sun, and if he drinks; and the surgeon gives him drying medicines until he is healed, and cauterizes on the stomach and on the liver and on the spleen after the extraction of the poison, as I have said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	Do nothing of the sort; keep yourself from using it until it stops hurting. And if you are in doubt about the patient, and you insert too much water, if the cure be of burying or washing with sand, with water or bathing and in the sun, and abstain from eating; and let the physician give drying medicines until he is healed, and cauterize on the stomach and the liver and the spleen after the extraction of the water, as I have said before.
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	Never are children born without a mark in the belly, or the mark is small, or it is not firmly in its place.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	If the physician has sojourned for a long time that he cannot perceive anything from afar, as in this form:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	Then put or perforate a hole in the middle of the great swelling, and bind and hold it for three days or four, and when he wants to urinate, if you leave it closed, he will urinate, and then you will reset it; and by chance it will not be able to close, because the urine which comes out will not leave it closed
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	If the opening is small, if it is medicine with lead weights, as we have said, if it dilates.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	If the opening is not wide enough, if it is treated with lead weights, as we have said, if it dilates. Those who have the opening at the root of the bone are blistered, for no hair grows where the opening is at the head of the bone, until it has raised its hair high; and they cannot cover it over for that reason, and it is a bad ailment.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the manner of the work is that if the patient lies recumbent on his back, then the head of the thigh and the knee are as large as a pen; if the opening is small, if it comes to a thousand, as it is convenient; and you must take care of the evacuation of blood which comes often, and if it comes, if the stain of that which stains blood, and cure the wound until it is healed.
des pustules de la verge	of the pus of the thigh.
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a .i. oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many times come these boils to the verge, and are an unsightly sight; and in them are both malignant and non-malignant things; if you take them at their face value, with ointment of subtlety, and press and squeeze them all out, then put on a wet bandage in the Egyptian fashion; then cure with diafinicon until they are healed.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	And if the swelling is malignant, of a dark color and swelling, it is necessary that you bring cautery there.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	When you have grasped it, and if the swelling is at the root of the bone, and has some in the marrow and some outside, you must break the swelling that is inside first; and when it is loosened, if the wound is outside.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	For when you have cured it whole, if it is not firmly held, the head of the shoulder will not be perceived and will come black and corrupt in its root or head; if you must remove all that is black and corrupt, then apply honey and flour made of pomegranate peel and sometimes, cure it of other treatments until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	And if blood comes out, if you mix the lunar cautery according to this form:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars; et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	The cautery is of two sorts in these two situations: that is to say, at the discharge of blood and at corruption; and if the head of the shoulder is corrupted and withdrawn, if you drink or force down the hair of the root a span of lead, and the patient urinates; and when the hair has grown over the head of the shoulder which has not been cut around, or there is wound or incision, if you must indeed remove these things, then you must burn the hair around the circumference until the hair is loosened; and when it is loosened, deliver the head of the shoulder from all parts; and if this should cause division of these things, if you must indeed burn at the root of the hair and the head, then dry thoroughly between two, and put on a soft bandage of wet linen with cold water, which should not be moved.
de la circoncision	If this be a grievous matter, if you must certainly undertake it, then grasp the limb firmly without inflicting any wound to the root of the thumb and the heel; then gradually separate the skin between the two joints, and place a fine strip of moist linen over the cold water, so that it does not slip away.
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Circumcision is not merely a continuation of the other wounds; however, when our will commands it, and is properly undertaken, if it is necessary that our workers do the best work, and the most gentle for the patient.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the old folks do not tell me of circumcision for their children, for they do not use it in their laws, and we have only what we have learned through experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor .i. dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a .ij. toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	For I have seen most of the masters and physicians who perform circumcision to make incisions around the head of the penis, and with force, and with great bleeding; so that the testicles often flee because of the two layers of skin, and by chance if one severs these below and leaves the upper one behind.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	Or the wound closes again, and the pain is doubled, and there is swelling which is painful when the point of the limb is not securely held; and by swelling of the cord by chance escapes the wound, corrects the work, and many times comes out without having had to perform any swelling and I think so.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	From the alteration which is made with force throughout the whole thread, I have observed the goodness of the experiment, for the forces cut just as well downwards as upwards.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien; et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge; puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	When you press your hand, if it is even all around the thumb, but the nail is well stretched and tight around the skin; and if the nail is somewhat bent from the start, as if you were making the child understand, if he understands, do not force the nail to lie only around the nail; but put it aside in every way you can; then put it between your thumb and index finger, and bring the forces between your thumb and index finger or take away your little finger so that the nail does not see them, neither any of the instruments; then stretch your thumb to the nail and blow or pinch, and pull the nail up as much as the nail of the thumb is long; then thoroughly cleanse the wound which is assembled, then tie the sign of a double thread, and tie the little finger from one loop to the other; and keep two fingers of the second loop to the pouch and the little finger, and keep between the two loops, then loosen the pinch from the thumb and pull the nail out; then leave the blood to flow freely, because that is the remedy; and put powder on and over the powder I drape a gauze which is glued with a clove of clove oil, scented with rosemary oil and fresh, and leave it on until the bleeding stops.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	When the forces are formed at the armpit, it is thus: the two arms are tense and stretched, and the arms are as great as the palm of the hand equally:
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	The error of the armpit is when the nerves are injured during the incision; therefore it is necessary that you extend your nail, even if it causes the wound to split; and grasp it equally, and if you do not manage to hold it with your nail, if you grasp it with your teeth, hold it firmly, and then grasp it.
Et s’il trespassent .iij. jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	And if they trespass for two days, and what is below the ribcage is inflamed, if you leave it as long as the spasms cease, and the swelling is slight; if you touch it as you wish, and hold on to the lower part of the ribcage, it will do you neither good nor harm.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When you have treated the wound with powder, as we have said or mentioned, if you touch it too hard, it will go deeper; so treat it as we have said until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
dou retenement de l’urine	When the urine is retained.
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division; et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e; et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	The urine is retained if it is due to the stone, or blood congealed, or bile, or worms, or other things which we have mentioned in the previous division; and if the urine is not released, you must know that it is held back by the stone which is in the belly or the neck of the bladder; if you can make the patient hunch over his knees; and put his feet on the back, and extend his belly from the part below his back, and restrain the patient so that he cannot move; and then you must constrain the neck of the bladder to the expression of the stone above, so that the urine is released; and if it does not come out, as we have mentioned, and the patient feels great pain, you must give an extraction with all the instruments which are called a "siringue"; and this is the form: either of silver or lead shot like a hen's quill; or the caine of a palm of a long and a half, or shot like a bean.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede; puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine; et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	And thus the method of issuing urine is as follows: if you take one doubled thread and bind one end to the head of a cushion or cloth, and pass the other end through the syringe; then close up the excess cloth and pass it until it reaches the head of the syringe, and join the syringe with oil or butter and egg yolk, and make the patient sit on the chair, and raise the bladder and testicles with oil and olive oil and warm water; then put the syringe gently into the testicles, as far as it reaches the root of the testicles, then double the testicles towards the scrotum; then withdraw the syringe before it reaches the bladder, and let the patient feel that it is coming out until it reaches the empty state; this must not be done except in the case where the thread leads or goes astray; then remove the thread at both ends, and the urine will follow the thread, and then expel it forcefully, and correct the urine; and begin the syringe again until the bladder is empty, and align the patient.
des maladies de la vessie	Des maladies de la vessie.
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When there are dropsy or blood in the bladder, or putrification has set in, and you see urine and medicines distilled, if you do everything that is called the «clepsedre», which is its shape:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus: II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est; et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	She is closed, and if there are three holes: two from one side, and one from the other, as you see; and the lord physician must keep his head firm so that he presses well the verge towards the addition, if we can remove the moisture, and push when necessary; and when you see the medicines flowing in the bladder, put the chief physician in the moisture, and draw out the one who is inside; if you draw out the moisture from the chief, and then push him back firmly; if the moisture enters again, and comes to the bladder, if the patient feels it; and that is the form of a subtle cluster from which we clusterize the bladder: if this is the case.
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie; et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	It is of silver or gold, and the head is higher; and from one side or the other; then take a bladder of mutton and put the moisture in it which you see clustering the bladder, then bind it between the two breasts forming a double bow, and burn one half of that moisture on the fire; then strain the chief of the cluster into the verge, and pull your hand over the bladder until the patient feels that the moisture has come to the bladder; and if you do not have the bladder, if you take a piece of parchment and make a circle, and pierce it round; then draw the string firmly through these holes, and assemble the circle as if you were assembling a wheel, and put inside what you see of oil, moisture, and water, and bind it with the instrument; and do as if you had made the bladder, pressing your hand until the moisture comes to the bladder.
de la piere	From the stone.
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have already mentioned in the previous division the methods of dealing with stones, and their extraction alongside medicines; and we have mentioned the difference between a retained stone and one that must be extracted, as well as the signs and in what case a stone must be opened; in the bladder and in the kidney; and I will tell you openly and briefly.</start_of_turn>
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont .iiij. ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I say that a stone that is retained in the bladder often causes vomiting, which is a sign that the stone has burst from the bladder similar to the pain in its subtlety; and it opens gravel, and grinds the patient’s side, and causes them to urinate frequently, and then it swells; and from these vomits the foundation is loosened; and the healing of these vomiting spells is light up until the age of three years, and is more grievous in the elderly, and is like that in those who are between youth and old age; and the cure for these who have a large stone is lighter than for those who have a small one.</start_of_turn
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	And when we come to the treatment, if it is necessary, first cleanse the patient thoroughly with vinegar, to drive out all the worms that are in the intestines.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	For it never happens to inquire about the stone [kidney].
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche dedens; se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	Then grasp the patient by the side, and loosen and move to the navel, so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder; and it never happens to go up high; then make him sit between your hands and his hands should rest on his buttocks, so that the bladder is completely drooping downwards; then inquire and touch within; if you feel the stone in the space, hasten now to cut above the stone
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	And if it does not come out on touching, moisten your left index finger if the patient is an adult, or your middle finger if the patient is a youth accompanied; and press it to its foundation, inquire for the stone, and when you feel it at your middle finger, if the bladder is swollen at the neck; then press above your middle finger, and the stone will come out either by itself or you will see it cut.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	And instruct the minister to press the bladder with his hand, and command him to extend his thumb on his right hand and his little finger on his left hand the skin that is between the thumb and little finger in the part where the measure is taken; then insert the sponge, which is shaped like this.
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans; par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	And between that which is between the collarbones and the sternum, do not insert it in the middle but at the cost of the left nipple; and on the right side of the stone, and two of them either adjoined or fixed to the sternum, and as much as the breadth of the stone, not too great; for by chance the press if it must be on the stone, that it leap in the direction of the work; and strings that there is a part of the stone or there are angles, and margins: if it is grasped to twist; and if there is a part which is swollen, like a gland, round, from which there is a clear discharge.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole; et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	And if there are angles and margins there, make the size greater; and if it does not jump, it is certain that you must strain over the teeth which are as sharp as a file at the head, for the stone must be strained if it does not escape; or you can take out the instrument which is curved at the head; and if you do not know how to manage it, if the wound is large, and if the stone does not move, if the tightening of the vitriol; and if there is more than one stone, strain out the greatest first at the belly of the bladder, then press on, then force the stone out, and the smaller afterwards if there are several.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	And if it is much swollen, if you cover it with silk, and make it even more painful.
Car II choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces; et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	And if it is much swollen, if you cover it with silk, and make it even more painful. For in this matter two things happen to the patient: either he dies or his urine comes out again at the same time as his wounds will not close; but whatever you do to relieve him, or to remove the splinters, as long as you are pulling them out by pieces; and when you have finished your work, if you apply incense and aloe and blood of dragon, and bind it, and put above it a wet cloth soaked in oil and wine, or in oil and rosewater and cold water, to calm the burn; then raise the patient up to his collarbone, and do not release the ligature until the third joint.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you loosen it, if there is much moisture in the limb from oil and water, then treat with the astringents diafinicon and basilicon until it is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit; puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	And if pus and blood clots come into the wound and corruptions, and congealing of blood in the bladder, and either because of that the urine is retained, which is known in part as not coming out with the urine: drink wine in the wound, and remove that blood, for if it remains, it will corrupt the bladder and carry it away; then wash the wound with water and salt and oil, and give him every kind of help that you can, as long as he is alive; and know that all the times that you are curing him, that you must bind the two seams and assemble the medicines on the limb.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	And if the stone is small, and it is in the bladder or the urethra, and it is fixed there, and the urine cannot pass; if the physician does what I have said above, that you must let it go many times, we will hear of the size of this cure.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	I have already proved this to be true.</start_of_turn>
Pren .i. foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a .iij. angles fichiees en .i. tison:	Take hold of the iron according to this form and make two angles grasped firmly in one space:
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	Then take a thread and tie it around the edge of the bladder near the stone, so that it will not be able to move backwards into the bladder; then pull the thread gently until it reaches the stone; and turn the thread towards your hand over the stone until you can see the stone from the other side; if the urine comes then, press your hand on what remains of the stone which is in the bladder.</start_of_turn
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides; et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the fracture is great, and the urine spurts with blood, and the patient is in pain; if you are unable to do this by any means, take a thread and pass it through the hole and another through the bone, then pass the needle through the wound between the two lines, and then withdraw the needle, and remove the thread, and close the wound with a cold compress that is in the wound; and cure it until it is healed.
de la piere des femmes	If you cannot do this for any reason, take hold of the limb above and below, then push the bone sideways between the two joints, and then extract it with force, loosen the ligament, and congeal the blood that is in the wound; then cure as before.
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por .iij. choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	When the bone is dislocated in a woman, and this does not happen often, it is a grievous cure, and is defended by two things: the first is that perhaps the woman is a virgin; the second is that one cannot find a woman who is truly virtuous, even among the most chaste.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere; et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	If by chance one cannot find a skilled woman in this art of hands; and if the woman’s bone is thicker than the man’s, because she can make a deeper incision and there is greater pain in her. And if it is necessary for this, if you must take a lesser measure, take a mark that is well known, and prick the flesh, and if you do not find it, do not cast aside the obvious; and present a sign of wisdom in the life of women, or a woman who knows a part of the art, and command her to do what you command of her with the inquiry of the bone; and look well whether the woman is a virgin: for if she is, she can push out her shoulder or foundation and inquire the bone; and if she finds it, if you constrain her shoulder, command her to push out her shoulder or with the patient, and desire and press her left hand on her bladder.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite; puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	If this be true, if you command her to move from the entrance of the bladder to the root of the thigh, as far as she comes to the root of the thigh, then grasp on the stone at the root of the thigh and discover the middle of the stone, where it is usually hidden, and feel the thigh in that part; and do not move her head up or down, or from side to side, until she is as small as at first. Then gently restore her to her natural size, if you feel the thigh is becoming relaxed as much as the stone can bear, and the discharge as many kinds of stones as you have seen: for example, small and large, sharp and round, long and short, and those that have rains.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	if the discharge resemble these things, it is an issue.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre; et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	And if she does not go away, if you put on the brow of vitriol and hold it for an hour until she is stained; then return to your work until the stone is gone, and have the instruments that I told you of for extracting the stone as your companions; and if she still does not go away, and it is the artery that has been cut, if you put powder on the wound and bind tightly with threads and bandage, and do not attempt to do so again; leave the stone alone and do not touch it, except by chance the patient dies; then cure the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	When the blood flow of blood is calmed and the limb is relaxed, if you return to your work, as long as the wound is open.
de hernie carnouse	Of hernias of the groin.
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit .i. autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	Ramice aquouse is nothing other than an assembly of moisture or white fat, which is like lead when cold, that contains the egg; and it is called "syfac," and never is it truly in the yolk of the egg, if we take care that this is not the case; and it is the skin of the coion between the white fat that we have mentioned.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the generation of this ramiculus is weak and comes from the coions, and the matter is spread out
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus; et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	And never if percussion comes upon the joints, and this moisture has many colors: or it is pale yellow, or it is without redness, or black, or aquous white, and these are signs of corruption in this assembly, for if it is white or pale yellow as we have said, if the abscess is renewed, I advise that you do not open the joints, for there is moisture all around.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef; et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	And if there is moisture in the flesh itself, if the abscess is renewed with a part of the egg, and because of this it is thought that it is another wound; and if the moisture is between the skin of the joints and the white substance, if you feel it well; then when you see the color of the moisture, if you suspect that there is something inside that makes it appear, of course the form is as it has been said before.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to this, following the introduction, judge what is within.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz; puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions; puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir; puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue; et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when we cauterize with iron, if it be known that the patient is in pain, that he should be well-nourished and have a full belly; then we anoint him on his back, on something high, and put a cloth over his face; we sit on his left side, and command the minister to sit on his right side, and stretch his arm to one of the two costles between the ribs; then we take the sponge soaked in vinegar, and cut the skin between the ribs from the navel down to the loin; and let the incision be straight, dividing the skin of the ribs right up to the white membrane; and we burn it subtly as it should be; then we pierce the white membrane with a needle to let out all the fluid, and we drain away all the blood; and we put on our sponges, and extend the white membrane upwards; and do not touch the ribs except for the white membrane; cut through all or in pieces immediately the cartilage under the skin, if you do not cut it well it will return the blood; and if the sinew leaps up to your work, if you leave it in its place when you have finished the work on the white membrane. Then we reassemble the two leaves of the ribs to their natural position, and cure it like the other wounds, until it is healed.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	If you find the eye corrupted by another disease, you must tie down the blood vessels that are suspended, doubting the discharge of blood; then cut the eyeball out completely, drain the eye, and cure it as we have said.</start_of_turn>
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset; et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	If the swelling is put together in two parts, their branches are two roots; if you press the other part as you did the first equally, then wipe out the blood, and put in the wound a piece of clean cloth soaked in rose oil; and put over it another cloth soaked in wine and oil, and put on the two bones, and put under doubled cloths, and tie it up as it is proper in this form.
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier; et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers; si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	Then take two cloths, and use coarse wool thread as described above and sew them together at the groin; and one of the bones grasps on the foundation up to the shoulder, and the other at the bony prominence; and the other two fingers grasp on the two angles, and all are assembled together with the restriction in the loop of the armpit; and never is medicine the root of the cautery instead of the size of a needle, and take only one cultellary needle and prick the skin of the bones, and if there is a white spot that contains the blood is discovered; if you take the cautery as described above and burn that spot as we have said, the blood will clot at that subtle cautery.
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille; et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	And look at all the ways you can do it, as long as you remove everything; and keep that fire away from the egg; and remove that which is more harmful; and take care of the discharge of blood, and do not be afraid of the work of size; and if anything opposes you, or if there is suspicion of infection or other things, if it is possible, cure that which opposes you, as it is said before.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit; pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer; puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee; et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	And if the patient is pale and does not wish to wait for this work because of its horror, if you think it necessary, make an incision, as I have said; and when you are sure by the signs that the swelling is liquid, make the patient sit on a high chair; then pierce the abscess at the lower part with a broad knife and make a hole as long as the thumb; and if the wound is large, let the blood flow out fully; then put a bandage on the wound and bind it, and leave the remaining blood to drain out naturally; and cure the wound until it is healed; and if the white fluid does not stop the bleeding in the wound, as I have said; you must drink a penny or the instrument used for treating the hydrophobia, because it is like this; and widen the wound, and remove the blood that has returned, and reassemble after six months or when the pain has ceased, and when it is reassembled as before, the patient will be able to live his days.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the bones
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse; et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	Wounds that in this section of the twig have fear in more than one place, for it seems to me that it is worth leaving them alone; and I shall tell you the work and the signs of the abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	Therefore, I say that abscesses come from boils or carbuncles, and sometimes from wounds; and this is by chance.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion; et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief; et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	It is known by excessive swelling and pain, which is spread as far as the joints, or by percussion; and the colour of the abscess is like that of fresh cheese; and there is no pain, and is an abscess that is grieved; and by chance there is one abscess which is large, bloody, and purulent, and of dark colour, and does not come from any artery, or from swelling of a vein.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois; et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	When it is not from an artery, if it is known by the arrangement of the abscess, when you press on it with your hand; and I do not know of any other way of treating it.</start_of_turn>
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars; et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	He who is made of the swelling of a vein is known by his disposition at the expression of the touch of the thumbs, and can make quite as much of this semblance as of the others; and it is that you must grasp like nails, then the egg is high, and the thread is thick white silk, and deliver the suspendor from all parts of the egg.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope; et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	If the egg is already softened with these thorns, if you must then carry the egg, and grasp; and if it is at the surface or in what is within the vessels, if you must deliver all that holds, and grasp roundly.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	If the bone is high or behind the joint, if you must grasp it entirely, and draw out the head, as we have said.</start_of_turn>
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	When your work is done, if you are using wool yarn, soak it in rose oil and wine, then bandage it with other bandages until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the bones
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait; et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	This is an abscess covered with a covering resembling a burdock, with the softening of the nails, and the patient groans greatly when he walks; and the cure for this disease is very near as poor as this one that we have just said, and all that we can do is tell you the work of it, according to what the old ones have said
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment; puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples; puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief; puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues; puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions; car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz; si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	You must make the patient sit upright on a chair, then suspend the arm from the armpits to the waist, holding it firmly with your hands and stretching it out; then cut through the skin at the elbow, as far as it is necessary, and then remove the callous part, just as we have said in the extraction of the arteries from the temples; then insert a needle or double thread and tie it to the first bone or where the nail has gone, and tie it loosely at the other end; then cut around the elbow joint, according to the length of the bone, and remove the corrupt humors; then cure the wound as usual or apply an ointment, so that no artery is bleeding other than those already bled; for by this means there will be no harm, and if all the arteries are bled, you must drain all of them.
de la routure dou syfac	of the root of the throat</start_of_turn>
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions; et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses; et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement; et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	The coming of this branch is by section that comes or by fracture, or extension upon the belly in the part of the intestines, for the intestines descend from that route to one of the buttocks; and that route is either by fracture or by extension of the bone, and these two methods are from cause: by percussion, or by jump, or by pressure, or by elevation of grief failure, and by similar things; and the signs when it is by fracture of the syfac are that there is swelling and swelling in length, and does not come immediately; and the fracture is equal up to the navel, for the syfac presses the intestines.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the sign is when the face is sectioned, that it makes sudden pain appear at the edge, and the swelling is diverse in appearance, from the splitting of the skin to the bursting of the bowels, because of the evacuation of the intestine and the displacement of the bone from the face.</start_of_turn>
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And never should the bones be closed with the intestine, and is retained when it is held, and causes great suffering to the patient, even when it is pressed.</start_of_turn
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these cures of fire with fear, for it is known to escape.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir; puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes; puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc; puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir; puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars; puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille; et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement; et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz; puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz; puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars; puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne; et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi; et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant; puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	If you command or the patient orders that the intestine be rapped at its root in the wound if it can enter; then either saw above its collar between the hands, and grasp the thighs; then extend the thumb above, and cut all the skin of the buttocks along; then draw inwards the intestines of the size of unces as much as you must to open the wound, and so on until the bladder is found; then uncover the syfac that is under the skin of the buttocks, until the thick syfac is discovered throughout; then put your index finger in that which lies between the buttocks, between the white syfac which is under the skin of the buttocks and between the second syfac, and depart that which is behind the buttocks and between the second syfac; and thus move the thumb of the hand to the buttocks, and place the white syfac at the top of your left hand, and keep the buttocks to the whole of the syfac; and command the minister to stretch the buttocks up, and unfasten that which is before the ligature; and ask at your sides if there is any intestine or white syfac that is hard, and if you find nothing, if the bladder is down; then take a needle or there is a thick thread made of X threads, and pass it into the back part of the syfac, which is after the skin of the buttocks; after the size, then cut the veins that appear from the threads, until there are three threads; and gather the threads together in the manner of a cross, and bind the syfac, as we have said, with a strong thread of two parts; then wrap the threads together and bind them in two parts, so that no vessel that sustains them can enter into the wound, except for the fistula; and put the liening back according to the first liening which is two fingers from that, and after these two fingers leave the syfac which is under the thumb the greatest of a finger; and after all the rest according to the circumference that the egg has; then cut in the part which is under the skin of the buttocks, as much as it is without error, and bow; as we have said before; and administer coarse wool with oil, and apply to the wound, and administer the liening that we have said.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And never shall the flesh be cauterized save in the manner that we have mentioned after the incision, in doubt of bloodletting.</start_of_turn>
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece; puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	For in this work, there is often the evacuation of blood, and leaving the limb long as it aches for it; and if it delays at the seat, if it is raised from warm water, put on what we have said, until it aches; then treat the wound with another treatment, until it is perfectly healed.
de hernie carnouse	Of hernias of the groin.
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this chapter, I have never seen anyone cure it with iron.</start_of_turn>
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz; puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the old men say that it is made just like the twig which binds the screw, in part as you bind the vessels, after the size above lightly downwards; then pierce it in the middle, and treat the abscess of what causes it, until the vessels cease to bleed; and treat it as we have said, until it is perfectly healed.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres; et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent; et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert; et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere: et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois; et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac; et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre; puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines; puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	Sometimes comes rupture inwards, as we have said, and opens the wound; and do not cut any intestines as long as they remain connected, and if there are any, it is thus, and repair them every hour; and whatever remains stuck there for too long, if you believe the wound or tumor, until the intestines are released; and this comes from the extension of the sinew which is inwards, as we have said, because it is taut, then is softened and relaxes the wound and opens; and it is treated as we have said before. And never is it treated with iron in this manner: and that the patient lies comfortably on his back between your hands, then grasp the limb of the rupture inflates outwards to the extent of three fingers; and then draw out the sinew which is below the leather that covers it, then take the root and put out the limb appearing from the sinew; and press at the bottom of the belly, then cut out the two fingers appearing from the sinew on the top of the root, and cut one and the other; then draw out the root of the root, and do not cover anything from the sinew nor extend anything else, as I have told you in the cure of the intestinal radix; and then treat it with the treatment of wounds.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when you grasp the hair, if the wound cleans and heals the wound, as long as it is sound.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The swelling is constrained and does not appear on the surface, and the cautery is muffled in this limb, and more proximate to safety.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	of the softening of the skin of the nails.
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a .iij. costures ou .iiij. fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Many times the nails of the thumbs are softened in water-soaked homes, because the nails that are inside are softened, and it is seen; and it is necessary, when you see it being cured, to make the patient lie on his back, and to scrape off the softened skin from the natural skin; then join the layers together with a suture, and if you see that, close the superfluous softened skin with two or three sutures firmly; then scrape between the sutures, and cure as the other wounds, until it is healed, and pull out the hair.
dou chastrement	Dou chastrement,
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	As for boils that erupt, it is forbidden in our law, and for this reason I do not wish to speak of them in this book; and it is not necessary to force them except for two ways: one is that the eye of the patient responds when asked, and the other is that we often mix in the treatment of these boils with other beasts, as with goats and sheep and cats and other beasts.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	I say therefore that boils are made in two ways: by traction or by incision
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	In the traction method, we make the best one sit in warm water, until the swelling softens and relaxes; then we grab it with our hand, until it is reset and you no longer feel it
Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	From the shoulder-blade: it is commanded that you hold it firmly, and press the skin of the armpits to your left hand, then bind the suspension, and grasp upon each joint with two fingers, when you have well supported them; and leave no hair or superfluous hair which is on the vessels; and this method of cautery is milder than that which is done by traction, because by traction remains nothing of the hairs, for the best desires luxury; then cure the wound until it is healed.
des hermofrodites	Hermaphrodites are beings that possess both male and female sexual organs.
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	Hermaphroditism is according to two manners as in homes: one if between the two testicles appears as with the nature of a woman, or if there are hairs, and sometimes it emits urine in the courtyard.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	And the other manner is in women, and has on the navel as with a penis and two testicles
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	And as for the treatment of wounds and ulcers, if you cauterise the edges of the wounds, it is cured like any other wound; in the second method, for those whose urine spurts through the skin of the scrotum, there is no cure.
de la tentigene	Hermaphroditism is in two ways like that of women: one if between the two testicles is opened as with the nature of a woman, or if there are hairs, and sometimes in the urine they are emitted. And the other way if in women, and there is upon the navel like a beard and two testicles. And the cure of the swelling and the fame is if you cut out all the seminal vesicles, and the cure is like for other wounds; in the second way, of men whose urine leaps through the skin of the testicles, if there is no cure.
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	The fire cautery is to be applied above the natural part [of the body] as long as it is too painful to see; and many women have had as much pain as with a hand, and this is the cure.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	It is necessary to hold back the superfluousness of the shoulder at the arm or shoulder blade, and to grasp it lightly; and do not be too rough, for blood does not come from this, but from the breaking of bones; and the cure for this is like that of other wounds as long as it is sound; and there is another wound which arises at the mouth of the marrow, and the spleen, and by chance spurts forth, and is like the appearance of a wound, and for this reason it is called the ancient "lame disease".
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If you suspect that it has slipped, as we have said previously, hold it firm until it is healed.
de erratique	De erratique.
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	If the character of the woman is not clearly understood, or if the wound is small; it is by birth or by disease that it comes to be; or by a sudden injury, or by the bite of a dog or by a wound caused by a blunt or sharp object, and is made manifest in swelling, bruising or haematoma, in the bone, in the muscle or in the skin; and if the cause is not known, and the child is in danger, or by chance the flowers have to be plucked. And this knowledge is from the experience of the midwife.</start_of_turn>
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	If swelling appears near the joint, if at the root or at the head.</start_of_turn
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	If he is lying on his side, and he is close to two books, if you are in a hurry, grasp two thumbs together, and let the woman be behind him, spreading out his legs; then the two books will form, as long as the side of the face is round, and over the thumb-stamps; then take hold of the hair, and mix it with oil, and put it on the limb, and hold the woman at home chest-to-chest, so that he cannot sneeze.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	And if the face is hard and thick, if you can, cover it with a cloth resembling a laurel leaf
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the thumb-stamps are of charred hair, if you suspend it at the onion and cover; and have medicines staying blood, such as acaice, dragon's blood, incense, together with a lot of eggs; then mix in a large dose of lard, so that the wound cannot heal; and let it be long, and mix in a handful of dry lint; then let the other treatments follow until it is healed
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	When the marrow comes out whole in the marrow cavity, if it is covered according to this manner, except for postmortem swelling, it is not a fracture.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	For swelling in the marrow cavity which is in the marrow, do not touch fire.
des emorroides	des emorroides.
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	Hemorrhoids are openings of veins which without treatment usually do not heal; and when hemorrhoids are old they become painful; and as we have said in the preceding chapters concerning the signs and symptoms, I will say here those which bring about a cure.</start_of_turn>
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	I say that hemorrhoids and the pain which is in the marrow, when they are pressed in the marrow cavity, and cannot be felt, must be cured by iron.</start_of_turn>
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	Those who are at the entrance of the marrow cavity can be felt, and these can be cured.</start_of_turn
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	You must therefore put the woman in a cold house, then raise the altar up to its roots, then sprinkle upon it medicines that restrain blood, such as alum and dragon's blood and incense, and similar things; then cover her with a cloth an hour later, then bathe her in cold water; and if there is blood, let her sit in a decoction of sumac and pomegranate seeds and barley and similar things, and then give her barley flour, mix it with honey and fennel, and put it on her back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	And if it stinks, that's good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	If this does not happen, if she is bleeding at the back and has swelling, then take flaxseed and soak it in juice of plantain or in vinegar with old wine, and apply it to the wound
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the abscess is at rest, if the wound is clean and healthy; the one which is called "albathir" is red, and is like a chief aspired to, if you cover it as I have said before; then the wound must be clean and healthy.
des apostemes de la marris	Emorroids are openings of veins which, without treatment, are usually fatal. When emorroids are old, they become toughened. We have already mentioned the signs and symptoms; here I will tell you of those which are most useful for curing. I say that emoroids and the toughened vein, when they are inflamed in the belly, are not felt unless they are treated by iron. Those which are at the root of the belly can be felt; these can be cured. It is therefore necessary that you put the woman in a cold house, then draw the belly tight, grasp the root and sprinkle on restraining medicines such as acacia and dragon's blood and incense, and similar things; then remove the pieces an hour later, and put them in cold water. If there is still pain, give her a decoction of sumac and pomegranate seeds and barley and similar things, and then give her barley meal with honey and assails, and make her drink it. And if it stops bleeding, that is good. If not, make her breathe vinegar at her back and give her lead. Then give her lint, and soak it in the juice of plantain or in the juice of elderberry with old wine, and make her breathe. And when the incision is healed, if it is a bleeding vein, it will stop bleeding as long as it is healthy; and that which is called "albathir" is red, and is like a rough chief, as I have already said of the toughened vein; and then it will stop bleeding as long as it is healthy. As for bleeding from the belly, this must be treated by an opening at the root.
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	Many kinds of abscesses occur in the belly, such as carbuncles and pyreous abscesses and herpes and worms and piles and fistula and haemorrhoids and burnt abscesses, and other diseases which I have mentioned in the division.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	It is therefore necessary that I say concerning the burnt abscess which occurs in the belly, which is not like other abscesses which are only painful; and if you know the work of iron, look if the abscess is still in its early stages of formation, and is full of heat and fever, and if it becomes red when you see it
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	When thou seest that the pain is appeased, make the patient sit on a chair, and place two cushions or as many as he can bear beneath his buttock, and support him on his back and gather his limbs as if to defend his limb; and let his thighs be wide, and put his arms across his knees, and bind them firmly with a bandage; then pour the bail towards his breast, and bring the instrument which we use to open the mouth of the vein, and when you see that it comes, know the depth of the vein, so that what comes into it does not go deeper than it should, and does not damage the patient; and if the instrument is too large, cover the depth of the vein with cloths, so that the instrument does not grieve; and let him put on the cap of the instrument, and hold the instrument.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.	When the abscess bursts open, and we pour oil over the hand, if it covers the head and the thumb, if the wound is emptied, then put in the wound some soft wool soaked in rose oil or in dry green oil; and put the dressing firmly over the wound and put over it a pad of linen cloth soaked in water or mallow, which must be cooked; then cure after two days of oiling following this, until it is healed; and never lift the wound and the abscess with a cluster of water and honey, and then with water or licorice root and alum.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	If the wound is closed in the wound, if you must take care not to burn, but cure it as we have said in the section.
de l’enfantement	From infancy.
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	The master first of all should know the figure of normal birth, and the signs are when you see the woman press down on her belly and desire to smell the head: then the child hastens to be born; then draw the head that the birth is in accordance with the natural figure, and it will issue from his chief, and support it with him; and when you see these signs, if you must press gently on her belly, so that the child comes out head first; for when it descends upon his head, if he supports it with him, the child is born of itself, and the mother is delivered of her superfluities by natural birth.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	For it never comes from his feet, or from his arm or hand, or from his belly, or from his bowels, but it comes from his collar or from some other bad figure; if the master is at the dance that he be wise and discreet in these matters, and he beware of error and deception, and I will show you all the figures how we must help him.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	If the child comes out head first by natural birth, and the woman is groaning, and her strength is weak, if you make her sit on a chair, or the women hold her; and when she has given birth of the oile or fenugreek seed, then lie between her legs the little cushion which is its form:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.	And cut the secondine, and hold its nail as long as the moisture which is in its core escapes; and press the woman’s belly until the fetus descends, and if it does not descend, it is necessary to clench the woman with the muscle of fenugrec with oil of sisament; then make her take it down and vomit, and keep her mouth and nose closed for an hour: if it is now delivered.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	And if the two hands issue forth fiercely, if you must hold them gently still; and if they will not enter, put the woman on a seat, and support her feet high; then withdraw the seat from the earth, and hold the woman, that she does not cough; and if the hands will not enter, and the fetus is dead, if you press the hands to the collar which is before put, and draw out the child, and comfort her equally.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	From the issue of the child upon his feet.
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut; et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz; puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	When the child comes upon his feet, if you can push upwards; and then twist a little to the front and a little to the back, until they are even; then take hold of the feet and extend a little to the front and a little to the back.</start_of_turn>
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi; si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	If he jumps up to the buttocks, if the command is to seize him, and make him spit out the bad things; if he jumps up, God help him.</start_of_turn
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	If not so fierce as we have said, if the limb hangs loose and limp, as long as it follows the natural figure.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For in such a case it is easily done.</start_of_turn>
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier; et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz; et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre; puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	And if he does not jump up so willingly as we have seen, say that you take muscle powder of elevation, and oil of lavender, and gum masticatory, and grind them all together in a mortar; and put on the nature of the woman inside and drive away this vomiting, then make her sit in cold water until below the ribs; and when she is softened down below, give her a collar of myrrh, and put on her clothes, and leave her for an hour; then make her sit on the seat, then make her vomit and strain her mouth and nose, and take hold of her belly lightly, for the child is now jumping.</start_of_turn
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	because of the issue of the child on his knees.
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc; puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit; et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval; et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains; et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	When the child comes in this form, if he puts his hands on his face and his chin in his chest; then either he is sleepy on his neck and hangs his head down, or he is stifled; and he folds his hands on his face and chin, and then he grasps his hands under his belly, and he stretches out his buttocks as much as possible; and if the child does not leap, if he grasps his hands and moves them, then he moves his belly upwards, and he lets go of his hands; and the child laughs and laughs; and he commands the woman to take care of him until the child is gone.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	And thus the boy cried out twice; and command the woman to take care of the children until the boys are gone.
I covient engignier a ramener la main: s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler; s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment; puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit; et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main; et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	I can teach you to regain the limb: if you cannot regain it, if you make the woman rise up and call; if she cannot call, if you make her gesture on her lap, and she pulls her legs towards her; then mix the muscle that I told you about; and if she does not regain the limb, if you make her sit on the chair, then study to restore the limb; and when the limb is restored, according to the natural figure, and make her spit, and command her to take care of the child until the child is gone.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	From the issue of the child on his neck, and he has spread out his hands, and his face turned towards his mother's back.
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement; et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc; et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	I command thee to grasp her hand firmly, then turn it back and forth, and move it lightly; and when it is even, put upon the fleshy substance of salt and oil, as we have said before; and then command her that it move back and forth; and when thou hast done this, make her sit on the chair, and command her to clench; and make her sneeze.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	From this same measure at all the second time.
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie; et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes; puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois: adonques si istra legierement.	When force comes in this manner throughout the second, if thou grasp the second finger at its nail, while the moisture is drained away; and if it rests upon her face and neck, if thou grasp it firmly, that it be not retained, and the child will die; then withdraw the child inwards, as thou didst command, and command the woman not to clench again: for it must be gentle then
de l’issue des gemelz	is slight.
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent .iij. ou .iiij.; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	is slight; for often blood flows out when a vein is opened, or when an abscess is opened, or in the treatment of wounds, or in extracting arrows, or in cutting into stones; and such things are not strange, and often happen.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom; je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude; et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	Who knows what is strained and does not live, if it be named; I know that when they are multiplied, they are scattered by the syrup that devours them, which is bound to the belly; and they never go out so naturally as all of them together, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait; et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	And if they go out abruptly, if the cure is as we have said, and let the subtle dance go, and make haste and lightly do what she does; and make peace as much as it is worth to save lives.</start_of_turn>
de plusors enfans	Moreover.
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient; si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	Never are they formed in the marrow I or II or III or IV or V or VI or VII, or more, up to XV, and are all formed in the form of a child by the measure of the glorious sage, and it is right that the sage dance should do all this, because by chance some things happen; if you do as it is right.</start_of_turn>
de l’enfant mort	Of the dead child.
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains; si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort; si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees; et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant; puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges; puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief; si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes; et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide; et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	When you cure the woman of the dead child or belly, if as I have said in the division, and he does not come furious, and you are constrained by the work of your hands; if you believe that the woman is of sound mind, and has no accident or fear of death; if you believe that the woman is lying on her back, with her arms bent over, and her legs lifted; and you support her hand with two fingers, or bind her to the bed if she is not being treated at the descending of the child; then wipe her mouth with a cloth of warm oil with muscillage of alum and fenugreek and linseed seeds, then anoint her hands with these oils and these muscillages; then put her on the bed lightly, then look at her or listen to her groanings that she is descending; if she moves her on her face, her nose, or in her ears or on her chest or on her beard or in her throat or on her ribs, and if she descends on a piece, if she grasps or pulls and has loose ribs; and you must keep the ointment on her hand that is on her right side, and put the elbow between her two hands of her left side, and support her with all your might, and grasp the ointment in no place that we have said, until it comes to the thing that is empty; and that is the form of the ointment.
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz; et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	Then the sheet finds another onion, or the third if you are in a hurry, so that the extraction is even; and then extend them evenly by moving from side to side, for moisture, or so that the needles remain, if this is the form.
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie; et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	And if some remains, if anyone has spilt some of its oil, and has put it in that part, and treated the other part; and if there is still some remaining, if you put this onion or higher up again, and do this until it is completely gone.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote; puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	And if one hand comes in front of the other, and it cannot be pulled back by the stretching, if you must cover over the drape, so that it is whole; then pull towards the joint of the limb or the cuticle, and then you must do the same with the other hand, and hold both feet
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue; ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui; et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment; et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer; et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues; et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	If the head of the shoulder is large and swollen on issue, or if there is a sharp pain gathered there, it is commanded that you place the spinous process between your thumbs and grasp the head and pull out the pain; or you may bind it to the instrument which is called "almidach," with which the bone is shaped in the work of this chapter; and in this manner make the limb naturally swell up; and then treat the teeth as tense, and as the shoulder leaps up, it will strain at the forcele, if it be fractured, until the moisture that is either coming out or has come out comes out; and if it cannot be drained, if the bone breaks into pieces at the muscle as you must; and if it is inflamed in the belly or around the ribs, if you must break open as much as the moisture comes out.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	and if the limb is hanging in pieces, if the attraction is slight, and the patient’s mouth is lighter.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main; et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre; et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris; puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer; et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses; et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	If it is strained in the belly or the arm, if it is possible, grasp it with a drape encompassing the hand; and stretch the belly or the arm until the moisture that is in it is cured; and if another limb is stiff and the shoulder is dislocated, if the hand is entangled in the armpit, grasp the hand up to the armpit; then draw the thumb or the two little fingers out, and pull vigorously; and if the armpit is retracted by the thick scab that has come away, if it is not possible to pass it, then it must be evacuated by means of soft and greasy things; and it must be plastered with moist things and sprinkled with soft things.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif; et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	If the fetus is on the cost, and you put it even, if you must, do what we have said of the living child; and if it does not move, if you pull it out piecemeal, do not leave anything of the second.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris; et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	And when you have done this, if anything mentioned above comes to pass in the marrow; and if blood comes to the surface, whether by means of restraining water, or any other cure.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut .i. autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman with a child in her womb who had a miscarriage, then consulted with another concerning it, and refuted the miscarriage of the other.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time, there came an abscess in the belly, which grew so large that it burst, and began to cause great swelling.</start_of_turn>
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I went for help to the doctor, and I thought for a long time, and could not stop the bleeding.</start_of_turn
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I put on a strong dressing, and out came a bone, and after that a few days another.</start_of_turn>
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I marvel at you, for your belly has no bone.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	I thought it was the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point; et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu; et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	I wish the wound, and in treatment of bones, as long as the woman is in a better state; and I saw the woman long tense her hand, and that was sufficient to cause a fracture of the bone; and I have never known this chapter except for the fact that whenever the master finds an unusual thing, he must ask for help.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	in order to put the head of the shoulder back in its place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a .ij. tornans as .ij. chiés des .ij. liiens.	Then comes the form of pressure, which is what we have learned from books; and two returns as two thumbs of two hands.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux; et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi; et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus; et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	However, the horns should be more subtle than the restriction, and be made of ebony or boxwood; and the mouth of the vessel should be large, and the margin of the trees should be wide, and long a palm and a half; and between these two limbs should be two pieces of bone, which are firmly fixed in one and the other, half a palm long or more; and these two pieces are placed in the mouth of the marrow to open when the two horns are turned
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles; et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large; et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes; puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	Another form, more subtle and lighter, is made of ebony or boxwood, according to the shape of the nails; and has two thumbs and two fingers, as you see, of a length equal to a palm, and two broad; and when you open the mouth of the instrument, if you make the woman sit with her legs crossed and her feet resting, then insert the two thumbs together into the mouth of the instrument, and keep the handle of the instrument between her thighs; then grasp the instrument with your hand as if you had made the nails even, according to the quantity you see opening the mouth of the instrument, until the water boils that which it sees.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	These instruments are all very formidable, and their resemblance is multiplied; and when one beholds them appear, the work hastens, and the higher one's home is for their quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	If one does not desire the instrument unless it has appeared, for its necessity is not easily excused
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis; et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	When the secondine is retained in infancy, if you command the patient to retain her breath, and then make her cough out of her chest, and strain your hands at her mouth and nose; and if she spits for this, well done
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire; toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	If not, take I pot, and make I hole or cut, and put herbes in that can open the mouth of the marris, like chamomile, rue, anise, camomile, cassia, and centaury; all these herbes, or some of them, are boiled or stewed in water over the fire; then put in a caine or hole in the pot, and the other head in the mouth of the marris, and hold it tight until the vapor comes from inside the marris; then make it erupt as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If the second joint is sprained,
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction; mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	If she remains after this treatment, and there is no further pain, as the physician commands at the dance, let her soak her left hand in oil of sesam or in alum, and then put it back in its place, and repeat the operation; and when she has found it, if she grasps and extends it forward and backward, so that the marris does not bleed; but it is necessary to move it slightly to the left and right, and then treat her. If she comes and it becomes dry again.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes; et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire; mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon; si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	If the mouth of the marrow is swollen, we have said the cure of vomiting and herbal fumigation; and if it is not of all that we have said, do not use anything else; but it is necessary that what is at the mouth of the marrow, you bind it to the hip of the woman, then clip it with oil tetrafarmaçon; if she will vomit and restore, there will be force; however, whenever she vomits, if there comes a bad smell from the stomach and head, and turns pale, it is harmful.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	If it is necessary, then the fumigations that are useful for these: neither the former nor we have experienced fumigation with thyme and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The form of the instrument is such that we fumigate the woman with the chest held to the chest and the secondine if it is this:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu; et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	It is like seeing a dog, and put the head subtle in the fashion, and the large joints over the fire; and either the fumigations over the charcoal, and the scent until it is gone, and start another.
de percier lou fondement	To pierce the foundation
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac: si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche; puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many children are born who do not have the perfect foundation of sense, and they have been stifled by a subtle madness: if you can, then give her the play that she prick that subtle at its root, and do not prick too much of acute spittle, and keep the wound that she does not touch; then put on a soft cloth of wine and oil, and the cure of oil until it is healed
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	If you doubt that it will not stay in place, if you put in or pull out a sponge of lead, and you leave your hands joined, and be still as when the beast has seen enough in the chamber.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	Under no circumstances does this stupid thing come from the treatment of wounds or incisions; if you cover this up, if you do not cure it, as we have said with regard to the sponge of lead.</start_of_turn>
de la fistule dou fondement	from the fistula at its root.
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	Fistules that arise from below the foundation are nodes, and those that arise from above the foundation deviate, or in the space of two parts, if there is one fistula or more; and when that nodation is ancient, if it is prolonged, and is accompanied by moisture that causes white blainche or yellow bile, these fistulas are never permanent; and they are known by the patient when they make an evacuation, and by chance when one leaps up towards them.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	And if there are fistulas that go up to the bladder, and up to half of the thigh; and they reach up to the hip joint, and up to the navel.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant: et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	And thus it is known that a fistula that arises from the foundation is not permanent; if you bite your thumb or the foundation and insert a fine needle or iron awl into the fistula when there is no twisting.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit; et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit: saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	And if there is twisting, if you insert a sponge or horsehair until you feel the tension or pressure at your thumb; and if you do not feel it, and there is neither bleeding, evacuation nor wind, as we have said: such things do not pierce; if you wish to be cured quickly
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	When the fistula persists up to the bladder or the urine tube, if in leaping the urine escapes and cannot be retained by medicine.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu; s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement; et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	If it be perceived until the hip joint, if it is the vein that is coming out as far as the limb; if there is no twisting and the cause of the pain is not evident, if it is merely bowed and not seriously injured, there is no remedy save labor and the vanity of fools who are meddling with it.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre; puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	In the one which is neither new nor old, hope of recovery by fire exists, as I have seen; and that the patient lies between your hands on his back; and let the legs rest on his thighs, and incline his thighs towards his belly; then attempt an embrace, or plunge if there is twisting, until you feel safe or the attempt comes.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans; si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	If the patient feels pain in the foundation, if you must bite your thumb index, if you sense that the attempt has been perceived; or that the fracture is uncovered or you sense between your thumb and the index finger the marrow or the bone, then stop for it is dangerous; if it does not break through, it cannot be healed
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc; et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit; et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil; et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	One can easily cure all sorts of ailments, but it is thus; and the aid which we make is, if it is to be done, to circumscribe the cautery narrowly in accordance with the size of the fistula, as is said beforehand; and draw out all the pus from the fistula, until it comes out from its foundation; and do this twice or thrice, until you perceive that these boils which are like a penne of oil must be burned; and then cure with moist patches covering the wound until the boils are gone, then cure with ointment coating the wound and stitching.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If it is thus healed, that is good indeed.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez; et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur; si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente; et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	If thus, nothing else can be done; and if one attempts it and does not pierce to the root which is or underlies, and between your thumb and the attempt put on a thick covering of hair or fat, and you will see the fistula at this point where the covering ends; if you touch the beginning of the fistula, and hold it before the attempt, and then apply the cautery afterwards, until it reaches the head of the attempt; and the attempt will be freed, and rejoice; then anoint those boils which seem like a penne of oil, and there will be nothing left.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if it does not go well for you, and if there is a break between you and the work, if the burn is done by fire or medicine is applied.</start_of_turn
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor; puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe; puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	For the fire cautery, two bones are joined together: that is to say, the burning of these hairs causes the evacuation of blood and the drying of moisture; then the cure of soft bandages bound up with rough sponges or broken bones, until the hair burns through the sponge; then cure the wound of the oozing sores with dry sponges, and these are the dry medicines.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it is restored, if it is healed and does not return.</start_of_turn>
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if a fistula comes up to the foundation, and is expelled from the flesh, if the bone or foundation is fractured, inquire about this.</start_of_turn>
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres: ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit; puis le cure, si com nos avons dit; par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé; puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues; puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	If you feel the attempt, and between two is the cloth or the sponge or hair, or it is almost going to burst, if there is no other way out but by surgery and hope, by the administration of one of these three methods: or you cauterize as we have said, or you cut right through, or if you wish, put on soft sponges and cure as before; do not go too deeply, that you do not cover the foundation that holds the bottom, and let the evacuation go in the natural way; then cure as we have said; by chance if it is well, or you remove the covering and the wound, then when it is cut off from the foundation, by attempt or by other pointed instrument; then tie up this burnt hair that is in the wound, as you wish; and then study to restore the wound and to stop the fistula in the lower part of the foundation: if it is less painful for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	And never are fistulas like this: when you bite the attempt at the fistula, and it is either cost with dou pain at the bottom of the skin beneath, or take an attempt pierced at the head like this.
Et i boute .i. fil tort en .ij., et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And always break the thread twice, and hold the lump throughout the thread in the fistula until it reaches the head.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement; et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II; et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent; puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	And if it is pierced in the margin of the pain at the bottom of the skin beneath, then draw out the thread of that which is pierced, so that you bite your toe or the pain; and draw out the head of the thread, and join the two ends together, and restrain one to the other, and leave it for one or two; and do not restrain it at any time, until the thread has overcome these two burdens that are between them, and that swell up; then cure the wound until it is healed and healthy.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not break through, if you make it break through in every way you can, it will not be too thick.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it is not worth making the dressing too tight if they are inflamed, and then the cure must be as we have said, until they are healed.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans; et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	The form of the spiny bladder from which we make the fistula is mouth-shaped and one-sided and trenchant; and on the other side not, for we must not touch this or we must not touch that, as you see here.
des emorroydes	bleeds.
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors; et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz; si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines; et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot; et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere; ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement; cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere; et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors; et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz; si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racine; et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot; et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere; ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement; cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere; et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc; puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose; et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If you command me to suture in this manner: take one thread, pierce it through a needle, then pass the thread through from below and pierce the needle through from the other side, and turn two threads of the thread around the needle, and if it is thick; tighten the thread firmly, then knot the thread, and remove the needle, and make sure of all the others, and leave one to hold the surplus of blood; then put upon the foundation a moist drape in oil of roses or cerote, and put upon the foundation, and command the patient to rest; and then leave it until it blanches, and when it is white, if the wound of oiling and other remedies, until it is healed.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	until the fire has consumed the hair or root.</start_of_turn>
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Many times there is the loosening of the bowels by the intestines, and by the constricting of nature, and when the disease is old and medicine is of no avail.</start_of_turn
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient; et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If you order me to remove a splinter or nail from the nail or cuticle, which does not allow it to moisturize; then cure it until it is healed if it is possible; and if it does not heal, if you renew the scraping more strongly than before, until it comes out, and be scraped away; then cure it until it is healed.
dou fremit	when he is calm.
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont; et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	Formice is a small swelling that appears before a limb, and goes out from within to without; and never does the trueve touch it, and it is felt as though dead from pain, and comes to every part of the body, and more so in the hands than in any other place.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor; puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	And the cure for it is that you take a bandage of one inch of goose feather, or a strong inch of flax, and put that bandage upon the wound, until the circle turns pale the wound throughout; then draw out your hand all the way to the bandage until you have embraced the wound all around, and press it inwards, and squeeze the wound from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see that it is done with a spider or iron in this fashion, and be quiet and attentive beneath:
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	And if you see that it is done with a spider or iron in this fashion, and be quiet and attentive beneath, do not move, for it must be held firmly and pressed. And if you see that the fire cautery has arrived, if it is before or alongside the cautery book.
de la forme dou clistere	of this fashion.
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	Never is silver or gold wire, or molten spider or enamel made; and never are these small and great instruments made in this fashion, as they are brought.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Those who suffer from ailments that are feeble and painful are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	Their form is small and great if they are soft, or the belly is tight according to this manner:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I; et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre; et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	And if there is swelling or pain in the belly or side, if you see, or if there is pain in the chest, and there are two holes on one rib and one on the other; or if the belly or an organ has medicine inside or outside, or if there are many holes throughout, put between each hole one space, then pass through these holes one strong thread of thick thread in the shape of an X or around, and assemble the belly as if it were a nail; and when the medicine is inside, if there is an instrument before a strong thread, then tighten it; and that is the form of a circle:
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement; puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	And let the medicine neither be too hot nor too cold; anoint the head with oil or balm of eggs, or something similar; then bind it lightly. Then grasp the minister with both hands together, until it is thoroughly numb, then draw out the blister, and leave the patient his legs exposed, and if the medicine sees that it suffices, if the swelling has gone down; and if he sleeps all night, it is more effective.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	If he does it in the morning when the patient is suffering from the discharge of the belly, and the physician arrives quickly, if he can do so while he is still sane.</start_of_turn>
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	And if there is bruising or swelling on the skin or abscess, if the blister is as fine as for one child; this is the form of a fine blister that arises when the skin is stretched tight.
des plaies	wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	We have already mentioned in the previous chapter the treatment of wounds; or rather the treatment of hands and surgery, according to the accomplishment.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are various depending on how they are made, and depending on the parts or wounds that are made, and how they are made
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses; ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres; et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	The things that cause wounds are bites of stone, and the size of spear and nail, or lance or fist or sickle, or similar things; or that are made according to the laws of nature, as for example a wound that bites on the cheek, or on the head, or the heel, or the belly, or the liver, and similar members; and I will tell you the cure for a simple wound, and we will begin with wounds of the head alone, for the memory will come to mind in this chapter
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree; et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	I say that when a simple wound comes or a head injury occurs, and the bone is not fractured, take care if it is from a wound of stone or other things, and the skin is completely ruptured and the wound is large, and you doubt the wound itself: if you do so immediately after injury to the head itself even if there is blood from the wound, or vice versa; and listen to the patient’s swelling of wine and fatty foods.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char; et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice; et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés; et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if he does not recover, if either he vomits meat or does not drink wine, does not eat meat; and put out the wound, if there is pus coming out, cotton wool soaked in rose oil only, or in styptic wine; and if there is no pus coming out, put a bandage on the wound, if it is fresh with all its blood, and it is not moved by the air, dust, or anything; and if it has been moved, put on some ointments, until it is healed.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large like a nail and similar, and the flesh does not naturally reunite, if you reunite it with stitches, as I will say for wounds in the belly, with sutures.</start_of_turn>
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	If the wound is exposed by the bone, and is raw, and will hold only at one point, if it be possible; then cure the wound with medicine, and restore flesh in place of skin, and command the patient to eat coarse food, such as meat and bread, as well as poultry, and similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure; et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil; et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	And if you find or cut through bone, if it does not penetrate the bone, if you can remove it whole, and drain pus, then cure it; and if there is an artery in the wound or vein, which cannot be stopped by medicine, if you see it, and if you find it displaced, if you bind it with a thread; and if this does not help, if you must cauterize it.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if these wounds are small and simple, if it is a mild cure: then you shall apply this powder which makes them adhere as soon as they have moved.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon II parties; chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc; et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And the manner of the powder is this: take incense one part; dragon’s blood two parts; live chalk three parts, and mix them together finely, and apply the powder to the wound, and hold it firm until it is well healed and joins together all its blood; and then bind it well and leave it alone, if it does not swell; for we do not cauterize the medicine until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And never do we do this charcoal burn only, when there is no incense nor blood of a dragon, but that the wound has not moved.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre; mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe; puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound has moved, even in this state, if one does not put on my powder; but put on some unguents digested, or poulps of oatmeal made of water and honey, until it is soft; then cure with other cures until it is healed.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz; et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	And if a fracture comes with the wound, and it is small, if the extraction has fine teeth; and I will tell you later about the fractures of the skull.
de la plaie dou col	of the neck wound.
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	The wound comes from the neck and is simple, if there is no difference between it and the fracture of the skull, but if the artery is severed or the neck is fractured
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire; et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres; mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	If it is a nerve, if there is no other burden than to leave the cure, and do not put anything restrictive, because it hinders the nerve and makes it shrink; and do not put anything rough on the wound, because the substance of the nerve is cold, and the continuation of the pain is with the brain, which is the most tender member; but if the medicine is soft, like molten chalice in sweet water, and mixed with rose oil, and cypress washed in sweet water, and other stones of lead according to this method, and moist unguents.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the wound is large, if the edges are torn and bent, then the cure must be prolonged until it is healed.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu; et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est; et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel; et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier; et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue; et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	And if the wounds are deep and swollen and full of pus, if the wound is pierced or lower in the limb; and if an artery is severed, blood flows profusely, if the swelling, and the pus, and the cautery mix together; and if the thorn of the throat is severed, or the tonsils, and the cord is grasped, by which the meat will go; and if the thumb rests on the chin of the throat, do not touch the throat but restore it to its natural position; and then strain it immediately, and leave it untouched for a while, then cure the wound from the inside outwards until it is healed; and if the wound has caused an indentation in the bone, if there are pieces of bone, if the fragments are forced out, do not attempt to remove what you cannot; leave as much as the wound permits, and when it is drained and aligned, issue the wound; and if the wound is fresh, if powder is applied as I have said.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there is bone in the wound and there is fistula, cut as I have said in this chapter.</start_of_turn>
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	of a wound from a lance or knife.</start_of_turn
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz; et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide; mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor; et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors; si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne; et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	If it be lance or dagger wound, and the wound is deep, if thou seest that from the wound comes out wind with speed, that the wound is mortal; and if it be not deep, and it be fresh throughout, if thou set not at the first hour the powder, thou shalt not bind it with the blood that comes out, but shalt remove the wound, and anoint the patient; but thou shalt put in an effectual astringent, and bind it twice the first time. If thou hast no astringent, if thou put in the wound old cotton to soak up the moisture, and shalt make the patient sleep upon the wound for three days, or four, or more; if there come no spasms, neither tremor of the body nor straining of the bowels. And when thou seest the bones arranged, that the wound is saved.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	Cure the tonsils and other cures, as long as they are sane; and if they cannot be cured, and if there is an opening, drain the pus that has formed; if the cure is necessary.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant; s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez; et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions; et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	And if the wound is from a cut or a knife, and it is simple, or worse at the front or behind, if the treatment for what is before is necessary; if it is large, suture; if it is small, powder; and if it is fixed in the bone, and has broken pieces, if you wish to close the wound, and the surrounding parts are loosened; and if they are not loosened, if you leave it open, if it aligns the extractions; and for other wounds, the judgment is as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	But about the loosening of the belly...
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis; de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus; et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut; por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres: les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies; et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	The bursting of the belly is great and medium and small; from a great wound never does the intestine come out, or the nerves of the intestines, because of the introduction of blood; and the suture is more painful, and never is better than the small wound than the great, because it returns to its points more easily; for as the intestines swell up as much as they feel the pain, if they return more to their points, and for this reason is better the lesser wound, because it makes us return the intestine to its place as with others. And pus that the wound of the belly is in three ways: the two common sutures come in the suture of the belly, and the suture of the other wounds of bone and two other proper sutures are common as other wounds; and all of them are more proper with the suture of the belly, and I will say one word and declare.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres: ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	I say that when the wound is small and nothing of the intestines is pressing, and only a little thing is protruding, this may be remedied in two ways: either by the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestines are swollen from the fruit.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere: moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee; et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	And when it is cold, soak a little in a mild way: moisten a sponge or lay a damp cloth over it only, or soak in lukewarm water squinching and spiking, and draw out the intestine as long as it swells; and do not do anything that might restrain it, for it is better that it swells out naturally.</start_of_turn>
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose; et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes; et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait; et c’est li estrumens por le fendre: si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	And when you see the swelling depart, if the intestine is filled with water or is high and tough, because by this is the entrance to things; and if it cannot enter, if you make a hole in the wound at the instrument, you can compress the blood clots; and the first cure is to make it soft, that we should not cut without great necessity, for this is the instrument for the wound: if you dig inwards in the curve and push outwards no, and if you do this the shape will be like this:</start_of_turn
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	And when the wound is swollen, and the intestine leaps forward, if you stop breathing according to nature in its own place, you will have done nothing, for this is of no avail.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief; et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre; et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	And when the wound is large, and it is in the lower part of the belly, if you must manage the patient lying on his back, and lift his legs higher than his head; and if it is in the lower part of the belly, put the head and arm higher than the lower parts, and if the belly is twisted in one of the two parts, put the effort in that the upper part is higher than the lower. And thus you must manage what I have said in great and small wounds.</start_of_turn>
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres; et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort; et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble; puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille; puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte; et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer: por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes; et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure; et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee; et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien; et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras; et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi; ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	For small wounds, do this: put between your hands I minister of pity that holds all the twist at its hand, and unite the lips; this is the common method of stitching, and take a needle or more according to the quantity of the wound, then leave the head of the wound I should have space, and pierce the two holes of the skin with the two holes of the siplac, which is the skin under the skin, until you have pierced it from that part, and reunite the two heads of the siplac the three together; then strain a double thread around the needle at two parts, then reunite the two holes of the wound backwards, and then leave I should have space, and pierce another needle; then join the thread as you did for the first needle, and do not cease doing this until the whole wound is restrained; and let the needles be moderate, between slender and thick, for the slender needles are too slippery and the thick ones do not penetrate well; for this reason they must be moderate; and do not push the needles too far from the skin and leather, for they do not penetrate and open the wound before the suture; then close the holes of the needles, that they do not hurt the patient when sleeping, and put on bands or dressings over the holes of the needles to hold, and leave them on until the wound is sutured; and this method of stitching with needles is more convenient for small wounds, for there is only one needle or two at most for the second suture, and that you reunite the two holes of the skin and the two holes of the siplac with one needle or there is I strong middle thread.</start_of_turn
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	I will restore the intestine when it has been out for twenty-four hours, and the wound has healed for fifteen days; then the cure will be complete and he will be healed.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle; et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines; et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	And the patient had judged that he would die, and this was a miracle; and I did not treat him with any medicine, for I was in a land where there was no medicine, no remedies; and I treated him only by applying pressure on the wound twice a day, and by giving him honey water until he was healed.</start_of_turn>
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture: pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens; quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer; et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	Or you will tell me two ways to suture: take the needle and pass it from the underside until it reaches the midpoint; when it has pierced the right edge, if the tissue is soft or slippery or if you have slipped the needle, and you must pierce it from another part of the underside until you reach the midpoint; and you must understand this method as if you were a leatherworker, and that you leave once the spicule on one side and take it back on the other, until the suture is complete.</start_of_turn
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere: fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac; puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac; puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit; et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	The second method of stitching, which Galiens does with care, if done as others do not, which brings together the two parts naturally, and joins one chief to the other chief in part: pierce a needle or chief near the margin and pass it through only the lower part, leaving the two chiefs of the margin; then draw up the needle and pass it through from the underside until it reaches the middle, leaving two chiefs of the margin; then pass through one and the other from the underside until they reach the middle, in two other chiefs of the margin that are on the other side; and this is the wisest method of stitching and the most common.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune; et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies; et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	Galiens says concerning this matter that no one testifies to it; we must sew the belly with two needles, or there must be a thread in the yarn; and one needle must be pushed in from one side, and the other from the other side, in the manner of those who sew wounds; and when the gut has returned to its normal position, if the stitching is tighter than others on the gut.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies: et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe; et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach; puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	The judge of the wound is such as the judge of other wounds: when you find the wound fresh with all its blood, even though it has moved, if you stop the intestine and the gut; then put on the healing powder, and if it has moved, do not put on any ointment except what is present, until the wound is healed; and close the wound, and let the dressing and bandage remain; then cure the wound as with the others, until it is healed; and if you have no medicine, put on nothing until it begins to secrete blood, cotton wool, and move it twice a day until it is healed.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples; et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles; et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine; et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	You need no other medicine in many cases except for simple wounds; and if you doubt that the wound will not heal as usual, cover the principal parts with loosely woven linen moistened in warm oil of poppy or rose oil, and bind them around the wound; and if there is pain or gangrene in the bowels, and it happens repeatedly, if you give the patient black vinegar enemas, and in the same way if the gangrene reaches the intestines; and pierce it through, and drain what is inside as soon as it is the large intestines, for it is lighter to heal than the small intestines.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	The intestines which are called "jeuns" cannot recover when they are swollen, because of the swelling of the veins, and the slightness of the whole body, and the proximity of their nature to nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres; et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres; puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	And if blood spurts from a wound, if it returns backward just as much as the intestine, while it is fresh; and if it is black and becomes towards or black, if you must tie the black part, since there are veins and arteries there; then close what is between the ribs, and suspend the two ends of the limb from the part below the wound until the spurting stops, to align the extraction when the blood spurts out, and the wound closes.
de la routure dou boueil	except for the root of the boil.</start_of_turn
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance; et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez; je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	When the intestine is round and the wound is small, if one can restore it in small pieces, because I have seen that one bone has been swollen or injured by a lance; and the wound was at the stomach and became filled and became a fistula, and in this there was vomiting and diarrhea; I put a cure for this according to what I could, and did not cease to make it gentle until it was healed, and the wound healed
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre; et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans; et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere: pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus; et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise; et cout la plaie.	When I see it soldered, I doubt that the patient has no harm in his belly; and there is no harm, but it remains in many better conditions, meals and drinks; and they say no experimenters have observed that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it must be ligated in parts: take tweezers and grasp the edges of the wound, and when the tweezers have grasped the edge, if it comes loose, put two fingers on it, so that it stretches its edge upwards; and then pull the tooth, and this will hold if it does not slip, and put another clamp afterwards in that manner until the wound is whole.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere: pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure; et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance; et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	If the chief of the intestine bursts, and there is no other nuisance to the patient, and it can be ligated with a thin silk thread which is cut from the intestine of a beast, in parts: take the head of this thread of intestine that is freed, and then join to the head of this thread one thread of silk that is twisted, then pass the thread through the needle, and in sew the intestine, and retain it in its place; and this manner of stitching with tweezers is not fierce except according to the way of making and hoping; and if the wound is great and wide, even if it is in one of the great intestines, if there is no other remedy, except for subtility.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	or that it should be cut out.
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	Wounds that open or are incised, when they burst, if they be called universally 'fistules', and even when they are shut and drawn in.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil; et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse; aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez; et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes: c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors; ou por sa malice; ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char; ou il i a trop de bowe; ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit; ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure; ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence; ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature; ou il i a voinnes ou os: et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	A fistula is truly a wound that must endure and swell, or else there is no pain, and it is as shut as the quill of a bird; and sometimes clear, sometimes thick; sometimes little, sometimes much; sometimes not at all, sometimes rather. I have already spoken of this in the division of wounds, that every wound that is not healed, and there is no decay, is only by one of the seven deadly causes: that is to say, by the smallness of the wound or the toughness of the flesh; or by its malice; or because there is toughness within, and on the surface, that does not allow new decay to arise; or there is too much swelling; or the blood vessels are hardened, and the matter is of bad quality; or the medicine is not good at the cure; or because the corruption is like that of pestilence; or because the property of the region is late in digestion and in healing, and flees by nature; or there is a vein or bone: and I have already mentioned all these causes, and their signs and their cures in the division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	Or you should know that I will tell you the cure for fistula, which is made by the work of hands.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors; car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez; et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	Wounds that have occurred in all limbs because of pain; for there are wounds that come from great veins, and arteries, and nerves, or at the jaw, or in the intestine, or in the bladder, or in some of the ribs, or in the spine, or in none of the joints of the hands or feet; and if part comes from the property of the principal limb, and the rest.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance; et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier; et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit; et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie; puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent; et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens; et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons; et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	All wounds of this kind are of grievous healing, and there is nothing but toil and ignorance; and if there is no wound that does not come down to the bone except as I have said, you have no hope of a cure, and you must know that it is in vain to attempt to cauterize or to burn it, if the wound is straight; but if the wound is crooked, if you attempt to cover it over with a sliver, for it will swell up with the swelling of the wound; and if the wound is torn and you do not cauterize it well by attempts, if it bursts through one of the rents, for the moisture is too short from one rent to another, and it softens; then you must know well where the bone or nerve is, and if there is any break or fracture, and ask the patient of the pain he feels at the touch of your hand, and the place where it hurts; and when you know truly the place or it is far from a joint, or a nerve, or an artery or vein, or in some of the things that I have told you, if the dressing agrees with what I have said, and if there is a fracture, you must force the fracture and the corrupt bones that are within; and then the cure until it is healed, and if the wound is well penetrated from the straight side, if you must force it, then put on gentle dressings and keep them until the medicine has eaten away the superfluous matter that remains at the bottom; and then put on oily poultices to the wound, until it is healed; and if it is not healed by this, if you must cauterize as we have said, and if the bone is fractured from the wound, if it must be set.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit; et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font: si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu; et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If a vein or nerve is not swollen or the principal limbs are affected as we have said; and if the bone is exposed, and there is corruption and blackness, if the latter persists as long as the corruption is entirely bony, then cure the underlying cause as much as possible; and if it is not cured, and if the swelling persists as before, evacuate the matter until it is all gone; if it is evacuated and the corruption is completely removed, restore the limb; and if it is finally cured, that is well.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir; si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature; et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un; et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	If not, evacuate the matter until the corruption is sufficiently gone; if there is nothing else to be done except to leave it to its natural course; and if there is a small fractured bone, and you wish to treat it, if the instrument is appropriate for the case, and if there is any remaining bone, break it off; do not leave it in place. If moisture opposes you, and there is no fear of error or fear of pain, crush and soften the bone and discharge it.</start_of_turn>
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os; et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie; et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os; si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez; et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	If you do not remove them at an hour, put upon the wound some covering that will prevent corruption, and leave it until the flesh is fully healed around the bones; then it will be easier for the bones to knit together. And if it is a great bone, such as a leg or thigh bone, reduce the swelling as much as possible until the blackening is gone throughout the bone, and then restore the wound. If there is much of the bone that is corrupted, go up to the marrow of the bone; if you cover it and cover all until the corruption is gone, and then cure it until it is solid. I tell you of a fistula that happened to a woman in her leg, so that you may take notice and help in your work.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir; mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors; et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors; et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	There was a young man of about thirty years of age who had a pain in his leg for a cause that came from within the bone, so that the matter came to the leg, and he fled from a large abscess, and did not find any cause to open it; but he made it worse by his folly by opening it too wide, and corrupted a great amount of matter, and became a fistula, and there came out much pus that all the veins and moisture of the bone were consumed; and he remained there for two years, and there was no wisdom in the art of medicine, as far as I know, until I left, and I saw his leg and the medicines that were being given to him, and what was causing the pain from the abscess. His leg and the bones had become red, and had a yellowish color.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	I stretched out a hand in one of these holes, and then circled all the holes, and found that one followed the other from all parts of the limb.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens; je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai; et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder; et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu; mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	I made haste then, and grasped one of the holes until I uncovered a part of the bone, and found it corrupted and putrid, and it ran from corruption right up to the bone within; I soothed what appeared to be corrupt bone, and I thought there was no further corruption, except for that which I had seen; and I began to restore the wound with soothing remedies for a long time, and could not bind it; and then I repeated the process, and again I uncovered the bone as before, and found the corruption continuing in the bone, and I soothed it, and then held it steady, and I could not bear to bind it any further, so I left it with the wound open; but it healed and was bound up steadily, and did not swell again except for the weakness of the patient, who could not endure it, and for the fear of death which I had avoided for him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	For often is there bloodshed in the evacuation of an abscess, but he remained whole; and from his bone there sprouted a hard scale, and it was in good condition and caused neither pain nor discomfort in any way, neither from the heat nor from coming.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere: pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut; et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char; et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue; et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	And if the bone is broken in no part of the limb, if you must bind it in this manner: take one thread, and stretch it to the head of the bone that is open, and command that no one extend it upwards; and put another thread of linen thicker than the first, and bind it over the scale which is coming out from the bone, and stretch the head, if you tear the corrupt scale away from the socket, and uncover the scale above the limb or where you see it bound, that the thread does not tear the scale; and put on a plug or a bit of lead at the bottom of the bone to cover the corrupt scale; and bind as much as you can see and feel the corruption, and bind again.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute; puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit; et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part; et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper; et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert; et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire; et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce; et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument; et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies; si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	And if the bone is corrupted, and does not open wide, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part, if it uncovers the marrow fully; then put in a pair of tongs and then gradually join together the corruption, as we have said; and if the corruption is in the joint, if you join the corrupted joint, join the bone that contains the other part; and if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, if there is no other angle except for the cover; and if the corruption is at the wrist or the elbow, if that thing is strong, but in any case you must inquire about that corruption, how it opened; and explain it in every way that you can, but that the vein or nerve does not hinder you; and that the incision and the stitches cover these bones many times, according to the position of the bones and the appearance of spots, and their thickness and thinness, and their greatness and smallness, and their hardness. And for this reason it is necessary to bring to light a similar resemblance of work to that which is known; and that the work will show you the instrument which you must have, according to the knowledge of this art, and the testimony of the manner of diseases. If you think that the instrument which you must have is that which is known to be necessary, according to this, then believe it.
dou feu	If you think the instrument is appropriate for the case, then use it as you deem fit.
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer; et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre; et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	The head of the shoulder suffers dislocation through moisture, pressure, or violence; when you have treated the corrosion with medicinal means and it yields no benefit, if you cover that limb until the corrosion subsides, the patient escapes by this means of death or by the greater evil, the defect of the limb; the sign is that the limb becomes black, as if burned by fire, and after the blackness, the corrosion of the limb extends throughout, embracing the whole body; if you are hasty in covering it, and if this is due to the percussion of venomous creatures such as scorpions of the sea and vipers, and similar things, if the corrosion is at the root of the bone, and you do not give it space to come out until the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras; et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut; et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe; et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet; et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil; et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort; et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers; puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	If it comes up to the hand, if the cope is at the joint, if the corrosion does not reach the forearm; and if it comes to the forearm, if the cope is at the elbow; and if it passes the elbow, it is death, and there is no remedy but the quantity of its virtue; do everything as soon as the corrosion comes or leaves: if it comes in the first joint, if the cope comes afterwards in another joint; and if it comes or leaves, if the cope embraces everything; and if it comes up to the thigh, if the cope is at the knee; and if it comes below the knee, there is no other remedy but for the patient to die; and keep the limb covered or bandaged if you tie it below and above, and stretch one minister below and one above, and you remove the flesh between the two joints to the width of one thumb, until the bone is exposed; then cope or tie, and put some padding under the drape of linen, so that the silk does not touch the sound bone, and the patient will suffer no other lesion or incision except that.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet: il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet; et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez; et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions; et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere; et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez; et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	If blood flows from a wound during treatment, if you cauterize the limb excessively, or if you apply restraining powders, then return to your medicine until it is complete; then bind the limb securely with a strong ligature and treat the wound until it is healed. And I will tell you of a case in which a black spot seemed to burn on the bone: that corrosion began at the root of the bone, as if by fire, until it consumed the entire bone. When we saw the corrosion, if we had covered the bone, it healed; but when we withdrew the cause of the corrosion, the corrosion returned. We were forced to amputate the limb because we could not stop the corrosion. I suspected that the patient's vital force was weak; and he died immediately after the amputation.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe; et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz; et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»; mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»; et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz; et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	Never comes abscess in the flesh that stays so long that it makes great swelling of the limb; then it returns and bursts, and in the jump the limb breaks, and remains limp as a vessel; and the skin which is under is as soft as a silken cloth, and does not go up to the bone, neither to the nerve, and such an ailment is called "sain," and is not called "fistula"; but if it is so prolonged that it comes down to the bone and breaks, it is called "fistula"; and if the skin is that you can cope that skin all around, and even when it is soft, like a silken cloth, and does not yield.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi: regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite: prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel; et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus; et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant; fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor; et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez; et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet; ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain; et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin; ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens; et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez; et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	If you have suspected that the skin has hardened, and the corruption is not deep, and the skin is thick like flesh, if the surgeon is skilled: look if the swelling is great, and the limb smells of urine, then make a blistering of Egyptian medicine which is made like this: take alum, oil, and alum, equally, and mix the ingredients in a vessel over a fire until the medicine is red and thick like honey; then take some of this according to your need, and make an incision in the abscess and drain the pus; leave the medicine in for two hours, then drain it while expressing; do this several times until the swelling is diminished and the limb is healed; never blister with vinegar, except when this medicine is not present; take vinegar of fennel, and vomit, then the pus will flow out, and blister with vinegar until you are certain that the swelling is well drained; if the patient cannot tolerate this, neither the Egyptian medicine nor the vinegar of vinegar and honey, or if there is a little bit of alum in the abscess, or if you have blistered with honey and wine, because honey has the property of softening and washing out, and the wine makes the pus rise up; when you have done this, and you are certain that the swelling is well drained, if there is any pus remaining in the wound, take astringents and make a poultice with oil rose and wine; or you can blister with other medicines and unguents, of which I have spoken of their properties or how to make them; and if the wound is too large, if the opening of the incision is too wide, or if the pus has flowed out, if the incision is too low, or if the wound is too deep, do not attempt to make the incision, but place a patch of unguent over the wound, such as Egyptian unguent or balsam, until it is sufficiently widened.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char; et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe; et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain; puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois; et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste; et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez; et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	When the shoulder is dislocated, if you do not leave the skin loose, and if you do not cover the wound as you see, the limb will move to the lowest point below its normal position; for when the shoulder is dislocated, if you do not leave the skin loose and if you do not cover the wound as you see, it will move in such a way: the shoulder will move easily downwards and leave nothing of the shoulder behind; and take consolidating medicines to bring back the blood, and extend over a bandage which covers the whole wound; then draw up the forces around the wound until the hole is wider than before, because there are sponges on the other bandage according to the quantity of the hole, and put the hole over the wound to align the shoulder, and do not remove the large bandage until after once; and whoever comes out of the wound often hinders the shoulder from being aligned, and tears what comes from the shoulder, whether it is blood or pus or enough, or digestion, or indigestion; and take care if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is swelling or not, and when your medicine is in such a way that it is extended and you see the nature that comes out of the wound, if the wound has already bled, and approach the health; and then take off the dressing in the morning or the third day, and when you take off the dressing, if the limb remains stiff, put on another bandage and restore the swelling.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if it feels sick with a sudden vomiting after eating, its saliva that it does not taste sweet.</start_of_turn>
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	And if subtle poison comes secretly after a long tension, if you do not arouse yourself from the danger, for the danger is approaching.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire; et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie; et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine; pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance; puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu; et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire; et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use; et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens; si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	And if subtle poison comes secretly after a long tension, if you do not arouse yourself from the danger, for the danger is approaching. For there are some who delay their ailments in their wounds, and some who do the opposite; and if it persists stubbornly after prolonged rest, the veins that should be closed remain open; and if they are tardy in closing, they are drawn out, if indeed there be medicines that can dry up moisture in their essence and make them dry in their virtue, as in the case of diaphinit, for there is a great part of vitriol in it; take diaphinit and mix it with rose oil and the juice of a vine equal in quantity; then confect and use it. And this will make the wound swell less, when diaphinit is not present, or take myrrh, aloes, and incense, grind them up, and sprinkle them over honey when the fire is out; then mix them together and cover with a cloth. And let it rest until it is withdrawn from the wound. Never administer an apothecary of long duration, and celestial root, which is like flour at times and sometimes like cumin; and use it either simple or compounded. Grind them up, make powder of them, and sprinkle over honey as I have said. And if the cure is prolonged, and not cured by this treatment, then the corruption has spread too far and has made an imprint in the bone, or has hardened the limbs, or has caused deafness; if the cure for fistula is not used as I have said before.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	from the opening of the vein.
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois; et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute; et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	Panarice is an abscess which arises from the swelling of a pouch of the hand, or the foot, or by chance arises in other two places; and when it is inflamed and care is not taken, if it comes to an abscess of the nail, it swells and bursts as much as it can until it reaches the root of the nail, and by chance it swells all the way; and comes the corrosion until the bone, so that there is acute pain, and the head of the nail is large, and the color is dark.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	When you have cured it as we have said in the division, and the cure does not profit, if you must, you must perform all the superfluousness that is removed from the nail, and then cauterize the wound afterwards.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne; et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	The cautery is a great help when the bone is sound, and the nail is healthy; and when the nail presses the marrow, and starts to prick, and the blood flows, if you must put off the root of the nail that the marrow does not protrude, and keep the nail elevated, and gently remove the soft tissue, and apply a medicinal ointment composed of burning and corrosive substances to the root; then cure the wound until it is healed.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner; et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier; puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor; et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	If the bone is corroded, if the swelling is great and the pain severe, for as much as the corrupted bone cannot be healed; and if you see the bone broken, if the swelling is in the joint as it is before, then treat it until it is healed. And if it is inflamed and swollen, and there is great pain, it is proper to drain it first; then cut the nerve that is beneath the swelling, and keep the cut from reaching the cartilage that is below the nerve, for the patient would feel too much pain; and if there is pus, put something above which will soothe.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	the pain of the hand
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	The two joints that most frequently occur in the hands of peasants by chance are completely cartilaginous, and by chance there is a part where there are bones, and never a nail, and none are born in the root of the joint, or they are born from the peasant’s bones themselves
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet; la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere: taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	He who is born without a wound does not move; he who is born at the joint of a wound, by chance moves; the size of him that is fleshy is slight, in part like this: size like the root of a large sponge.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	That which is born at the root of the shoulder joint is grief to cure: if you keep it covered.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	He who is born or must at the rear without a wound, if it be that you must first circle the round flesh up to the bone, then circle the bone to a reasonable extent like this, then cure it until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The wounds that come from birth, or from a wound, or from the burn of fire, or from similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz; puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent; ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	If it be that you must circle that wound, if it be that it must recover according to its natural forms; then put between two bands or cloths soaked in rose oil, that it does not stick; or you put between two pieces of soft sponge, while it is soldered, as it befits.</start_of_turn
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	When it comes to the bones of the forearm, with the palm, if they are soldered, if they are not soldered, they will break.
des vils	From the wiles
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors; et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	From the wiles,
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	It is therefore necessary that you do not give them any purgatives of bile, and then the remainder of the nourishment.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir; et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	The cure for iron is as follows: two methods. One is with the forceps, and draw out the black blood. The other method is if you tie up the vein, and draw out all the blood.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil; puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir; et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire; et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	The size is as follows: first stretch out the hot water-soaked limb, until the great vessel is not felt to be taut; then strain the limb of the patient from under the hip bone up to the knee; then clamp the vein in one, or two, or three places, of a large size, then cut and draw out the black blood from your hand, from the thumb to the little finger, until as many as the patient can bear; and then bind it up and command him to eat nourishing food; and resume the evacuation and the bleeding when the veins are full, and do not harm the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes; et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville; puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent; et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche; puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers; puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope; et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse; et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide; et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The wounds are treated thus: open the limb of the patient, if there be hair, then bathe it in wine or oil; elevate the limb in hot water until it turns red, and swell the veins. If there be no wine, if the fire is kindled, then burn the edge of the vein to the long side of the elbow or on the ankle; then strip off the skin to the bone, and draw out the vein from the bone end until it appears; and you will see it red and black, and when it enters or the skin appears like a white thread. Then withdraw the clot, until it is level with the skin, then reinsert it gently, then burn again in another place. Repeat this process until the clot is gone; then burn again. If you do not burn it out, if there is a staple left in the flesh, grasp and pull it out, and there will be blood loss. Keep your hand steady on both sides until it is all out.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	And if the eye is contracted and tortuous and enclosed together, and it is not straight, as we have said, if you must force it open, do not cover it; and treat it as we have said before.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne; et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	The form of iron with which we cover the eye is curved, and do not pierce through, but only cover the vein; and is of great curvature, for if it were slight, it would pierce the vein, but let it be great as we have said, and this is the form.</start_of_turn>
de la voinne civile	of the civil vein.</start_of_turn>
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor; et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	This vein is enclosed in the limb, in hot parts or where there are no herbs or trees, and in the earth or where there is no moisture; and by chance it arises from another part except the limb, and this comes from the corruption that comes from the decaying of the leather, as it comes from within the serpent's body and outwards, enclosed between skin and flesh.</start_of_turn
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	And if there is a sign of the commencement of this vein when there is a great inflammation in the limb, then it chains itself up, and the vein becomes swollen as if it were the root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe; et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue; car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie; por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors; et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	If the limb is open, if it is suspected that the surrounding area has been affected by a wound for about one and a half inches, including the nail, and the nail is left in, and the surrounding area is left for a while, every time it swells, if the surrounding area is wrapped around the nail and the nail, and if it is too long, if a portion is pared off, and the remainder is wrapped around, and is not firmly secured at its root, for if it is left without support, it returns to its original position and causes swelling or pus and harm; therefore it is necessary that it be treated at once and not left for a long time, and that nothing remain or adhere to it; for in many instances concerning this vein, when it is treated with five palms of length, or ten, and one hand has already come to me, from ten palms of length, when it is pared off, there has been one or two fractures of the bone, and the bone has been perforated right through, so that everything has gone awry; and let the material that is within be evacuated, and mix with medications that will promote healing, without causing further pain, and then cure it like other wounds.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	And never in this vein have hands rained, even when it opens at the elbow or the wrist, and there comes forth blood from the opening; cure it therefore as we have said before.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	And never in this vein have hands rained, even when it opens at the elbow or the wrist, and there comes forth blood from the opening; cure it therefore as we have said before.
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer; et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre; et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	This disease is called in our land "buffalo sickness", for it often causes swelling of the groin, and is a small vein that arises between skin and flesh, and runs throughout the body, ascending and descending, and causes pain throughout the limbs as far as the skin is taut or is stretched, and spurts blood; and is accompanied by the emission of various humors, as towards worms and serpents and lampreys and scabs or intestines; and it is doubtful of its malice, for when it runs through the body and reaches the head, and comes out, by chance it returns and destroys the marrow; and this often happens.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait: si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire; et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit; et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer; et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	When you see it healing and treating, if it will not force its way out, if it can be held in check, then indeed bind the limb above and below with a strong ligature, and then press above and it will come out. If it is not extracted, if you cauterize the fire upon it, until it dies; and the greater damage it makes, if it breaks the oil, as we have said; and if you see it coming or close to the oil, then grasp the outgrowth and press it out, and press above and it will come out. It is proper to use the patient of various medicines for resolving humors and eating nourishing foods.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	When you see it healing and treating, if it will not force its way out, if it can be held in check, then indeed bind the limb above and below with a strong ligature, and then press above and it will come out. If it is not extracted, if you cauterize the fire upon it, until it dies; and the greater damage it makes, if it breaks the oil, as we have said; and if you see it coming or close to the oil, then grasp the outgrowth and press it out, and press above and it will come out. It is proper to use the patient of various medicines for resolving humors and eating nourishing foods.
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	This disease is called in our land "vakirir", and is a pain that comes in various members, and because it moves from member to member; and I have seen this.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais; et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre; li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais; puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	I was called to a sick woman, and found her arm swollen, and saw a small swelling in the armpit of the arm; and after that, I saw it rise up like a worm on the shoulder, more erect than anything, as if alive and silver as when it bursts from its root; the pain departed from that root and settled in the shoulder, and then a moment later corrected throughout the limb, until it reached the other arm; and she told me that it often returned to its place, just as I saw it.</start_of_turn>
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I was amazed at how it twisted back and forth between the limbs, for I had never seen such a disease in this way before.</start_of_turn>
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme; et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte; et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	However, I do not know whether to maintain that the pain moves from limb to limb, but I do not believe it, as I saw in the woman; and I thought that it was because her limbs were stiff and her veins were exposed, and because of that appeared that constrained wind. I do not see it according to these reasons in those who have delicious food and moist limbs and veins replaced.</start_of_turn
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer; et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	When you see the healing of this ailment and the patient feels the pain, if it is shown to you that the pain is increasing, and that the swelling below and above has become inflamed, then you should apply a cautery to the limb until the swelling subsides; and if you do not see it disappear from your eyes, if you have cured the cause of the swelling, as for example with foul pills and serpin pills, and similar things.
des saiettes	When you see the healing of this ailment and the patient feels the pain, if it is shown to you that the pain is increasing, and that the swelling below and above has become inflamed, then you should apply a cautery to the limb until the swelling subsides; and if you do not see it disappear from your eyes, if you have cured the cause of the swelling, as for example with foul pills and serpin pills, and similar things.
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	The bandages are diverse, according to their appearance and according to the nature of the pain or the reason for their use.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees; et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces; et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	The diversity of their points is such that some have large points, some have small points, some have teeth, and some have sockets; and some have two angles, and some have tongues, and some have pieces; and that which bites in no limb bites in two ways: either in the principal limb, as for example the brain, arm, forearm, breast, ribs, intestines, bladder, and similar limbs.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent: si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions; et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	When it hurts and she cries out in no limb of these members, and a sign of death, that I will tell you later, I will teach you: if you doubt the extraction of this arrow, for death comes afterwards in many dispositions; and when this sign is bad, do not doubt, the arrow is not withdrawn, if the wound is treated, and cure the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole; et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix; et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char; et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	And the sign of the brain when the arrow hits and pierces the bone, and jumps the blood vessel that is above the brain, is when scraping and soiling and twisting and vomiting and redness in the eyes, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasm and mixture of senses, and vomiting of bile; and by chance it is without fever or headache; and by chance it loses speech and voice; and jumps from the wound moist white pus resembling grapes, and just as with blood red of charcoal; and if this sign tells you, if you remain silent, take out the arrow if it is not embedded.</start_of_turn>
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide; et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope: saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	When the nipple is bitten or cut, the sign is that it is close to the left breast, and feels as if it were stuck in something hard, not soft; and by chance the nipple moves like a poulce, and in dark blood, and comes with cold sweat and chills, and fainting: the patient may die with doubt that the blood has drained out.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of an infected wound is that it never swells without pus leaking from the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient turns pale, and breathes high and cries out in pain.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	And if the arrow comes out through the covering of the wound, if it is small, spit out great pain and great swelling and cries out; and moves all the limbs stiffly.</start_of_turn>
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the arrow comes out or through the stomach, by chance there is no undigested meat from the wound.</start_of_turn>
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if the arrow comes out or through the belly, and there is no sign of stool in the intestines, if there is no hope for the cure, do not attempt to extract the arrow.</start_of_turn
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	If the bladder stone breaks in the bladder, and the urine spurts out and comes out forcefully, the patient feels great pain: such pain as the wound is mortal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	As for the other members, if the face, the neck, the chest, the armpits, the groin, the thighs, the arms, and the legs are affected, and the rest of the body, they are all subject to various conditions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the bladder stone is in the nerve or artery, and it is not venomous, as I have said before, because of this I do not know what to say.</start_of_turn>
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis: je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	There was once a splinter which had penetrated the earlobe: I grasped it, and as I pulled it out, I extracted a piece of fat from the ear, and it was cured without any further discomfort
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	And I pulled out a splinter from the fat of the olive oil from the marrow of the bone, and the splinter was restored, and did not leave the head towards the heel, and it was as large as a Turkish bow; all that was left was to listen carefully to the ear, and the pain ceased, and there was no further discomfort
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles: je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	And take out an arrow from the throat of a peasant, and the arrow was Arabic at the ear: I soothed the beards, and moved secretly as long as I took it out, and the peasant was healed.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit; et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition; je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	And took out an arrow from a wound, which was in the side or belly, and thought that it was going to die; and then when it had not passed three days, and it did not recover its position; I cut above the wound, engaged it, and pulled it out, without any bad accident.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus; et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	And if someone has an arrow wound in the side or back, and the wound is deep; and when the arrow has been pulled out from within, do not bind up its nature, do not hinder its natural works in any way
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie; et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	And another man had an arrow stuck in his face, and the wound was deep; and when it suffered great pain; and many similar things happened.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	And take out an arrow from the king's arm, that was stuck in the middle of the night, and was a great decline to the lower part; and the arrow was completely recovered. I was called to the treatment after that when it had been stuck for three days.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	If you find the wound very painful.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie; et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	I would have you try to close it entirely and do not feel it; and there is no pain or tingling in the surrounding area
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast; et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	I thought it was from the tip of the arrow. I put on the plaster poultice digestive, so that it would not swell; and I found the arrow coming out on its own
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	I put on the plaster for several days, and closed the wound, and left the patient lying down for a long time, until he felt the arrow still inside his chest; and he told me
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu; puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement; et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir; adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	I place upon the wound the corrosive medicine of vinegar by hand and days, until it was overgrown; and I held it, and felt the head of the splinter which was breaking at the root; then I joined in the opening of the wound by that vinegar medicine, as long as the head of the splinter appeared visibly; and it passed well the end of the third month, and then grew so that I could put in the nails, and I held one part and the other, and could not stir; so I ceased to toil and to intrigue in ways of cunning, as long as I took it every day as the nails were well made, as is said at the end of this chapter, until I finished it, and restored the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer: je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	And the doctors say that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored: I restored it then, and the wound was healed, and the patient was completely cured.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre; mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	Or tell me what is the quality of the extraction of these arrows, so that you put your cure on that which I do not say, for the books do not teach me all; but you know masters better than I do about many great things, and about that which is present and lacking, find nine works, and a new instrument, at the descent of the strange things that happen in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres: ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part; et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	I say that the arrows do not go out of the limb or are fiched by force, for there are two ways: either by the force of the liquid or because they enter; or by another way. And that which leaps for the liquid or enters, that is the arrow that is pierced through flesh, and leaps never does it now.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue; et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor; et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	And if it does not leap now, if you leave it as long as the bones are carried inside, and if it is relieved, the issue will be released; and just as if it is pierced through bone and cannot withdraw, if you leave it there for some days, and move it every day; and then it will leap, and if it does not leap, if it is pierced through all the soft parts, until the bones are swollen, and then you pull it out
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	If the splinter is firmly fixed in the bone of the shoulder, and goes as far as one of the ventricles of the brain, and any other ailment that I have mentioned to the patient: do not grasp it out immediately, but leave it until it is even again afterwards for several days, because if the splinter comes as far as the surface of the skin, that is death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	If the splinter is only firmly fixed in the bone alone, and goes only as far as the surface, and remains in the patient for several days without any other mishap, then the patient must be treated for it.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is firmly stuck and will not yield, if you administer oil around the circumference, as I have told you; then cure the limb until it is healed.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente; et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble; et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans; et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire; et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	If the splinter is embedded in the bone so that it cannot be seen, if it has been tried in every way; and if you feel it, if it has to be grasped with no visible instrument; and if you do not wish to risk the wound and the depth of the splinter, and there is no bone, nerve or vein in the vicinity, then hold the wound open until the splinter is removed; and if there is any cartilage that is attached to two parts of the muscle that you must grasp, and then break or crush the cartilage of the splinter as much as you can, until you can remove it; and take care that you do not break the splinter, that you grasp it more firmly.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you do not do it at once, if the limb remains limp at its entrance, then carry it out, for the extraction is joyful.</start_of_turn>
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre; et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	And if bleeding opposes the treatment, if necessary, remind the patient of the cure mentioned in this chapter; and beware of incisions of the nerves and veins, and put in place what you wish to remove the arrow safely, either quickly or slowly; and lay the patient as he was when the arrow went in, for this is the greatest aid. If you cannot do this, follow what the signs show you.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment: taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	The arrow that comes from elsewhere, or if it reveals nothing of itself, or if the skin is swollen in the place where it is seen or felt: then make the opening wide enough so that the forceps can grasp it, and then extract it: if possible immediately.</start_of_turn>
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is held in the bone, if you round your hand around it until it enters the bone, widen the bone, then draw it out.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer; et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust; et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	And if it cannot be grasped, if you leave it in, and then resume the extraction until it comes out; if the arrowhead has become loose, if it has all its force; if it is split, and you see it is necessary, if there is a curved instrument, so that the tip of the arrow enters the curve of the instrument; and then extract it, and if the arrow is hooked, if the instrument has a pointed entrance, to facilitate the extraction.</start_of_turn
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	And if the wound is surrounded, if you must, grasp all the surrounding tissue or the poison is there; if you do, then cure the wound as it should be.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope; et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est; et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if the wound is bleeding from the armpit, the hip, the belly, the bladder, or the ribs, and it is close, and you must cover it, if you grasp; and keep covering the wound and the nerves, and then extract it, and then close the wound, if necessary; and cure until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The shape of the nails with which we treat the saiettes is like the beak of an osprey, and thus is the form:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	And there are many methods: great, moderate, and small, according to the quantity of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	The shape at the end of the shoulder is like the wing of a bird, to push the point of the wound outwards, as it is like this.</start_of_turn
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	the form of the nails to push and to grasp if this is the case:
des voinnes dou cors communes	From veins of common cause
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir: II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»; et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans; et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»; et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis; et les II guindeges qui sont ou col; et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»; et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	The veins that we must know are about sixteen in number: two veins that are behind the ears, which are close to the two «herbs»; and two arteries that are in the two temples that appear; and two veins that are in the two armpits, which are close to the «aspirates»; and the vein that is in the middle of the forehead; and the vein that is at the top of the nose; and the two veins that are at the collarbone; and the two veins that are under the tongue.</start_of_turn
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras: l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»; et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	The common veins in both arms are five in number. One is the cephalic, and it runs on the left side of the chest; they call it the great vein. The middle one is called the fasted, and it is composed of the cephalic and brachial veins; they call it the arm vein. The brachial vein if it is either right or left side runs on the chest; they call it the belly vein and it is above the scapula, and this is the one from which we take blood, which appears openly on the pouch.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains; et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei; et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	The ulnar vein is between the elbow and wrist, and if there are two, there are also three in the leg and foot: one which is below the cubital vein of the left side of the chest, the second which is in the ankle of the right side; and the vein which is called the sural, which is in the ankle of the other side; and in the other leg there are three veins below these.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine; et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief: quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche; puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues; puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee; et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	The blood of the veins that are behind the ears helps to expel old blood and foreign matter; and the quality of the blood, as I have told you, is that you raise up the head of the patient and wipe away the blood or the veins are of a rough texture; then stretch out the patient’s neck with a hook, as long as two veins appear behind the ears in two loops depending on the head: if the patient has a sense of swelling on one side, or if he feels a throbbing on one side, this is a sign of infection; then take the lancet and pierce through the vein until it reaches the bone, then keep your hand over the whole vein above, and clench and pull the skin and the vein well together, and make the bleeding cease as long as you see; then strain and tie, until it is healed; and I have already mentioned the incision and the cautery or first book.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz; et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis: et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement; et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche; puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit; puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton; et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	The blood of the two arteries which are in the two temples, if it is like an ancient emigration, sode, and obtalmia which is customary, and at the root of the tears there are glands; and the quality of the physician is such as I have said: and that the patient has strained his neck, as the two veins open widely; and he feels the pulse down his thumb, and then he seizes; then he places his index finger on the vein above his thumb, and removes the lancet from the vein, and places the vein above, and the cope, as he has done in two other veins, and makes correction of the blood according to his need; then he frees the patient, and places his thumb on the vein for an hour, then places on cotton; and then the bleeding stops, and he leaves it until it is healed; and we have spoken of this above and of its treatment and its extraction, or the beginning of the book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor; et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere; puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	The blood from the front vein is worth as much as the blood from the cephalic vein; there are diseases of the face of old age, and a migraine, and redness; and if the patient strains his neck twisting, as the vein bursts; then take the instrument which is called the "forceps," which is like this:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues; puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	The blood from the front vein is worth as much as the blood from the cephalic vein; there are diseases of the face of old age, and a migraine, and redness; and if the patient strains his neck twisting, as the vein bursts; then take the instrument which is called the "forceps," which is like this. Put the point on the vein, and hold with your hand, or something else, and let the blood escape according to the quantity that you see; then loosen the patient’s neck, and ligate the vein until it is whole and never again let it bleed from a wide opening.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	However, it is not fitting that the flames be too great; and the same with the vessel, for the bone is near, and by chance breaks the flames when it is subtle.</start_of_turn
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice; et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant; puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	The blood from the two veins that are two fingers wide helps with the swelling, and the stiffness, and the redness, and the yellowness, and there are diseases of the face; and the quality of their blood is that if the patient strains his neck twisting from side to side, as before; then do the same, and let the blood spurt, a little long with a wide flame, because there is no char.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if the flame is subtle, by chance if it breaks; then make evacuation of blood, as much as you are able, and then bind up the wound, and bind it firmly.</start_of_turn>
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree; et c’est li forme dou flaime:	The blood of the vein does not flow if it is cold, and with swelling, and with diseases of the face, as with measles and redness that comes on the face, and even when it is old; and the quality of the blood is that if the patient bites his neck, then he strains his head to his left hand, and takes a long flame, and puts it into the space between the two nostrils, for the vein does not open very well indeed; and without beginning to correct it now, it will not recover; and do not go too quickly, but correct the blood according to your need, and leave it for one night, for it is quite restored by then; and this is the form of the flame:
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit; et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est; puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	The blood of the two veins helps to ease swelling, and to begin mixing, and with many diseases, and with boils, and corrosions, and herpes, and tumors; and the quality of the blood is that if the patient bites his neck from both sides, as we have said; and let the master be on the head of the patient, and the patient sit on one seat, then grasp the vein long and wide, then draw the blood calmly, or as much as is necessary; then do the other half in the other vein, then remove the ligature, and strain the veins moderately, that the patient is not strangled; and leave it until morning, when the wound is healed.
de la sainie des leivres	Of the blood of the liver.
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The blood of the veins from the arms above helps to clot in the mouth, and to corruption of gums, and wounds of the arms, and swelling and pain.</start_of_turn>
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit; puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires: cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	When the blood of the liver is dark, command the patient to hold his head forward and grasp his collar as I have said; then open the liver, and see if there are two veins, one on the right side of the liver and the other on the left side, and know them by their darkness, and because there are small black veins running alongside them: grasp both of them, and if you do not know them, and you are in doubt, if you grasp the larger one from the front, and like so do the two veins that are below and above, for this is the right method.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	When the blood is dark of the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche; et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire: saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	When the blood of the veins that are under the tongue helps after the blood of the cephalic vein, and it is at the widening of the throat, and with eye diseases, and with mouth diseases; and the blood is dark if the patient sweats between his hands before the sun, and he holds out the tongue, and look under the ribs on both sides of a black vein: grasp both of them, and do not press too much, for there are arteries there.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres: ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»; et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	The veins which commonly cause pain are usually sound in two ways: either by pricking with a burning flame as large as a match, or by olive oil as thick as cut trenching, and is called 'anesil'; and they are large and thick according to the size and breadth of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The form of the violent flame is known, and is wide as you see:
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble; et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	And there is another method for opening the large veins filled with visible blood, which contain blood and blood clots; and this is the form of the olive oil flame
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	And is more subtly pointed, and is for healthier the veins subtly, or there is subtle blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre; et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	The blood of the basilisk, which is one of these veins, helps to relieve diseases such as hoarseness, and cough, and pain in the feet, and in the belly; and it is useful for healing wounds and preventing infection from the artery which is next to them.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit; et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	And if it bites the artery, and blood flows out, if you must hold it back, as I have said; and do not make the flame too large, but keep it as thick as an 'anesil'.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre; ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement; et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	If the swelling does not visibly subside, if you must extract it, and bind another in its place; or if you wish to avoid any discharge, or if you leave the vein open in the arm: it will swell visibly; and the swelling will burn, as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz; puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil; et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	If you see the vein pulsating, if you must pull out the arm, touch the limb until you know its extent; then sign the limb, and then bind the arm, and close the vein with the flame; and beware that you do not damage the artery when you see the limb swell, for that is the artery: stop immediately.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere: haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient; se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	If you see blood spurting out like the urine of a child, and it is pale and limpid, know that it is without an artery: hasten then, place your hand over the length, and stretch your hand until it does not bleed; if it bleeds again, bind the arm and leave it still, and do not move the patient; and if there is doubt, do not move it until it is healed
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	If it is not bleeding, and it is painful, and the physician is not present, if the artery has burst, for the limb will shrink; staunch it without delay.</start_of_turn
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor; se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc; et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	And take a sponge of alum, and make it, and take one half and bind it well until the other half; if it is without stain, it is well; if not, if the physician wishes, as we have said, powders that stain blood; and the styptic does not matter in many situations by the small extent of the wound, and the position of the hand.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit; et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner; et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	The blood of the vein in the middle helps to stop bleeding from the head downwards, and from the ribs, because it is composed of the basil and cephalic nerves, as we have said; and it is fitting for the patient that he move for the nerve which is at the ribs, and if it is not too deep, and if he finds the nerve, and it swells, the bleeding will either stop or will be reduced; and if the bleeding does not stop, the nerve is often opened several times, and if it does not open in some people because of its subtlety, it is fitting that you take the sensation away from the instrument that is anesiolized; and withdraw the nerve from your hand.
Et se il a voinne entre les .ij. ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if there is a vein between the armpits, if the blood flows long.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz; et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	The blood of the cephalic vein helps, that it pulls blood quickly, and aids the eyes; and it is best to cauterize with the olive or myrtle flame, because it is the safest of all veins, for it has neither nerves nor arteries.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence; et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	However, it is best to ask more gently at first, and do not grieve if it does not work the first time; and by chance it will swell up with some people, which cannot be helped the first time, but it does not grieve anything.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of the blood is as you think.</start_of_turn>
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir; et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique; et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent; et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	The first thing you must know about cautery is that it should only be used to preserve health and to ward off future diseases; and it should be done in one of the three veins that are or are not harmful: namely the cephalic, facial, or basilar. It must be done at the beginning of a prayer, in fasting and in eating afterwards when the sign of repletion appears; and it must be done immediately or after two or three hours.</start_of_turn>
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens; et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	The blood which is administered for diseases has no definite measure, but when it is necessary for spur or nut, at all hours and in all tensions; and it is not proper to give it to children under twelve years of age, nor to women who are pregnant for more than four months up to the seventh month.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez .lx. ans.	It is not permitted for the physician to treat those who have passed sixteen years.</start_of_turn>
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz; ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques; et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors; puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir; puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit; et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses; et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans; et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on; puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	And when anyone sees a physician, in whatever way, if he commands the intestines to be cleansed with a mild enema, if there is retained bile, so that the veins do not extract the useful humors from the principal parts; neither too much meat, nor too little, neither too fat, nor too watery; and if after eating there follows colic, vomiting, and swelling of the belly, and multiple evacuations of the bowels, and vomiting, and guarding and vomiting, and all the things which are useful, or by weapon or poison; then subtilize the humors, if they are not too thick, by meat and by drinks and by medicines, if you have the power; then enter or bathe, so that nothing hinders the sublimity of the blood, and leave the vein empty from the wrist up to the third part, as we have said; and keep that occupation of work, of fasting, and of luxury, and similar things; and be tied and bound, and be more attentive than you are accustomed, and let the physician touch your hand twice or three times, and then remove the thread from below the middle, for if it is too tight or loose, it will not be able to correct it without; then touch the limb with your hands, until the veins swell, and you feel them; then moisten the physician with a little oil, then put his thumb on that vein below the elbow, which is where the physician saw the physician give the medicine, that the vein does not swell and cause injury.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus; et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	For there are veins that flee like threads from a tailor, and if they are of such kind that are filled with windiness, so that when one puts on the flame, it withdraws from the flame, and cannot open the vein, and thus is this; and if one opens the vein, if the wound is too wide, for this reason one must advise the tailor in these matters.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	If the vein swells up for the first time, that is good; but if this does not happen, one must repeat the process several times, until the swelling subsides.</start_of_turn>
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras: par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait; et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement; et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	If the limb is inflamed and the patient is anxious, and one lets it hang limp or for two, and does not bind the arm: by chance there will be apostemes in the flesh; do not enter or bathe, then restart the bleeding if it stops; and if the wound is small, or without proper support and you doubt that there will not be enough blood as you see, if you trust in this loss itself with all the flame downwards; and make the work promptly, even if the limb is inflamed; for this often happens when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile; et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc; et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	If thou seest the limb inflamed, and dost not wish to renew the blood, put upon a little piece of lint soaked in oil, for it doth soften the pain of blood; and it doth stick to the limb the oil which is on it; and give the oil-soaked lint in the hollow of the blood which thou saest the veins, to stop the course of the blood; and this doth make a tremor and swelling about the limb when it is put on; if thou takest it off too soon and it is too great.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre; et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie; et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	And if there comes a great abscess, which happens often, even when it is not dangerous, save only when the opening of the vein is small, if thou art in a hurry, put upon the limb a wet cloth and a little piece of charcoal, and hold for an hour; and it is advisable that you do this after the blood has stopped flowing from the vein, and if it remains in the limb after a few days, no blackening or greening, if thou dost not see; and if thou seest, put upon no foreign thing or ointment made from eggs, mustard, or any similar thing.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And often there is swelling and appearance of blood in the armpit: put your hand there and if you find the limb soft under the compression of the hand, if that is the bad appearance.</start_of_turn
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai .i. emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Listen then that you do not put anything of what we have said on it, for by chance in court without an artery; but make an embolus dry to harden the limb, then treat it with another treatment, until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And treat each wound according to the quantity of its virtue, and of the color of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	For if it is black, leave it be as long as it is red; and if you see it thick, leave it as long as it is subtle; and if it is too thick, leave it cool down.</start_of_turn>
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges; et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant; et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	And it is to be done to the one who is fair and strong, and has the skill of extracting blood, to make the wound larger; and let the flame be large. And to the one who is weak, do the opposite, and keep it sound often, and must keep it sound by cutting across, without pricking; for this method of bleeding saves from the decay of blood and nerves, and is worth more than bleeding long rather than wide.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	And to the one who needs food for the blood, it is fitting to give soft bread in juice of pomegranate seeds; if he is pale, if take blood three times or four. And if he has a cold complexion, let him eat before the blood soft bread in mustard, or in aromatic honey with spices, such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cloves, and fragrant oil.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	If he pricks at the blood vessel after the evacuation of blood, it is certain that he will emit thick blood, and an odor of char, and use other things as we have said in the division or chapter on fainting, for the evacuation of the vein.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he sees his arm fainting, and recovers again, if it is swollen with great blood, it must be bound up and bound up continuously according to the amount of its continuous virtue.</start_of_turn>
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine .vij. houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And whoever sees his arm fainting after the first bleeding, and has severe pain, if he recovers after nine or twelve hours after the first bleeding.</start_of_turn
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And whoever sees himself fainting from another side, if he must recover later from thirst or hunger.</start_of_turn>
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson; puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens; et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus; ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz; mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	For there is blood in the body which has already been sucked out, which causes fever; if you attempt to draw out a great quantity, and widen the opening too much, it will cause the arm to bleed profusely; since you must leave all the blood, and put your hand on the pulse when it is well, so that the blood does not reappear in place of the flesh, and this often happens when the patient is negligent; and do not attempt to draw out the blood a second time if you see the limb slip, and the opening is closed, as you must press firmly; if it is crooked, extend the limb immediately, for that would be harmful; but leave it until it bleeds a second time; or you can prick at the tip of the flame, until the one which is frozen at the opening of the vein is forced out, and put some sponges on it and press gently.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein has burst, if you leave it and do not tighten it too much, until the swelling is reduced.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if necessary, the blood must be drawn again the second time, if the same one is in the same vein, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein in the arm is filled with blood instead of the one in the shoulder because it is composed of it
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges; puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc; et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez; et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit; et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	And thus concerning bleeding, if the patient grasps his hand in hot water, until the foam be red; then bind it moderately, so that the vein opens properly; then draw the hand forward, neither too wide nor too long; or make an opening large, and bring the thumb close to the joint of the hand, and if it is not possible to return it, grasp the hand in hot water and leave the blood flow in the hand until enough; and if it be in this state, do not draw the hand in hot water again, for more is put into it than in this; the blood of this vein is more valuable than all the veins, for there is neither artery nor nerve in it.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere: estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie; et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	The blood of the saliva of the right hand is worth for all the diseases of the liver, and this is the method: strain the hand and grasp it in hot water, until the vein is driven out if one sees it; and if it is drawn through, and if you do it all at once, do not grieve; do not go too far, for the nerves are all exposed without covering, and then grasp the hand in hot water again, if it is not frozen in the wound, and cannot be returned.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	When you have treated the blood as much as you can, if you put oil on the wound and bandage it securely, and then make each wound.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The blood in the left hand is worth to the disease of the mouse, and do the same as I have said before about the right side.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	The blood of the sophene is worth for all diseases that are caused by a swelling of the body, such as diseases of the marrow, retention of flowers, diseases of the reins, and of the uterus and the old legs, and similar diseases.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains; saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	And the quality of its blood is that if the patient has become stiff in hot water, and has rubbed on the belly until it swells, and has put his finger under the joint of the bone; and if the belly is at the ankle, and from under the bone comes out drops of urine; the same as if there were a large wound or a wide wound at the ankle, or at the elbow, that the blood is worth more than any other blood.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you see blood on the hand, if you are wary of the nerves that are sore, and if the limb has been cut as if by a sword; or the flame is near.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if it cannot be cured, if you reset the bone in water, and leave the vein wide open.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz; ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	And if the patient has to be bled for the first time, if he begins the second time from under a little space, because the liquid is salty; do not doubt, as we have said, and do the same with the other arm equally
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The limb of the sciatic vein is at the ankle of the buttock, and its blood is worth as much as the pain of the groin, when it is for blood that comes out.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant; et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	And if the patient is in bed or in water, and he strains his ankle twice in turning, for otherwise he will not open the vein; and if it opens, do so in all ways that you can, and through and through; it is better to leave it closed, for the blood is thick, and it will soon return by itself.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners; et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	If you do not find [the blood] flowing out or coming back in, towards the little toe, and you suspect it, take hold of the limb firmly; do whatever you can to staunch the bleeding, and then bind up the wound. It is now healed.</start_of_turn>
des sainies de ventouse	from the wound of the vacuum.</start_of_turn
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc .ij. manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	And do so diligently with blood that you see, and then loosen the tie, put on a bandage and hold it; it is now healed
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu; et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col; et II autres en II costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton; et li ventouse des II espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies; et les ventouses emmi les II bras; et les ventouses des II jambes; et les ventouses des II chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne; et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	And this suction which is made by cutting if it is done in two ways: either it is with great heat or without heat; and the suction which is made by cutting and by extracting blood if it is done in twelve days of heat, of which one is at the top of the head; and the other is at the bottom of the head; and two others in the two corners of the head; and the suction of the tongue; and the suction of the two scapulae; and the suction on the buttocks; and the suctions at the two arms; and the suctions of the two legs; and the suctions of the two ankles; and the suction does not treat any blood, except for small veins that are scattered in the flesh, and for this reason it does not cause any harm, as when we make a bloodletting; and it must only be administered, neither with great heat nor without heat, in no disease that comes from repletion, as long as all the heat is evacuated.</start_of_turn
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens; car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief; et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz; et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc; et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	And if need be of disease it is allowed to speak, or by custom, if the attendants remain together for an hour at the commencement of the month, or at the end, and every tenth; for there are some who, when they must speak, have a heavy head; and there are some who find swelling and redness in their face, and in their head and neck, and dark circles under their eyes; and some who find a drop of blood in their mouth, and have lost their tongue, and spit blood; and some who think, and see nothing but blood and vomit and death and similar things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés .iij. houres dou jor.	When we see these signs, and the patient is in a state of great fear and distress, we command him to fast for two hours.</start_of_turn>
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors; et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement; et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	The blood of the physician helps with the pain of the head … which comes from these circles under the eyes; and it cannot be done except after the evacuation of all the humors; and this vomiting is useful in place of the cephalic blood, and it cannot be done except by those who have a cold complexion in use, or who have chatarrh, for this makes them vomit greatly; and for this reason it is not to be done except with those who have a cold head and not with those who have hot diseases.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And if those who are well-versed in the matter disagree, and for this reason it is necessary to place the ventouse somewhat lower due to the doubt of compliance.</start_of_turn
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion; et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	The air that comes out of the head is in lieu of blood and bile, and for that reason it is worth more than gold, and it causes swelling of the face, splitting of the palate, and all around; and it is necessary to be able to push it out, for if it is held too firmly, it can cause swelling of the lip or cheek or stomach or side.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	The air that comes out of the head is worth as much as the pains of the head, and vomiting and diarrhea, and strangulation, and toothache; and it is in lieu of the blood of the bile; and it is necessary that you command the patient to put his hand over his [artery], that he does not close the vein, and does not let blood spurt out.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des .ij. levres.	The winds of the south blow over the mouth if it is sick with mouth disease, and with corruption of the gums, and similar diseases that are in the mouth; and is in the cause of the health of the teeth.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	The winds of the south blow over the teeth if it is sick from heat and swelling
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes; et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	The air from the chest is worth as much as three veins of the arm, because it draws blood from these large veins; and command the patient not to be too tight, for it is dangerous, and knows nerves and arteries.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The swelling that is on the buttocks is worth having haemorrhoids from the foundation, and has diseases of bones and arteries; and it is recommended that the swelling be large and of hair, that it has much to do with well-treating; and by chance, if it should be ruptured, there will be great wounds
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des .ij. sophenes, et des .ij. chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	The swellings of the legs are apt to open widely, because they attract blood from all over the body, and cause old pains of the veins, and of the marrow, and of the bladder, and reinforce the flowers; and are in place of the spleen, and the kidneys, and all of them cause the body to swell up later on, and cause vomiting of blood in various situations.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	The manner of applying the suction cup is as follows: if you apply it at first glance, and do so promptly, and put it on firmly, and move it evenly, and do not cease doing so until you see the blood flow red and swelling, and open the wound; then withdraw, and take care of the patient’s condition, for there are some who have a tender scar, and clear pores: if you must cut once alone, and you must make large wounds, and a deep wound; and do so cautiously.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir .ij. fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	If it is not large, if you must cut once: the first time to staunch the flow of blood from the large vessel.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	If it is very thick, if you must cut three times; and when our wings grow weary of blood, if we only suffer once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif: se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite; et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	And if our wounds bleed profusely, if we rejoin them too often; and if they are not expected to heal, if they are fiercely inflamed, and if they persist even when the cause has disappeared, it is better for those who have thick skin and hard, and who have numerous pores, to apply to the wounds a liberal amount of aperitif and dissolvent oil: if it is for an abscess, violet oil, or sweet almond oil, or pumpkin seed oil; and if it is for a wound, cresson oil, or lavender oil, or chamomile, or something similar.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the superfluous moisture is great and cold, take olive oil of marigold, or balsamite, or olive oil of anet, and the like.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	And if the wound has a thick edge and large pores, it is not to be oiled, but it is to be washed after the evacuation of rose water, or cold water, or elderflower water, or cucumber water, or porcelain water, or something similar.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And if there is moisture in the mouth, if it easily rises, or of mistletoe, and sumac, and the like.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans; et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	And he who has excessive liquor, from wine old or water of sweat, or decoction of elderberry or chamomile, or other like things; must not trust his health before the bath, but after the bath an hour or two; and must not sleep after the ventosation, and must know that he must rise when he must rise and when he is risen.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez; si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses; et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	And guard him who is feverish is cold and if he is too hot and inflamed; if you must give him cold things, as with pomegranate seeds and radishes and lettuce easily, and other like things; and eat barley meals, and broth of broth, and moist meats.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons; et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier; et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz; et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	And he who has a cold complexion, if you give him honey syrup and scented wine medium, which is between old and new, and eat broth, and eat barley and eat herbs and small oils and simples; and when he must vomit, he must drink more than he eats; and you must not give to anyone triacle or mustard before or after the ventosation, but rather comfort the principal members; and be discreet about it, but he must only drink those who are hot drink it
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre; et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu; et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	The wounds which are made to bleed are those which are made upon the liver, and upon the spleen, and podagra, and upon the belly and the bowels and the veins and the testicles, for these members do not suffer from any wound upon their outsides, and they are made only to draw blood from member to member, as we do when we put them upon the nipples when they do not bleed; to remove the viscosity which is in the member, as we do when we put the cautery upon the belly and the bowels to make the member softer; and to stop the pain, when there is an opening or stone, for the opening or stone to be attracted by its attractive power by chance or to empty the stone from its place; and thus it is made high when it is put upon the liver and the spleen when there is retained moisture, and these cautery are administered empty without any liquid, and never administered together with water, except in cases of pleurisy, and in such a manner we fill the cautery with warm water, or with water or herbs that are appropriate for this.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The form of the ventouse administered to fire is like this:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre; et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent; car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	And there are two large and half palms of mustard, or cost the rent of a thousand little holes, as for driving out an awl; and it may be of rain, sulfur before if it does not irritate the patient when putting it on the limb; and there is in the middle a twig of thorn or iron, to put a bandage on, and it is to be large or small according to the illness and the nature of those who take it; for the bellies of the sick are other than the rich, and the leaner than the fat.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre: empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide; et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse; et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	And must be placed on the limb: grasp the bandage with the thumb or index finger, and insert it through the twig which is already in the suction cup, so that it sticks neither at the bottom of the suction cup nor burns the patient; and then put it on the limb, and two must be placed either on the hole that we have said, or on the awl that has gone in; and when you pull, if there is vapor, remove the suction cup; and grasp the linen again as before, and repeat often, if you must.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement; et c’est li forme:	In the chest where it is administered in the disease of pleuresin, at all times, there is no bulge or perforation, and it is administered only when it is clear of pain, and is placed upon the limb just as little as possible; and this is its form:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus; et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans; et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren; et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres; et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues; et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	They are not administered except in limbs where it is impossible to place a ventouse because of their smallness, such as bones and teeth, and similar things; or in wounds stripped of flesh, such as wounds from nails or bites, and others; and when the quality of the patient is that when they find the bubbles that are in soft, clear liquids without any puncture, if they take them; and put a drop of sweet liquid on them until they are full, and do not have anything in their belly; and then either let go of the vein and the ventouse, or rub the limb until it is red, and put the bubbles back on; and when they are full and comfortable, if it is possible to put the ventouse back on, put it back, for it is worth more afterwards.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint; et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés; et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez; ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant; et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	If not, if you raise the limb easily, and then with water, wet well, and then dry; and if the limb remains too long after washing the hair, if you pour a cloth of linen on the cold water, put on, until the hair is stretched; and if the hair is numerous, put on broken glass, or scraps, and the like, until it is stretched; or you take out half of the hairs, and leave them until they burn out on the limb, if you stop now; if you do more work, take out other hair.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent; et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	If the hair does not take hold, if you rub the limb with fresh blood, or you put in a needle until the hair is embedded, and then put on, as soon as they feel the blood, if they burn; and when you see that they are bleeding, if you sprinkle on some aloes and bruised saffron, or charcoal, they will stop now.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	Ci comence li livre des brisures.
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and is the restoration of fracture and displacement.</start_of_turn>
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent; et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin; et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie; et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	Hear now, my son, for the matter which I speak of in this chapter is not found in any former book, neither in letter nor in practice; for this reason it is strange in our land, for I have never learned of it. I know of it only through the study of ancient books, or through my own study and experience, and by the habit of my life; and I have described it in this chapter what is contained in it, and I have summarized at the end, and I have made it clear the forms of the instruments which are brought into use, as I have done in the two preceding chapters.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	It is therefore necessary that we say or write in the prologue of this book the sum of the word and the chapters or the knowledge that it contains, and that we remain true, so that those who are learned and who learn this noble art may learn from it and teach others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars; ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	I say that when there is a fracture or dislocation or torsion or swelling that comes to nothing, if you command the patient to hasten recovery from the one side and from the other, if nothing hinders him, if he is not too weak in body, or if he is a babe or an old man; or if his pulse is not very strong, or too cold; and if he drinks cold water, or oil and vinegar, and does not drink wine, does not eat fatty foods, and does not fill his belly too much with meat, until he has overcome his doubt of incision and expansion of the matter in the limb; if the patient then returns to his former state, he will recover his government as before.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken bone begins to heal, if you must nourish the patient with foods that cause great nourishment, or if he has viscosity, as with wheat flour in water, rye, peas, almonds, cheese, fish, and large wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For at a part nourishment returns muscle and more tension the break.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans; mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	And know that bones that break in pieces and decrepit ones do not mend well by themselves according to their nature because of the dryness of the limbs; for the same reason as those which are too tender, like bones of small children; but there is no cure, remain above the broken bone and hold the limb together, so that it reinforces as if it were before; and do not touch it at all, for because of this it is necessary to nourish it with large foods, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And know that fractures are of various kinds in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the fracture of the head is different from the fracture of the limb, or of the foot, and I shall tell you in this chapter all the ways of fracture.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there are fractures that go to the marrow, and others by bending, as with the size of a pen to write.</start_of_turn>
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if there is a fracture with a wound, and a fracture with a small fissure.</start_of_turn
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu; et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main; et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure; mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	And sometimes there is its own sign and its own instrument in restoration; as it is remembered that comes to its aid; and it is known that the breaking of the bone by that which it is twisted is opened well by pushing, and by the pressure of the hand; and when there is no swelling or pain, there is no break; but it may well have swelling, or fissure, or a small break.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	If you do not know whether it is moving or not, but put on medicines that come later, and then strain it now subtly.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne; et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez; puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	When the bladder bursts, which is two parts of the joint, it is necessary to set them even now, as well as the post-traumatic spurs which are left behind; and if the spurs are hot, do not leave any residue until the spurring has ceased; then set the limb even and gently, and restore the bladder more easily than if there were pieces remaining; then hold it.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main; et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor; et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	And if there are broken pieces in the bone, if it is thumb or toe, or at the hand if it is a small limb, or two strings, or an arm and a hand; set the limb according to its natural figure, so that when the parts of the limb which are broken reunite, if you restore them by all means to the limb as before, and keep that in your work there comes no further injury or pain to the patient; and adjust the two ends of the bone according to the best forms.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	And feel well with the hand if you think it is not well: if it is swelling well, and it is not straining too much, do not press as those who do who make it come by their work excessive heat and contraction in the limb, as we have often seen
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere; et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	And when the limb is at a joint, if the patient holds it firmly, so that he does not move it, neither by day nor by night, neither by turning nor in any other way; and keep the limb firmly so that he does not feel any pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor; et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez; et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	For when he feels no pain, if it is not at a joint, and you can put it into proper position so that he feels no pain; and keep it straight, so that there is no twisting when you restore it; and the quality of the limb will be as I have told you
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	The quality of a broken limb is diverse in small, medium, and large sizes and shapes
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz; et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche; puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure; et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet; puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus; puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	For there are small limbs, such as arms and thighs and the like: if you can cover them with soft and fine linen; and for those that are large, such as bones and legs: cover them with a wide and strong thread, for the large thread embraces the whole great limb and strains it equally, so that there is no slack; then put on firm supports, three turns or four depending on the limb, and strain your hand one inch all around the limb, then go up to the break and strain less, than the break then lets go an inch of the break; and soften the thread both above and below, as long as you take a great part of the limb still attached, then take another thread and turn the support around the limb; then put back to the lower part of the break, and strain moderately, not too strong or too little, as we have said at the beginning of this section; then put between the supports of linen or cloth, so that they are even all around, and then tie everything up with a bow, and then put your pins in place, if there is no incision or swelling.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors; puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	And if there is swelling or abscess, if you put upon something soothing the abscess burn, and which closes the swelling, and leaves it thus for some days; then strain upon your testicles, and let them be half of a large sausage-shape, or of cloth from which nails are made, or of poppy seeds, and be in this figure.
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres; et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor; puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure; plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol; car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	But it is necessary that the thread which you put upon the break be thicker and wider than the others; and be as long as it is appropriate for the limb in breadth or in length; then strain upon the testicles in the same way as you did at the first hour, and then bind them up with a thread of even thickness, neither too thick nor too thin, made of linen; for if the thread is thick, like those fools who make their threads from hemp fibers, that is a great mistake, for the thread will not be even if it is too subtle, and it will not hold securely.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is numbed by the blows of the needles after the stretching, if you put on stockings of linen or coarse cloth, they will not bleed
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is with a bruise, and the nerve is severed, I will tell the cure of that later.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And as regards those who do not wish to endure this discomfort, they must immediately break the limbs the first moment.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant; et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	For when the limb is large, it is not permissible for me to set these bones except after five days or seven, or more according to the severity of the wound; and when this method of ancient plaster is used to restore fracture, dislocation, and torsion: take flour that adheres to the walls of the mill, mix it with abundant egg yolks, and make this confection, neither too thick nor too thin, and use it. This is the common method of plastering that restores the fracture in various positions, just as much for women as for men and small children, for it is neither too harsh nor too rough.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .v. З.; alechil .viiij. З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Another method of restoring fracture and dislocation and torsion: take three barley grains and linseed and alum and saffron and Arabic gum and mugwort, all in the amount of eight; mirrace and aloes, in the amount of five; chamomile, in the amount of seven; and grind them together, and mix them with abundant eggs; for if the complexion of the patient is hot, use this plaster, for it is of good composition and restores the broken bones quickly, and is worth more than many homes.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.; acaice VI З.; bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Another method of plastering that is good for torsion: take mugwort and chamomile, each in the amount of X, three; myrrh and aloes, each in the amount of VIIII, three; acacia five, three; and mastic gum ten, three; grind them well, and mix them with water or abundant egg yolks, and administer them.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	Another method of restoring joints and bones that have slipped out of place, and relieves the pain that comes with it, and reduces the swelling: take fresh linen, moisten it in oil and put it on the affected area.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	These methods do not restore them completely, but they are good for relieving excessive swelling and pain.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Other means of support that are worth considering are: dried fig tree leaves and terrestrial poppy leaves, ground together, and make a plaster.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	Another method of restoring the fracture and diminishing the remaining swelling
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Take root of gentian, chamomile, violets flowers, barley flour, and fennel seed; grind them and mix with wine, and if the limb is swollen, soak it in vinegar or water, and apply
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	Other methods of restoring the limb are more forceful than the first, when an abscess is hardened and comes to the restoration of the limb.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Take root of chamomile, seed of flax, balsam, melilot, and chamomile, of all an equal part; and grind, and mix with salt water, or sweet water, or with wine, according to the heat of the limb and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Ypocras writes in his book that there is no need to put anything on the broken limb to restore its force except for a little wax and oil, and nothing else, and that it should be between soft and firm.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems Galen would have us put on the warm parts of the member broken, to restore things dry a little warm, as for example, myrrh and aloes and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another way of dressing that is worth for pain and swelling: take mugwort and chopped almonds, or pine needles, and gum, and mix them evenly, and crush them, and make a dressing of them and bind it.</start_of_turn>
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor; puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut; et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then loosen a little afterwards, and take care that the patient feels no pain, nor has his bone moved from its place; if you do not loosen by hand for days. And if pain comes to the limb, or swelling, whether you are in a hurry or not, loosen it and support the limb now; and put on a lighter bandage, and a wet sponge, and immerse in water, and raise up the limb, until the swelling stops and the pain is relieved; then leave the limb rest for an hour, then put on dry linen, soaked in water or oil of rose, and tie on a nut, until you are sure of the abscess is cured; and rest the inflammation of the limb, and be sure the pain is gone, then renew the gentle binding, and a little support, and do not bind too tightly; and be subtle until it is healed
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see swelling, redness, pain, and swelling about the bone, it is necessary to support and bind, if it recurs, as you did at first.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII; et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus; adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir; arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure; par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	If it does not yield to the limb what has been said, if it does not yield after three days or four, or five, or seven; do not leave it for twenty days, as we have seen, until the swelling has subsided and the limb has approached its normal position; then tighten the restraint more than before, and swell the meat, as I have said before; and if you see the limb become drier than usual, the swelling will not rise; then raise the limb with warm water, every time you loosen it, two-thirds of the time, and cut a vein. In this way the swelling will be removed from the limb and the patient will recover quickly from what the fools have done, who have left the limb twisted: that is bad, and if the disease is serious, I see nothing better than to leave it alone and do it right.
des diverses manieres de brisure	various ways of breaking.</start_of_turn>
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees; car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	Many forms of fractures are known, and various figures, and the causes are diverse; for there are fractures caused by the percussion of a spear, and the collar bone fractured throughout its entire length up to the syphus which is perforated by the bone, as in the case of the spear or the fist; and for this reason this kind of fracture is called a "haichure".
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces .ij. brisures grans ou petite.	Or the spear pierces the bone in a transverse direction, and is called this kind of fracture "absolue"; and is the wound of these large or small fractures.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is an embedded percussion, or fracture or dislocation of the bone, or fracture of the bone, or other similar things.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is a fracture that approaches the socket which is below the bone, or it is on the bone, then this wound is great or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»; et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	And if a wound that is closed in the bone is as subtle as a nail, and the tear is small, and for this reason this kind of fracture is called a "capillaire"; and if the wound is made or caused by a stone, or by a thorn, or by a similar thing, and causes the piece of bone to enter the cavity, and the limb is bent as when carrying a burden when it is placed on the embers; if between the bones.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant; et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	And this happens more often in those who have soft bones or joints like children; and this happens in all these ways that small pieces break away from them like stars; and I will speak of it later.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And there are many other ways of fracture when small pieces are detached from them as in these; and I will speak of them later.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The capillary resemblance is known by this that when one has discovered the bone, and has wiped around it, if one finds a black fracture.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of the fracture, take care of the patient’s accidents and if you see no other bad accident, such as vomiting of bile, emission of urine, extension, paleness, fever, and swelling, and other similar things, if it does not recover sense immediately.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	If you suspect no imminent danger, and hope for recovery, begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	When the limb comes forward first, and it is in swelling, if you can remove the bone before the fourth part of the muscle that you must do so.</start_of_turn>
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	If it is in this state, if you hurry to remove the bone before the seventh part of the muscle, so that the tissue of the bone is corrupted, there will come the accident that we have said.</start_of_turn
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset; et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	And if the break of the bone comes up to the covering of the brain, if you must cut the torn part off: and that is that you grasp the head of the patient unmoving, and uncover the bone in all the ways you can, and on the figure of the wound more strongly than you can; and if blood comes out when uncovering the bone, or opening, if you are aided by this, that you fill the cavity with soaked cloths oiled with rose oil; and rest the wound until the swelling subsides, and be sure of bloodletting; then begin to bind the bone to stabilize, and this is done in two ways: one way if the cut is narrow at the front, and that is the shape:
Et puis i boute .i. autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then do another incision more extensive than the first.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	And thus if you have various sizes of testicles, some large and others small, and they are pointed and made of iron, and in their lighter work, do not bleed the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou .i. cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des .iij. manieres de tareres:	And if the bone is thick and hard, if you must pierce through it, even though you administer testicles with tarres, do not pierce beyond the test bone. And you must leave above the point a margin or circle, that does not allow the point to pass beyond the bone; and you must have several of them, so that if the testicles come out in place of the thickness of the bone, if you have several tarres on the test; and this is the form of the two methods of tarring.
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes .i. tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	The quality for piercing through the brittle bone is that you put one tarret on the bone, and turn your two hands until you feel that the bone is pierced; then put the tarret back in another place a little later, and do the same thing to the surrounding area, and cut between the perforations, and do it more skillfully than you can, and lightly, as we have said, until you have brought the bone to your hand, or to any of the instruments that you have if you have them, pincers; and keep your hands away from the brain and the jawbone.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire; et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	When you have perceived the bone and treated it, if it is possible, reset the fragment which is dislocated from the bone to all other instruments which are like incisors; however, it must be firmer and more flexible than the others. If nothing of the small bones remains, do not fear, if the bones are lightly held by instruments; then cure the wound with sutures and ointments as we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And another way of working is like the Galenicians say, which is more certain; and the lord is very strong, and that is his word.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is necessary first that you uncover a part of the bone, either by fracture or by opening the muscle, so that when you have uncovered that part, you put back the head of this lenticular incisor, for this is its shape:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz; s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	Do not cut too deeply from one side, for the part which is injured lies between the two costs, so that if you cut towards the bone, then hold it in place with a small mallet above, so that you can easily support the bone all around; take good care of the cloth which is beside the bone, for if it is split from the bone, if the bone is easily displaced, because we must support it soundly, and with fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	If the bone breaks through the skin, do not pierce it further with a needle; cut it off just below the fracture, and there will be small pieces left. If you suspect infection, remove the surrounding tissue with a scraper or file of various sizes, in order to prevent infection in each place, according to the nature of the fracture.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If the fracture is great and after more scraping, and does not cease, do it until it is well healed.</start_of_turn>
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	In some other capillary and fracture of a subtle kind, it is necessary to bring about the cause according to its location; and this is something that is not easily learned by anyone who has not put his study into this art.</start_of_turn>
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie; puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement; et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication; et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	If the wound is discovered, you must take I drapeil of linen, according to the quantity of the wound, and wet it in oil roset, and place it on the wound; then take I other drapeil doubled in II or III, and wet it in wine and oil roset, and place it on the first drapeil; and do this more gently than you can, that you do not damage the wound, then administer from above I other thread, and do not strain it more than is necessary to hold the wound only; and leave it in place for I or II hours, until the swelling has subsided, then remove it, and administer medicines such as radix of lis, and flour of times, and powdered incense, and an apothecary, and similar things; and from these things make a powder, and put it on the wound, and administer appropriate medicines in moderation; and keep the wound clean, that you do not leave it dirty, neither do you leave it bound up tightly, for when it is bound up tightly on the head of the nail, if it is twisted and pulled, it causes great harm to the patient; for when something biting is put on the wound, if it is not held in place by something.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Beware then, if any evil event comes to the patient, as we have said, if there is any doubt, it is doubtful sense.</start_of_turn>
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac; puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if black bile does not depart quickly except by the medicine we have put on, that some virtue has, if you take a part of honey, and three parts of rose oil and one part of glue, and you apply it on the surface; then you will cure in the manner of cures that it is suitable, until it is healed.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les .ij. parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont .ij. os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	Then follow the treatment in the way that is useful, as long as it is safe.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil; et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	And if one of the two parts is broken, if you can drink a little wine or vomit what you do not need, and put this break into your index finger and the little finger by pushing out, until it returns to its natural position; and do this gently, and keep the patient from feeling pain by your work.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the break is in the upper part of the arm, and cannot go down to the root, if you can, put an even support under the arm at the height of a large rib.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues; se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	And if the break is of two parts, if you do it again, and hasten to restore the first limb, if you wish; if not, after the seventh or tenth day, when the inflammation of the wound has subsided, then bathe the head of the limb where the fracture is, and if the break is on one side.
Ou tu boutes .i. autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	Or you must bind it once more on another side if the break is there; and be the attempt as strong as to fill the hole in the limb.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	And they say that no restorer should attempt to break up the swelling in a burst wound, and die each for himself.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	I do not think it is good, but it is proper that they be softened with an egg yolk and meal powder; then leave the wound open until the bone is firm and the cartilages are hardened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a .i. souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And never do they put goose feathers in place of tents, and if there is sulfur powder draped around, and it is held in place, and blows the patient among them; or do as you see fit.</start_of_turn>
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en .i. poc de dyaquilon.	And if they come to rest while you are working, if you put some butter or cotton soaked in rose oil or some such salve on it.</start_of_turn
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis; et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu; et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound does not bleed, if you put on a paste of fuller’s earth, oatmeal, and incense powder, confirmed with egg yolk, then put on light compresses, and do not bind it tightly; and if the break is small and is broken into small pieces, if you have suitable instruments, then cauterize the fracture, and close the wound with stitches, as with pastes and ointments that are suitable for this; and if there is no wound in the break, if you close the wound, and put on bandages, until it is healed
de la routure de la mandibule	Of the root of the mandible
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the mandible is fractured without any wound, and the break is only slight, and is not broken through, except for the teeth inside, if one knows it slightly.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	It is advisable, if the break is on the outer part, to bite down on the thumb of the affected hand towards the mouth of the patient; and if the break is on the left mandible, if you hold the thumb of the right hand, and gently hold the break inwards, and hold the other hand outwards, and make them even.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en .ij., si covient que tu aministres extension de .ij. pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the break of the mandible is displaced, that is to say, if it is displaced by .ij., it is advisable that you administer an extension of .ij. parts, as long as they are even.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus .i. drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	If movement of the teeth causes pain, or a dislocation, if strained by a thread of gold or silver or silk, then put a broken mandible cerote on and put on an i. two-fold drape; and on the drape put a large sponge well made, or a piece of leather equal in length and width to the mandible, and tie on the suture that you put in place, and command the patient to rest, and eat soft food.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en .iij. semainnes.	If you see that the figure is changing, if the bone comes loose at the third joint, and then reset it to its place; and put on a dressing of powdered alum with abundant egg or oatmeal, after you have oiled the cerote; and put on a dressing of linen. If the dressing becomes loose, and the patient’s condition does not change, leave it as it is until it is healed; many times it heals in two weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if after suppuration the limb remains swollen, as we have said many times.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is a fracture and wound together, repair so that neither part of the bone is left unboned; if delicate of the bone has instruments that cover this.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is wide, if the swelling has flared up as you need.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus .i. des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have boned all these parts, and there is no longer any displacement, if the wound is wide, put on some dressings that cover this, to absorb blood, until it is healed
de la forcele	so strong.
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc .iij. manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en .ij., et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	The strong force breaks several times before, over the shoulder, and the fracture is deemed to be in two ways: either it is broken and split into three pieces, and is the most light to restore; or there is a fracture with a wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies .ij. ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And when the fracture is with a wound, if you have two assistants, let one hold the limb that feels the strong force; and the other extend the shoulder towards the part; then set the fracture even, so that the form be as it should be, and there be no bulge or protrusion.</start_of_turn>
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And if you must extend more, put under the shoulder of the patient a round ball of wax, or linen, of the size you need; and stretch and hold the forcele, and strain the ball in your hand, so that you can put the fracture even, as it should be.</start_of_turn>
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule .i. oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	If you do not manage to push the head of the shoulder back in its place, because it comes out of its socket, you must know that the patient lies groaning on his side, and put a cushion under the shoulder blade, namely the middle rib, and hold the shoulder blade down until the head of the shoulder is lifted.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	Then address the fracture to your side, and if you find debris, if you must, make an incision; and force the pieces lightly, and if the bones cannot join together by any means, if there is a fracture at one of the incisors that you have made; but that you put a cushion under the shoulder to prevent infection.
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os; et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	And it seems like a spoon, and is not at all crooked, and should be as wide as it can cover, according to the size of the bone and the nature of the work; and there should be two holes, as you see, one large and one small, as is the way of closing a wound that has been made when treating the bone; and when you are sure of the closure of the wound, if the wound is small, or if you doubt the closure of the wound, if you put a dressing and bandage over the wound, according to its quantity.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille .i. drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if the wound comes open again, if there is much blood, apply oil of rose, alum, and wine, and place above.</start_of_turn>
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier; puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant; et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint; et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors; puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	The tightening of the bone, when it is suffering from wounds and is being treated, is that you put on the bone powdered gypsum and egg white, and put on soft bandages, and put a ball of lead on the heel; then take a great band of silk, then put on two layers of bandage, and put on the gypsum; then take a subtle pin of three twoths of an inch in length, and wrap around that bundle, so that the head of the bundle remains in place; and put the pin on the bulge, and turn the bundle on its collar, and take off the heel of the wound, and the wound of the shoulder; and leave the chest part rest, and when you see that the ligament holds the bulge without any risk, and you see clearly that the pin does not move from the fractured bone, if the reward is repeated, and if the ligament is stretched; and do the patient rest on his back, and put under his heel a little pillow to lift up the shoulder; if you align the fracture by aligning the shoulder blade, or you bind the arm to the collar, and do not unbind it until it is badly inconvenient. Keep it like that for twenty days; then repeat the gypsum if necessary, and strain and leave it in place until it is restored; and it is usually restored in about eight days, and in less time for most people.
de la brisure de l’espaule	Then resume the displacement, if you see that it has to be done, and hold it and leave it thus until it is restored; and it is usually restored in about twenty-six days, and in less time to any home.
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en xxv, Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	When the scapula is fractured or displaced from its normal position, it will not stay in the middle unless forced by pressure; if the limb appears according to the figure of the fracture, and is reduced according to its natural form, in all the ways that you can; then put the limb into a powder with abundant egg white, and bandage it loosely, and put on a double drape; then put on a broad and subtle splint, a little wider than the scapula, and keep the splint firm so that it does not move from its place; and look at the limb every moment to see if it is improving; and every time it becomes soft, if you re-extend the splint, and put the limb back in its normal position, and let the patient rest on his side; and the scapula will be restored in twenty days or less. And when this number is completed, if it heals, and be joyful, for it is not a bone that easily breaks.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a piece of the bone hangs forward, and does not yield at all, if it remains in place, and the bone itself, do as we have said in the bursting of the forcele to appease the pain of incision.
de la brisure dou pis	And if a piece of the bone hangs forward, and does not yield at all, if it remains in place, and the bone itself, do as we have said in the bursting of the forcele to appease the pain of incision.
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer.	The body is never completely broken in the middle, but it often happens thus; but it breaks often from excessive force.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	When it is broken in two, if it declines downward, and causes the patient great pain, and weakness, and vomiting, and by chance blood flows from the broken bones, and all that is well.</start_of_turn>
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met .i. cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des .ij. costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en .i. drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is this: if the patient lies prone on his back, put one cushion between the scapulae, then press the scapulae together, and reassemble the ribs at your hands, and subtly bring into equal all the ways you can, until the bone is set as it should; then put on bandages and stamp under the staple of salt, or other soft substance, and wrap in one bandage, and bind on the bone break, if it does not move; and turn the limb round about the back, and strain gently, and reward chest pain an hour later, and if it relaxes, strain again; and if it will not come loose, by corrosion or by purulent discharge, or pain or swelling, if you are in a hurry, and it comes loose, loosen the bandage, and rasp off the dressing, and address what has happened in the manner of treatment; then rest the dressing, and strain until it is healed.
de la brisure des costes	And the restoration is this: if the patient lies prone on his back, put one cushion between the shoulder blades, then press the shoulder blades together, and reassemble the ribs at your hands, and subtly bring into equal all the ways you can, until the bone is set as it should; then put on bandages and stamp under the staple of salt, or other soft substance, and wrap in one bandage, and bind on the bone break, if it does not move; and turn the limb round about the back, and strain gently, and reward chest pain an hour later, and if it relaxes, strain again; and if it will not come loose, by corrosion or by purulent discharge, or pain or swelling, if you are in a hurry, and it comes loose, loosen the bandage, and rasp off the dressing, and address what has happened in the manner of treatment; then rest the dressing, and strain until it is healed.
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	The breaks of the ribs only come from the great joints below the back, and at the shoulder, and do not happen for anything other than because they are slimy; and the patient feels well at the inquiry as two.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	The restoration is when you put the fracture back in its place, as it should be.</start_of_turn
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	And then put on a dressing, and bind it with a bandage, if you need to.</start_of_turn
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And if the fracture of the ribs is downward, if the patient feels great pain, and swelling, as with pleurisy, for the bone pierces the membrane; and there is swelling, and vomiting, and a great discharge of blood, which is a great grief, and they have put much pain on it.</start_of_turn>
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if it is said of these things that it is necessary to administer food that inflates the belly, to push out the fracture.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not do this, for after the catarrh has passed, life does not come back by itself.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if it comes back, let it be well.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And they say that no one puts on a bandage on the limb to soak up moisture, for it is like reason; however, there is doubt that the bandage will not retain the excess moisture on the limb due to weakness.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And they say that no one should cover the limb with coarse linen soaked in oil, and put on tents between the ribs to make the layer even, then either cure the pleurisin, meat and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot bear from the bone that points towards the navel, and there is doubt in the patient, if you can open above the fractured bone, and can put in a support, then you must cut the bone slightly, and dress it lightly, and then stitch the two layers of the wound, if it is large, and cure it with dressings, until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if pus comes out from the wound, put on moist cloths soaked in rose oil, and put on the limb; and treat until the limb stops bleeding at the wound, and do not touch the wound side or it must, until it is healed.
de la brisure dou col	And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot bear from the bone that points to the navel, and there is doubt in the patient, if it is commanded to cut above the broken rib, and to put in a sponge; then one must cut the bone lightly, and then sew up the two layers of the wound, if it is large, and cure it with sponges, as long as it is healthy. And if there is pus coming from the abscess, if one puts on wet cloths soaked in rose oil, and puts on the limb; and cure while the limb is held in place, as long as the rib is not displaced or it must be displaced from its fracture.
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	Never comes a fracture of the bone of the collar, and often it rains; and also at the thorn of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	And when this happens to no avail, and you see that it will heal or not, if you take care that you see its hands softened and limp and dead, and that you cannot move or stretch them, and when you prick them with a needle, if you do not feel them.</start_of_turn>
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	The wounds are mortal in many positions, and if you move them and feel well when you strain and prick them, the wound is saved, and the patient will be cured, if you put on treatment.</start_of_turn
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	And if anything similar comes to the spine of the back, you must know whether there is blood or not; if so, take care that the piece is softened if it is hard, and that the accident is not in the hands or on the back, for wind and vomiting ensue; and when it has been soothed on the belly, vomiting ensues spontaneously.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	When it is soothed on the back and it vomits, it will not be able to do it again.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	The patient is mortal: if he does not work diligently in his cure.</start_of_turn>
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this does not happen, if the thing is lighter.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the treatment is that if there is a wound at the edge of the bone, put upon the spine oil of rose or oil of nutmeg of an egg, until it is calmed; then put upon one of the comfortable and absorbent plasters, and bind it with a thread, and command the patient to rest; and do not sleep on that part where there is pain, until it is healed.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if a bone breaks, if you cover on the limb; and stretch the bone, then assemble the two ends of the wound, if it is great, with a splint, and bind it up securely; and if the fragment of the bone is broken, which is called the "break of the marrow", if it is in your left hand pouch, and put it equal to the right hand at your side, then put on the dressing and the bandage, if you have need of it; then strain it, and if there are broken bones underneath, if you leave it there, and stretch the bone, and cure the wound until it is healed.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	...and if the thigh bone is fractured...
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	When the thigh bone is fractured, if there is no other wound at the head; and if it persists, and declines downward, and comes to the patient great pain, swelling, and inflammation of that which is fractured.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And the restoration is that you extend your hand over the fracture, until you reach the break; and take hold of the broken fragments and their position; and if the break is only at the head, if you make the break even, until it is in its natural position.</start_of_turn>
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the break is on the side or it declines downwards, if you make the patient sit on his belly, until the restoration of this break is apparent.</start_of_turn
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	When you have placed the limb even, if you place on the support, then place on a staple of lead or copper, and strain the bandage, so that it does not move; and use the thumb and index finger to hold the limb steady, as long as the limb is even.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And instruct the patient to sleep on his side, or on his back.</start_of_turn>
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	And if swelling comes, do not touch it, until the swelling subsides; then put on what we have said before; and then return to rest, and strain it as it should be strained, if there is no other mishap; and this is the method.</start_of_turn>
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	De la brisure de l’ajutoire.
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren .i. fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	From the dislocation of the shoulder
Et lie as .ij. chiés .ij. liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus .i. siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	And so there are two methods for restoring it: one is to take one fist full of moistor and hold the patient’s arm above their seat; then bend the patient’s arm towards the shoulder, and put a curve in the fist, and then put the fist on no weight or have the assistant hold it down; and put the eyes level with the hands clasped together, until the dislocation returns as it should.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a .ij. ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout .i. liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And the other method is to support the patient’s shoulder and tie the arm to their collarbone, and command the assistants to hold what is on the dislocation at their hands, and to hold down the scapulae at their sides.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	And if you see that the extraction is too strong, strain the liquid from the bladder, from the bladder and from the testicles; extend the testicles to their part.</start_of_turn
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	If the shoulder blade is close to the head of the shoulder, command the patient to place the thumb of the middle finger on the lower part of the shoulder blade, and the other on the upper part, of the shoulder blade; and in like manner if the fracture is on the upper part, command the patient to place the thumb lightly, with force, as long as the fracture is equal on both the shoulder and the upper part; then set the fracture, if possible, and hold it, so that no aftershocks occur.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a .vij. jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	And if after-shocks come, do not strain for more than thirteen days; put on a thick dressing of lint and rose oil until the after-shocks are calmed; then strain, and the way to strain is that you place the bandage over the bristle, then assemble the limb on the shoulder and put your hand on the shoulder or on the chest; put on the bandage and strain the limb, and the arm will be in its place, without anything hindering it, or without the bone being fractured.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele .i. doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure .iij. dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	And if you doubt that the bone is not moving, use splints, and place on the bristle a splint that is wider and stronger than the others, and put between the splints two pieces of wood that are equal in size to the thickness of the bristle; then strain on the splints, as I have said above in the beginning of this chapter, more strongly and less loosely.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	If you see the swelling subside, and the tightening, as we have said, when you have restored the limb, and you doubt the fracture is complete, if you leave it uninjured until the seventh day, as we have said; then observe for three days whether the swelling subsides or inflammation or discoloration does not occur in the limb, or that the limb does not regain its natural movement due to excessive tension
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	If the head of the shoulder, as we have said,
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	If no such accident has occurred, if he has slept for three days or more, and the patient lies on his back with his hands on his stomach; and give the sufferer a cushion filled with wool equally, and watch for an hour or two to see whether the limb remains stiff, or if the ligaments are softened; if the case is urgent by the power of medicine, and do the work that we have before us, in part as the meat must be at the first movement; and when it starts to recover, if it is large.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	It is customary that the shoulder and limb must be restored within forty days in total; and then one must retake and administer oil baths and ointments to the affected part to restore it correctly
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	If the constriction is painful and emboldened, if it persists for more than a day or two.
de la brisure du bras	In the event that the arm is fractured,
Li bras est compos de .ij. os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm is composed of three bones, which are called the "radius" and the "ulna". One is small and the other is large. The small one is inside and the large one is outside; sometimes the large bone breaks alone, or the small one, and sometimes both together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	When the small bones are fractured, restoration is easy, and the healing; but when the large bone is fractured, if the healing is poor, it is more painful than when they are fractured whole.</start_of_turn>
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	If only the small bone is fractured, if the limb is slightly extended and put into its place.</start_of_turn
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	If the large bone is fractured, if the limb is drawn more strongly; and it is extended over the thumb and keep the wrist of the hand higher than the other, and the small bone must be lower than the others, and the patient must be crossed over itself, and the thumb in front of it higher than the patient suffers no pain; then extend the limb from the elbow to the wrist, or to the thumb, and another assistant at the other side.</start_of_turn
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And then he sets the eye equal, according to its best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if in the fracture the limb is split into pieces, if one puts in a pin without removing any splinter that may be left in, and you cannot remove it, you must leave it and let it heal naturally as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if with the fracture there is a wound, as I have mentioned in the singular chapter; take the cure.</start_of_turn>
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	And when restoring the eye, if there are afterimages, if glue I drape with rosin and white wax, that it is neither too firm nor too soft; and I drape it superficially, until the afterimages are appeased.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	And then I put on the cerate, and put in place the filling of fine powder with abundant eggshell; and I put on the stars, and make the main star the strongest, and a little wider than the others; and let there be six stars or arms in various positions: either that the star is in one of the bones, or in two; and I tighten more on the star than elsewhere, and I touch less frequently, as I said at the beginning of this chapter; and let the cloths that are on the star be soft and moist, and neither too hard nor too rough; and let the thread, which is strained, be of linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And warm the limb and the joint afterwards every day.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	And if any evil accident happens to the limb, if like itching that happens to the limb, then you must know that you must raise the limb with warm water, until the itching is calmed; and leave the limb still until it has rested.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	Then restart the movement, and if the tendons are softened and the bones are loosened, and similar things, if necessary
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses .i. poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	If you take care that the swelling does not come back to the limb, because it is too tight, if you must soften it somewhat, and leave it for some days, until the swelling goes down, and then strain it.</start_of_turn>
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	And if none of these things that we have said do not happen to the patient, then leave it for twenty days.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	or perhaps after that, then he must hold his hands to his chest, and keep his collar even, and be careful of movement and vomiting, and sleep on his back; and change the dressing every thirty days or every fifty, and sometimes every twenty days, according to the composition and the temperament of the patient
de la brisure de la main	From the fracture of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	From the fracture of the hand: At the back of the hand there are two bones that often break; and it does not come out but pours out many times.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin.	And when the bone of the hand is broken or split, if it is known that the patient is limping, if he is sitting straight before him equally; then put his hand on the extended cloth and stretch out the broken bones, and put them even with the thumbs, until they are well joined; and put on the plaster and the bandage, if the abscess does not come out, then put on a splint as much as is necessary; and be wrapped in one cloth.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	And if the fracture is on the edge of the limb towards the belly of the hand, if you make a loop of bandage, and command the patient to hold his broken limb firmly; and then stretch from a long cloth, and be the splint as great as the bone of the hand, and strain it, as it should be.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	If the fracture is on the side, then command that you place a splint above and below at the root, so that the hand is overextended and straight, then bind it all around the hand, and seal the gap between the two.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en .i. tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	If the fracture does not come from either side, if it is the pouch, if it is equal, as it should be; and strain with the root, and if you see that it does not move, put a right splint small enough to raise the fracture, and do not move it; and if the fracture is elsewhere, as in the index or one of the others, if it is equal, and bind it with the two fingers that follow; or bind them all together, holding the wrist tightly, or put on a splint, as for a pouch; and take care in restoring and disposing of the wound, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	of the broken limb
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie .i. liien desus la briseure, et .i. autre desoz.	The bones of the thigh are often fractured, and it is well seen when they twist before and behind; and the restoration is when it is bound with a thread above the fracture and below.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	The patient lies on his face, and extends his limbs equally; and it is when the fracture is within the bone itself
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	If the fracture is near the root of the thigh bone, if one of the ligaments above the ankle and the other the ligament below the fracture.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	And if it is near the knee, then either the ligament above the knee or the ligament below the fracture must be taut; then place the limb parallel to its natural position, and then apply the dressing and bandage, without which there will be no healing.</start_of_turn>
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	If there is an abscess that has burst, let it rest peacefully and then return to your work and your treatment; the bandage is made in a timely manner.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	It is necessary to wrap the fracture with a strong bandage doubled over twice or thrice; and to drain the excess blood, then bend the limb until the nails reach the root of the nail; and pass a thread long between the thigh and the limb from below the knee, and pass the thread over the top of the bone; then bend the limb and the thigh together, and place the bandage under the fracture, and place a splint on the limb; and put between the limb and the thigh eight cloth squares to equal the tension, and as you go up the fracture and less you strain; and take out two threads that you passed between the limb and the thigh, and tie three knots on top, and leave as much tension as there is no displacement or swelling or anything similar.</start_of_turn
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	If there is an abscess that has burst, if it comes loose, address what has come, as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of bone that prick, it is necessary to extract them; and if this cannot be done, it is necessary to cut the limb open and drain the pus.  The treatment is as we have said, until it is healed.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	And never is the bone broken in this place where I put the needles, as in the arm or the shoulder; nevertheless, in the restoration made in this place, I do not cause any pain to the patient.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en .l. jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And the swelling that remains in the bone is restored in one or two days, or less or more, according to the variations of temperaments.</start_of_turn>
de la ruelle dou genoil	of the rue du genouil</start_of_turn
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	Hairs that are in the groin region have often burst, but they fall out many times.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	If they break, if not just a split, or a wound, there is pain and injury, and this feeling is very bad.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is set right, do this: put everything that is round back to its place until it is firmly assembled again; then put on the dressing, and put on a round cushion, if you need it, and strain it as it should be strained; then reward all the orders that we have said before, as for example incision and other like that; if you put into practice each of these things that it should be done, until it is healed.
de la brisure de la jambe	And if it is set right, do this: put everything that is round back to its place until it is firmly assembled again; then put on the dressing, and put on a round cushion, if you need it, and strain it as it should be strained; then reward all the orders that we have said before, as for example incision and other like that; if you put into practice each of these things that it should be done, until it is healed.
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	Hairs that are on the leg have two bones, of which one is called the «muscle», and the other is called the «femur». And there is often a breaking of these bones as it happens in the arm, and because of this the restoration is just as in the arm, and the work is like that
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if a bone is fractured near the surface, twist the limb forward.</start_of_turn>
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz.	And if the large bone is broken, there is great pain, and one can see it clearly; and there is bursting of the marrow
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	When therefore the fracture is slight, and there is more than one piece, the extension must be less severe and more gentle; and the limb must be aligned according to your virtue.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren .ij. faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en .ij. leus .i. bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent .i. bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have completed your work, if you take .ij. strips of coarse cloth that cover the limb from one side to the other, and be as long as the limb from the knee to the toes; then wrap in .ij. layer of lint from under and from over, and bind firmly in the middle, and with this binding the limb will not bend either to the right or to the left, and that is good; and no one will administer any more than .ij. dose of pain that is long as the limb, and if there is a wound, and put on the limb to prevent movement, and do it properly in the fracture or there is an injury; and move each joint of the limb, to see if there is any swelling or other accident; if the cure until it is healed.</start_of_turn
de la brisure des os dou piet	Of the fracture of bones at their root.
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle, there is no fracture, but in the bones of the root of the limb there is no fracture at all, and two must suffice; there is no other means than to wait until healing is complete.</start_of_turn>
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a .ij. chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	And if there is a fracture in the bones of the root of the limb, and you see these bones pressing against each other, if you put the limb so that it hangs down to the earth like a bird in flight, and then put the limb back in its place, as soon as the bones are raised, then put on the dressing and bandage, and put a little bandage under the limb at the joint, then restrain the limb from moving, and cover it with a cloth bandage.</start_of_turn
Et quant .iij. jors ou .iiij. seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when two or three days have passed, if the limb is healed, because you will find the bones equal, whether fractured or dislocated.</start_of_turn>
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a .ij. ou .iij., ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	And if there are two fractures, if you restore them as we have said, then hold the hand still; then place under the fracture a splint according to the length of the fracture, and make it wider than the width of the fracture, and put on the dressing that I have said; and if there are three or more, fracture them and place under each fracture a splint according to its quantity, covered with a bandage of linen, and strain the dressing from the bone.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And remember that you must not neglect the other things that I have said about other fractures, as we have said; and secure each accident as it should be secured.</start_of_turn>
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	from the fracture of the clavicle bone
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the bone is fractured in a woman, if she sits up, the wound must be elevated to the painful part and held in place by the back; then fill the wound with wool, and put as much in as I stand; then withdraw the woman, and keep her back and front supported, and then pull out the wool, until it reaches the bottom of the wound; and bring back the bone with the wool underneath. When she sees blood, if the bone is pulled out, and when she has bled, she must rest for seven days or more: if the fracture is restored, and if you see it, take a bladder of vinegar and bind it to the wound, and keep the bladder over the wound until the bladder is emptied; then the wound will return to its natural state.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	And when the bone of a man or a woman is broken, if you restore it as we have said concerning the thigh bone; these fractures are not hidden from the one who placed his study and his art upon them, and they understand my book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	For these fractures signify in many cases the right way of restoration: understand then.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse .iij. jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	In the groin, when it is fractured, take a goose neck and bind it up; then cover it with cloth, and leave it for two days or until it is healed, and it will be perfectly healed then.
de brisure avec plaie	Of sudden with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	In case of sudden fracture with wound, even if it is great, as for the bone of the thigh or the shoulder or similar, that it should be sound now, if what we have said is true
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound is sound, if the clot of vitriol remains, if you have nothing else, then resume the fracture in the same hour, or the following, if there is no other sign of fracture.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if there is swelling at the fracture, if the swelling persists until the next day, leave the restoration until the swelling has subsided, and do not touch either the third or the fourth part, for you will risk causing further damage.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the bone is fractured and is apparent through the skin, cover it immediately with your hands, lightly extending your fingers.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a .vij. dois ou .viij. de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne .iii. ou iiij., selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if extension does not appear to you, hold this instrument of iron, which is about the length of three or four fingers, and its width is according to the extent of the wound; for this reason it is necessary to press three or four fingers, according to what is necessary in the wound of a fracture; and let it be round and firm, so that it does not press against the limb at your work, or be placed before and behind, and large in the middle forward.
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	And it is called "palainche," because it must be known that the curved limb should be placed above the head of the apparent bone; and once again, when it returns, it must be equal on one side as the other
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And if the fracture is subtle, and the instruments cannot firmly grasp the bone, if you must hold the head of the bone, as long as the instruments have possession of it
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	If you cannot restore the bone, as we have said, if you grasp with a covering instrument that can reach that area, or if you must incision or burn, at your peril; then withdraw that which is remaining embedded in the bone, with rough rasps and scanty pus.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	And when the limb is returned to its place, the patient experiences great pain afterward, swelling that is not in its natural position.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	If you do so until it is in its place, then more I drape it in black wine stain, and so it should be; and do not put any cerote or other thing on the wound except oil, lest it cause putrefaction and corruption; then administer stars when you have restored the limb, and leave the wound uncovered, and close the covering all around, according to the quantity of the wound, and take care that the wound is not strained with the breaking; and many times this has been done to the fool, and has caused the patient to die or be crippled or caused decay on many occasions; so let the astringency be more gentle and soft than the other breaks.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	And if the wound is small or large, and you doubt that the treatment will not suffice, as we have said, and you feel pain in the limb, if it does not suffice to put on bandages; then cover round about with coarse cloth instead of bandages, and bind them tight.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And when you see after one or two days that the wound is healing, if the bone that you put on the whole has become loose, and there is swelling of wounds, as with swelling of medicines and similar things.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre .ij. fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And you must stretch the limb twice a day, in the morning and in the evening, until it is soldered and healed.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And you must keep the limb perfectly still in some measure that it can move easily without causing harm
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	If it is dislocated again, and it cannot stay in place, it must be reset while the limb is still slightly bent, as there are small pieces of bone that must be broken in order to stop the pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	And if fistula arises in the limb, or other manner of corruption, if it is necessary to cure it, according to what is said in this chapter above
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	And if the bone is fractured and opened upon the limb, as the bone of the thigh or the shoulder, and other bones of the great limbs, if I do not treat it, for many times death comes from this; but I leave it until it has healed; by chance it will heal by itself after twenty or thirty days, and then I will cure the wound, if I wish; and if I do not wish, I will leave it
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	The hairs which come out from the beard
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	The hairs which come out from the beard come out many times after the heat of the summer, even when it is close to the joint, and it is a helpful thing to see how the limb is positioned; and by chance it cannot do its natural work.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Beware then that you take care: if you administer astringent medicines, such as aloes, incense, and myrrh, and sarcocoll, acacia, and the like, do not take any of these things, or all of them together, and mix them with wine that is astringent or with plenty of egg or with oil; and put them on the wound in bandages, and strain it well, and do not remove it from the hand for days; and then dislocate it, and do it again, until the dislocations are bony; or you strain it on a well-made piece of lead; for the property of lead is that it hardens all the swellings under the limb; and if the dislocation has already become hard like stone, and it is necessary to break it, if the swelling above has burst, and to make the excess apparent; or you leave it without a drain, until it is bony, and cure it until it is healed.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	Weak limb after the bandage.
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the break of the bone is restored, and hangs limp after the limb is weak and limp, if there is any cause for it: because it was too tightly bound and was not bound properly; or because there are too many bands, and cannot come back to the limb naturally; or because of many wounds; or from too great movements, not even in its proper place; or because there is much blood in its body, if it is weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the cure is that you make the patient eat and make the limb firm, as long as it does not swell in him; and give him bath, and make him joyful and cheerful; then put on a bandage over the limb, so that the bandage attracts to great nourishment, and the blood flows often hot, until the nourishment comes back to the limb; and restore it to its natural position.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	The limb is bent after the illness.
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai .i. emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	When the limb is bent after restoration, and the bone is broken open, and the limb is deformed, all this without damaging its natural work: for it is not believed that one should break the limb anew, as some fools say; and many have suffered from this treatment in our land; this work is blamed, and many deaths result from it; however, if the swelling and pain are fresh, if you can raise them with warm water or soft herbs, such as meadowsweet leaves, and roots, and honey, and similar things; and you make a soft dressing, like with aquaint well done, and take the nourishing draught of meadowsweet, and mix it with grease of gelline or olive oil, and make a dressing on top; or you take fat figs, and grind them with horse dung, and similar medicines that alleviate the swelling.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	And never is the bone loosened by continuous rubbing and for a long time with wet hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And let there be no movement to the limb for an hour
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	If the dislocation is swollen and hardened, like a stone, and requires iron tongs, if you cover it up to the bone, make a superficial incision; and put cushion and packing in the wound.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	If the dislocation is swollen and hardened, like a stone, and requires iron tongs, if you cover it up to the bone, make a superficial incision; and put cushion and packing in the wound.
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation comes to no avail, if it can now be remedied.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors; toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	For if it is delayed, if by chance it swells up again, and by chance one tries to move it again; for this reason it must not be moved while it is swollen: many times it brings swelling and other pains; however, when this happens, if you make the patient comfortable, then leave it alone, until the swelling has subsided; then raise the limb with warmth and oil, and move it gently, and cure each limb as it comes to its place.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have ordered the chapters concerning dislocations from the shoulder to the foot
des mandibules	Des mandibules.
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	The jaws are loosened and the dislocation of both is like this: when they are united to their bones, and softened by moisture; or when they are entirely loosened, and hang towards the chin, and close the mouth that it cannot hold it, cannot close its mouth, and engulfs its tongue with speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is slight, if it returns by itself in several positions.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie; et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	And if it is whole and complete, if you must move it urgently, do not grasp it; and in such a way that the servant holds the patient’s hand near the root of the dislocation of the jaw in the mouth, if the dislocation is two parts; and the other hand must be loosened, to make them even; and command the patient to soften his jaw, his teeth, and move them all around
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And look that you make the thing even, until it returns to its place.</start_of_turn>
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les .ij. mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And if it returns grasped, even if both mandibles are together, if they arise with hot water and oil, keep them lightly; do not force the return, as we have said.</start_of_turn>
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens; et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules; et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	When they are restored even, and the patient’s mouth is well closed with gentle pressure, lay on moist cloths moistened in cerate made of rose oil and wax, then bind them lightly with linen; and let the patient rest on his back, with his arms resting between two cushions, so that they do not move neither to the right nor to the left, neither to the front nor to the back, but take a little nourishment, until the pains are over, and keep the jaw firmly closed.
Et se les .ij. mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	If the jaw bones do not manage to be reset at a single hour, and are not firmly converted to their place, then fever and swelling become accustomed, and by chance solution of the belly, and by chance vomiting of pure bile.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en .viiij. jors.	When you see that, then know that it is a loss; and many times death is the consequence in eight days.</start_of_turn>
de la forcelle	of the forceps.</start_of_turn>
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The forceps cannot remove the bone from its place without causing further damage, and is always damaging when it is used.</start_of_turn
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint; et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez; et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	When the patient lies still on his back and extends his arms; then press the limb towards your palm, and it will return; then put on the support and bind it, and strain it; and the limb which is towards the shoulder cannot be dislocated; if it does so once, if you leave it dislocated, if you must restore it, as we have said; then put on the support and the bandage, and strain it, and command the patient to rest until he is healed; and in the meantime restore the shoulder, when it is freed from its place.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	De la dislocation de l’espaule.
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc; et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	Hair that has grown on the shoulder is not loosened except in three ways: firstly, it is loosened at the side of the shoulder towards the armpit; secondly, at the side of the elbow; and sometimes it is loosened at the top; thus indeed; do not loosen it from behind on the shoulder, neither from below on the nerves; and often it is loosened from below towards the shoulder, even among those who have little hair, for in these jumps it is greatly hindered; among those who have enough hair, the jump is painful, and it returns painful.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And by chance, there happen to be blows or fractures, and swell the shoulder from a deep abscess, and care that it is loosened by that.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	Therefore, you must certainly be sure, until you are certain; and then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste; et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens; et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier; et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	It is known that a dislocation occurs when it is twisted towards the armpit, and it distinguishes between the healthy shoulder and the sick shoulder; and you will find between their diversity an indentation at the head of the shoulder, and the armpit touches the head of the shoulder, just as if it were a wound; and the patient cannot move their arm to its place, neither can they move in any way; and thus, if it has been dislocated upwards, if it is not hidden, since you will find it manifested by touching; and this manner of dislocation is not sufficient to bring it back, when it is new, or when the patient is sick.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	And the way is that the assistant holds the painful limb upwards, then places his thumbs below the armpit, and holds the joint forcefully upwards; and the assistant holds the limb, and extends it upwards, because it is put below; if necessary.</start_of_turn
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree; puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide; et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere: et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar; et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	If she does not come as we have said above, if you must, the patient must be bathed in warm water; and give him a soft and soothing nourishment, such as broth of elderberry, fenugreek, and melilot in water, or give it to him directly. Then either let the patient lie on his back and put under his buttocks a cushion of linen equal in size, not too soft nor too hard, and put his hand on the cushion, and support his shoulder joint firmly, and treat the hand of the patient; and another attendant will hold his shoulder firmly, so that it does not move backward. When the shoulder joint returns to its place, if you see that it remains in this manner: and it is that you make present a person who is greater than the patient; and stand behind the patient’s shoulder, and stretch the shoulder joint from under the patient’s buttock, and raise the buttock up, so that the patient hangs in the air; and another attendant will treat the patient’s hand backward toward his belly.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And if the patient is too light, if he can hold nothing heavy, the dislocation will return immediately.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile; puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment; et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	And so we will repeat it in another way: if you insert a long pin into the earth, and the head of the shoulder is as high as the fist and not too thick or thin; then put on the patient’s hand, but let there be a bandage over it, and let the patient’s arm be resting on a long cushion; then extend the patient’s hand from the other side and the joint will return to its place immediately. And if it does not return with all these things we have said, do this remedy: take two large pins and three thin ones, which have the head bent inwards so as to enter under the scapula, according to this form:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus .i. eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	If these things fail to restore it, if you wish to perform this cure: take one thumb and two fingers of great length, which have the tip rounded like a mouse entering through an opening in the wall, and place them under the armpit, following this form. Then support the shoulder with a cloth, so that it does not bleed the patient, and place it under the armpit of the patient. Extend your arms above the shoulder, and support the arm at the wrist, and place the thumb on the index finger of a fist, and extend the hand outward. The joint is now restored.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is restored, in whatever way, if you wish to keep it in place, put under the armpit a square ball of wool of equal size, and put on it a pad of powdered meal, with incense and alum of egg, on the whole shoulder and around the joint, then strain under the armpit immediately, and keep the limb resting on the pad, and embrace the hand at its collar, and keep the hands still together.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés .v. jors ou .vij., et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And it is necessary that he move the limb gently while it is comfortable, because it will heal faster; and then move it more vigorously after five or six days, and move it. And if it is stiff and cannot be softened, then it is healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint is forced from its place by moisture or for some other reason, you must administer cautery at three punctures, as is placed before or alongside the cautery.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés .vij. jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And if you do all this, and the joint remains dislocated after six days, and the limb still cannot be raised, then the nerves at the head of the shoulder are compressed or stretched or softened; and if the joint never heals in its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The shoulder dislocation which is from the front, and the arm, or behind, if it is done by impulse, and extension of the hands, and is administered with another bandage; and it heals as long as it is sound.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after healing there comes pain in the limb, and later movement, if the patient uses the limb many times, as long as that pain is relieved, and returns to its first nature.
de la dislocation dou coute	of the dislocation that remains.
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	The joint is dislocated at the point where it is usually stable, and the same thing happens at the front and the back; and it is often detached, both front and back, and the dislocation is not easily remedied, for we see it clearly and feel it well; and it is detached in this way.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	And when you join the patient with the salve, if he sees it openly.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	For the joint is shaken, and cannot hold his arm, touch his shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And must keep it still as before, because if it were to come loose again, if it should ever happen, it will bring grief to bring it back; and by chance it cannot be brought back whole, even if it is at the back; for it is better to leave it as it is than to cause further pain, and by chance there comes death.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes .ij. mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And if it is restored again, when it is such that it can be brought back, you must extend your hand with both hands; and let your arms be spread out, and your hands down to the level of the patient's shoulders front and back, and hold the joint firmly together, or at the root of the bone, until it returns to its place
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is in front, if it returns when the patient doubles their hand over their hand, and grasps from the root of the thumb which is dislocated.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large; et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne; et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	And if he does not see it return to its place, if you administer strong extension; and if two ministers extend the arm and hold it, if it does not move at the extension; then turn the arm from the shoulder, and when you have enveloped a double-long and wide bandage; and when you look at the joint with the hand, if there is any oil on the joint to lubricate it, then restore the joint immediately; and when it is in its place, put on dry plaster with egg yolk, and the strain is formed, and bend the arm to the patient’s chest, and leave it there for some days, then remove it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	When the joint is firmly in its place, if you loosen the limb and leave it; if you see that the joint does not hold well, repeat the plastering and the limb, and leave it until it is firmly set; then take it off.</start_of_turn>
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain; et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	If he feels pain after the joint has been reset, and it moves, bathe and rub thoroughly, and press until it is eased; or put upon the joint a poultice of mutton fat, then leave it for a day and a night, and then draw out the bone, and pour in oil; and when it has sweated, rub the joint gently, then put the poultice back, and then draw out or bathe; do this twice or thrice, until it is healed. And if you see that it returns to its place, put upon a moist poultice of rue chaff with vinegar, and strain it; if it returns to its place again.
li dislocation de la main	When the hand is dislocated...
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	When the joint of the hand is loosened, and its return is laborious, more so than the others, it must be immediately reset in its place without delay, even if there is swelling or if there is a fracture.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	If you put the diseased hand on a table, and extend the patient, look at the hand that is being put on, so that he puts his palm on the appearance of the joint, and press until it returns whole, you must look to see if it is well placed; then put the patient’s hand behind his hand on the table during extension and reduction.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	If the dislocation is at the back of the hand, let the patient place the back of their hand on the table, and I will look and put their hand on the appearance of the joint.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If it returns now, that is good. If not, if the strain of the resting muscles is appeased after the incisions, and you leave it in its original position, it will resume its course.</start_of_turn>
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte; et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	And if it cannot bear it, and you do not set it in place after a few days, the joint will become stiff; and nothing will help the patient except that his nerves are severed, or an artery is cut. If there is no other reason for straining except to cauterize, do so in this case, and by chance that is the only thing that will help.</start_of_turn
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse .v. jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hands are in place, if you put on the dressing that we have mentioned, then strain and leave it for three days, then remove it and leave it like that.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	If he cannot move it easily, and there is no pain, if the wound is filled with warm liquid, and it is washed until it is healed.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre; adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins; et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	Never is the head of the arm loosened from its shoulder-blade at the chest, never at the back of the palm or belly; therefore is the head loosened, and the dislocation is held in your pouches until it returns, then support the head of the arm and incline it towards the part where it is joined; and leave it there for two days, and then put it back in its place; and do not touch it, as we have said, and loosen it, and move it, and bind it up; do this often, until it is tight, and do the same if it is loosened at the belly of the arm, and do as you have done before, until it is healed; and do the same if it is loosened from another part.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	and do the same if it is dislocated at the wrist, and do as you have done before, until it is healed; and do the same if it is dislocated from another part.
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the shoulder blade or the collarbone is loosened, or if there are several loosenings, if no remedy is found, for the patient is in haste.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»: li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	And the sign that it is that the blood egestions flow in the contrary direction, it cannot be held, and many times it is softened in no limb, or the two thighs or two arms or one leg. And many times the marrow of the bones moves at three parts; that which moves at the back is called "gilbosite": it is cured if you restore that the gilbosite has come from childhood: if there is no cure or healing of the whole.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit; mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	And that which comes from sitting or from blows or from similar things, they say the old methods of treatment with great words, or it has no great benefit; but I have abridged it according to my intention, and I have formed instruments in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit; et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis; et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece; puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles; et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons; et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	I say that in the swelling that comes before the wound, there is no health; and as much as that which comes straight across two ribs, one can cure nothing except that which comes from behind, as I have said; and that the patient should be placed with his face down one inch equal, and should have a strain from his toes up, that he should not move; then I put a bandage on the head of the wound, and another at the toes, and I bind up the limbs of the patient, and I put on gloves and sleeves; and two assistants know the bands, one at the head and the other at the toes, among the two bands; and they must be well closed, the bandage as I have said, and the patient should put his palms on the spine until it returns.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee; et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	And if it does not return by this treatment, take a table three palms long, and hold the thumbs at the edge, and let the patient sit on the side; grasp the head of the table at the edge and put the middle of the table on the spine; and place the thumbs on the other side of the table, and press firmly, until it returns to its place. If you see that it has not returned, do it with the thumb that is turned at the wrist.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc; et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet; et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	And take two fingers at the head of the patient’s arm of a great span, and grasp two others, and between each finger, put a sow and a nail, a palm’s length; and in each finger put a hole, or the nail is crooked, and let the fingers be firmly fixed in the earth, so that they do not move; and between two fingers let there be one turning, so that the thread that turns returns, and between two turns put two small fingers of a palm’s length, so that the turning returns; and then join the thread that is between the armpits to the turning at the head, and the other thread to the pieces at the other turning, and keep the minister turning his turning all along the thread, and the master puts the spine even as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	When it is even, put upon a dry dressing with abundance of eggs, and then press, and then support with a tab of three fingers' length, that it may reach the root of the rib and the part of the spine that is painful; then bind with a thread as we have said, and use the patient with gentle support, as long as he is sane; and if nothing comes to an end of the sanity, if it is necessary, administer soothing and calming medicines, as we have said before; and under no circumstances give a dose of purgative, and under no circumstances let it appear in the lower spine of the back, and take care that it is not a dislocation; for it is the bone that has opened, for which we must not presume: by chance comes death.
des dislocations de la hainche	hip dislocation
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc .iiij. parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	Hairs that are attached to the hip and shoulder joints only become loose from dislocations alone, and do not come out with other joints; and the hip joint is loosened in three parts: within and without, and in front and behind; and the more within it is loosened, the more loosened is in front and behind.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu; et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	And the knowledge of its dislocation is this: when the diseased limb is joined with the flesh, if it is longer, and opens more the patient's joints than before, and cannot double his knee at the fire; and it is the bruise that is left inflamed by cautery, for this is what brings about the dislocation of the shoulder
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of one who comes to the aid, if it is that this accident is contrary to those mentioned above.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the sign of one who comes to the aid, if it is that he has his limb well in accordance with the accomplishment; however, do not double his knee with pain, and if you see him do so, do not do so before, and retain his urine, and swell his groin, and when he walks, pass over his heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the sign of one who comes to the aid, if it is that he cannot expand his knee, cannot double it, and is that his limb is shorter than the other, and his groin is softened, and his shoulder is dislocated from its socket
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	You must take back this semblance of dislocation if it is an old dislocation and it remains according to its habit, if there is no cure; and it is not recommended that you do so unless there is presumption.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des .iiij. manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	And in this case where the dislocation is fresh, and there are three ways of dislocation, if you are hasty you will twist the joint, and stretch outwards and downwards, and move it to the right and left; by chance if it returns, and there is no need for any other treatment.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil; et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien; et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	If it does not return in this manner, if you must, appear I strong minister, and grasp the limb with two hands, or with one that you shall bind upon the knee; and another minister extends his hand downwards as far as he can, while he holds his hands above his buttocks, and he grasps it with a loop of thread upon the hip; and another holds the head of the limb. Extend both upwards and downwards together, until the patient is lifted from the earth at once, and remains so.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as .iiij. semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	Such a method of extension is common in three out of four cases, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, that is good.</start_of_turn>
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele; puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	If this does not happen, if you must, put the patient’s limb in its natural position. When the dislocation is complete, if you can, place the limb on the costal margin and place the ligament at the root of the hip, and the limb that is below the ankle, then extend the ligament upwards towards the ankle and downwards towards the heel; then take another minister and grasp his arms, and embrace the great limb of the painful area, and extend it towards the front: if it returns to its place now; this method of dislocation is less severe than the others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres; puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc; puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	If you do not hold it firm in this manner as we have said, if you must, bind the two feet of the patient together with a strong thread above the two toes and above the two knees; let the limb of the patient extend two inches more than the others; then let it hang suspended from the head of a staff, or on the ground two arms long; then command one minister to grasp the head of the hip, and let another minister hang alongside the patient, who graspes the hip, for the joint is now restored.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi; puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme; et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	When the dislocation is driving out, if the patient is lying down, as we have said in the case of hiccuping, grasp the limb of the patient firmly above the knee and above the foot; then put two cushions, one at the head and one at the foot, then push one cushion between the hips of the patient, shaping it like this; and plant cloths soaked in moisture around it, so that it does not bleed from the patient; then extend the hands of the ministers towards him, and the one who is holding the dislocation should put it equal in his hand.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	If it returns, that is good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If not, put on the table as we said in the previous, and press on it as we have told you, and keep the patient lying on the right side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And when the dislocation is forward, if you must, extend the limb gently, as I have said; and look with your eyes where the pain is on the painful side, and press on the other hand, and extend it backwards towards the groin.</start_of_turn>
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches; et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table; et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve; et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And if the dislocation has gone away, if it does not wish to extend the patient’s limb, do not lift it up, but rather keep it as it was before, for it must be as if it had been stretched out beforehand; as we have said concerning the two inches; and let it rest on its face, and the limb must be stretched out as we have said previously, and must press on the joint at the table; and it will be finished when the patient extends his leg, and they will be even; then join the thighs and put on the dressing, and bind with a bandage, so that the limb does not move; and let it rest for three days or four, then take it off and put on the dressing once more; and if you see that they are even, if the bandage is as before, and leave it for three days; then take it off and leave it be quietly, until the limb is comfortable
de la dislocation dou genoil	From the dislocation of the shoulder joint...
Li genous est desaluez selonc .iij. manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	The shoulder joint is dislocated in two ways: forward and backward; and do not strain it forward
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez; et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez; puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement; et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And the sign is that you command the patient to bend his limb at his knee, and if he does not feel it at his knee, take away his socks; and restore him when you make him sit upright, and extend his limb if he can, and put your back against his face, and put your hand on his toes; then take his heel towards your palms, and draw between your thighs, then bend his two thighs together; and another attendant extends his hand, as long as his knee returns to its place, and the sign is that he has properly bent his limb at his knee; and put on the dressing and make the limb rest on the knee, and bind them together firmly for three or four days, and then remove them. And do not work with the patient until his limb is comfortable.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	And if the limb is not at a point, if an extension is administered strongly, as we have said in the treatment of the hernia, until it is healed.
de la dislocation dou talon	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The shoulder is never completely rigid and is always somewhat dislocated and painful.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee: li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	And the sign is if the ankle is swollen, and attempts before at the part where it is loosened: if it is slight, one must extend it slightly with the hands when it is only slightly painful.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville; puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut; et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient; et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide; puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet; puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent; puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	And when it is completely drained, if you do this, make the patient sit upright, and hold him firmly by the leg, under the ankle; then take hold of the limb at your right hand, and then at the left hand twice, and extend it upwards, and keep it well stretched out; do this twice as we have said, pressing in and pulling the limb; if it returns, that is good; if not, repeat the work, for it will return; and if it cannot return, make the patient lie face down on the ground, and hold his heel firmly on the ground between his thighs, and cover him with a blanket, so that he does not bleed; then hold the limb firmly with one hand or another, as close as possible to the neck of the limb; and extend the toes equally, and keep the heel either pressed against the thighs of the patient to retain the limb when it is stretched; then put the thumbs equally on the dislocation at your hands, and another assistant holds the limb steady at the ankle, and the dislocation will return immediately.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois; puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors; et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	When it comes to the boil [cautery], if it comes to a head, put on the dressing and stamp upon it, and the strain forms, and join the thumb to the finger, and keep the nerves that are above the ankle behind, so that the ligature is not too tight; then leave it for two or three days, and if the ligature softens, if the strain has gone; then take it off in a third or fourth, and tell the patient for three days. And if it goes before this time, this is not certain except that it will go sour.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If he pricks at his base, if you must hold his eyes still as we have said before, until he is whole again.</start_of_turn>
des dois	until he is healed.</start_of_turn>
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the two are dislocated, if you can gently stretch the limb, it is a light matter.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne; et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the dislocation is in no other place but the back of the thumb, it is to be ordered that the patient sits on one knee or on the ground, and put your thumb on what is open of these joints, and press on your thumb until it returns; and when it is equal, and there is no opening, if you put on the dressing of the thumb a table for two fingers, then the strain forms, and leave it for three days, then take it off; and make it rest until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	with wound and dislocation together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert: si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis; et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit; et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne; et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis; et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples; et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	When a wound accompanies a dislocation, and it is seen to be restored, many times the patient dies. If you are not humble in the cure and do not have skill in the art, and if you are not compassionate and merciful and tardy, do not be bold; and begin with calming measures at the outset, and leave the patient in the hands of the Lord, if you do not see hope of health; and when you see hope, if you now restore the limb to its place, even though the abscess remains; and when the limb is in place, if you administer calming measures at the outset, cure the wound, as it is fitting, with dried sponges; and if with the dislocation there is a fracture, and bones are fractured, if the bones are displaced, do as is said in simple illnesses; and beware of entering into fear, as I have said, for this will be unprofitable to you according to your Creator, and for the salvation of your soul and your body.
Amen	Amen.
