O you, most dear son, I have completed this book which is the end of the knowledge of medicine along with its fulfillment, and have finished it through its explanations and declarations. And it has come to me in a vision that I should complete it with this treatise which is part of the work of hands, namely 'surgery'.
And because the work of hands is neglected in our region and entirely abandoned everywhere, therefore its science has perished and been destroyed, and there remains nothing except small descriptions in books that hands have moved. And from this has come error and foolishness, intentions are closed off, and science is disregarded.
Now it seems to me that I wish to enliven it together with the arrangement of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation. and I will bring together the shapes of the irons for cauterization, and other tools of this work with the arrangement of their declaration and preparation as it is necessary.
And because there are no good masters of surgery found in our time, the art of medicine has been neglected. And therefore whoever undertakes it must climb up into the science of anatomy, as Galen says, so that he knows the judgment of limbs, and their forms and connections and separations, and has knowledge of bones and nerves and muscles and the number of joints, and the movement and course of veins both moving and resting, and where they originate.
And therefore Hippocrates says that a name without a deed is little, and with a deed it is much. and indeed in the art of medicine.
We tell you at the beginning of this book that whoever is not knowledgeable about the things said before should guard himself so that he does not fall into error and harm others.
thus I have seen many times those who meddle with this science and abandon their science and experience.
For I saw a foolish doctor who cut an abscess of scrofula on a woman's neck, and cut the arteries in her neck; thus so much blood flowed out that the woman died in his hands.
And another doctor who drew a stone from a man's urine, and the stone was large. So he took with him a piece of the bladder, and the man died three days later.
And I had already been called for to remove it, and saw the condition of the sick man and the size of the stone, and knew well that if he were cut open, he would surely die.
And saw another doctor who took in care Duke our land who had his leg broken, and with the breaking he had a wound;
and the doctor full of ignorance bound the break upon the wound like stars with great carelessness, and left no bandage to the wound, and left him thus at the end.
And he commanded that he not untie it.
So that the leg was entirely swollen and the foot, and came to ruin.
I was called to go to him, and I hurried to come unbind the leg; and when I heard it unbound, he was at peace and felt no pain.
But all passage for corruption was already confirmed in the limb, and could not be healed;
And corruption did not cease to spread through the limb until the whole limb was lost.
And I saw another surgeon who drained an inflamed black apostume and then cauterized it out of the malice of his mastery.
For a chancre, when it is purged of melancholic humor, should not be touched with iron unless it is in such a place that all that is corrupted can be completely removed.
And therefore, dear son, you must know that the work of hands is divided into two parts: That is to say, surgery where there is danger in many situations;
And I will show in each place of this book where there is fear and danger.
So that foolish doctors may not speak ill of you.
Therefore, take your arms with caution, undertake your patients lightly and firmly, and choose the best way so that through God's grace you achieve salvation and are praised;
And leave frightening diseases to those skilled in difficult cures.
And remove your arms from what makes you doubt, and have faith in yourself so that you can pass from this world to the next in glory.
Galen says in some of his teachings: 'Do not undertake a bad disease, lest you be called a foolish doctor.'
I have devised this treatise according to three chapters.
The first chapter is about fire cauteries and medical cauteries, ordered from the head to the feet.
and the forms of instruments, and the irons for cautery, and everything necessary in this work.
The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, cupping glasses, wounds, and the extraction of arrows, and similar things.
and this chapter is ordered with the forms of instruments
The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twisted limbs, and similar things.
and it is ordered from the head to the feet, with the forms of instruments
Before we remember the work, it is necessary that I tell you about the quality of each temperament and its harm.
I say that the qualities of the helper and his harmfulness are a lengthy and subtle science, as well as secret answers;
and about this many wise men spoke, and they agreed upon it;
they let me speak few words, for I fear length.
I say that cautery is generally beneficial to every complexion where there is matter, except two: It is to know: hot temperament without matter, and dry temperament without matter.
In a hot and dry temperament with matter, some people divide it and say that cautery is great help there; And others said the opposite: That cautery is not useful for diseases caused by heat and dryness. For the nature of fire is hot, and it should not be used to treat hot diseases due to heat or dryness;
And he who said the opposite said that cautery greatly helps hot and dry diseases that occur in men's bodies. But when you compare the body and its moisture to the temperament of fire, you find the body cold.
And I agree with this word. For I have found it so by experience.
And in any case, do not meddle with fire cautery unless you have experienced it and know well the chapter on cauteries, and the diversity of temperaments among men, and the dispositions and causes of their diseases, and the conditions and seasonality of the air.
We are not afraid of other temperaments, especially in cold and moist diseases. And all physicians agreed on the use of cauteries.
Know this, son, that fire together with cautery is among the secrets of cures and has greater virtue than a cautery made from burning medicine.
For fire is simple, and does not go beyond the member that is burned, and does no harm to any other member if it could.
Hot medicines spread from member to member by cauterizing, causing painful inflammation in the members; And by chance, he may kill the patient.
Fire alone does not cure unless there is an excess of it.
And this I have found by experience and the length of service and study that I have put into this art, which is based on the truth of things.
And therefore I apologize for the length of my speech, as I do not wish to deprive you of the secret that is hidden in fire and its quality of work, how it overcomes diseases of the body, as philosophers say in their demonstrations. Or receive this in your thoughts.
And know, son, that they agreed on what time cauteries should be made and chose priests for this purpose.
I say that cautery is suitable at all times because the harm that arises is kept under control by its aid. And especially, cauteries are necessary for immediate and urgent pains which cannot wait until the member suffers greater harm.
And never think, dear son, as foolish physicians do; For the disease healed by cautery does not relapse And they say thus
And they say thus But it is not so as they believe, for cauteries are no more a medicine that changes complexion and dries the humors causing pain than any other medicine, valued more for its speed of action than for its virtue and power.
And it can happen that the disease comes sometimes according to the constitution of the patient, and the place of the disease and its strength
And excesses are gathered in him through the acquisition of foods and similar things, except for cauteries administered where there is little excess or moisture, such as those used for toothache and similar pains, which do not return. But this happens rarely
And many people do not understand why cauteries are called the "derrière" of medicine, and that is true.
But they do not believe that cauteries are valued after medicines, but their intention is false, and cauteries are called the "derrière" of medicine because when we apply various treatments for some diseases and they do not work, then we apply cautery, which is effective.
Therefore it is clear that cauteries are the last resort of medicine, not according to the intention of foolish physicians.
The ancients said that cauteries of gold are gentler than those of iron; they said this because of the quality of gold and the nobility of its substance.
And they said that the place of cautery does not cause decay, but this is not entirely true as I have tested and found it to be so in some men
And cauteries of gold are worth more than those of iron, just as they said. Moreover, when you heat an instrument of gold, you cannot tell by its color alone whether it is hot enough; it cools quickly.
and if one heats it too much one puts it in the fire And thus there are enough obstacles.
Now I have arranged this chapter from top to bottom so that the way may be easier to find.
This cautery is useful for moisture and coldness on the brain, and there are two kinds made:
The shape of this cautery is such that the patient should be purged by a solvent medicine moistening the head for three or four nights, according to what the patient's strength and age and habit can tolerate and then make the fire behind the patient's head.
And then make him sit crossed-legged between your hands, with his hands on his knees;
then place the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his two eyes; And let where your middle finger comes be the spot to burn with the cautery called 'olivare', of which this is the shape: And place it on the marked spot, and move it downwards and outwards, little by little, turning your hand. then raise your hand gently, and reward yourself if you see a bit of bone appear; And if you don't see it, then continue with the cautery until you see the bone as I told you.
then take a bit of thread, and place soft cotton inside it, then put it on the spot, leaving it there for three days;
then put on soft cotton soaked in butter; and leave it on until the burn is healed; after treating the wound with the ointment called "tetrafarmacum" until it is clean.
And the ancients said that when a wound remains open longer, it purges itself more. and therefore movement helps.
"And some of these say that one should allow the cautery to burn until part of the bone is charred, and then remove what has been burnt off the bone, and it should be healed."
And others say that one should hold the cautery on so long and press it so hard as to abrade bone as thick as a woman's spindle used for spinning, so that the humors flow out more freely.
and one must leave the wound open for a long time afterwards one should dress and bind it.
And these two methods of cauteries do not seem entirely good to me except in some people where there is room for fear;
and it seems better to me that I should leave them.
for the head is weakened by continuous dissolving of its nature, as we witness in other members;
and even when the head of a patient is weak by nature, I find the first type of cautery to be more saving and gentle, and I use this one now together with safety.
When the whole head is afflicted with chronic pain that lasts a long time, the patient should use ointments and pills called "cochie," and perform head purging and apply oils and plasters. And if one performs the cautery we mentioned earlier, it does not help. Beware if the patient's head is strong in nature and not too cold; In such case, cauterize him a little below the one we mentioned earlier. After performing cautery on each horn of the head up to the bone as we said earlier, perform cautery at the location called "vessels. And this is where cupping glasses are placed. And raise your hand so that you do not see down to the bone: The patient feels much greater pain with this cautery than with others, and I will speak of it elsewhere.
And the cauteries on the horns must be more subtle than those used for cauterizing the middle of the head, and this is the method:
"of the cautery of the head" When sudden pain comes in a part of the head, and the illness extends to the eye, and the head is purged by cleansing medications, and all the other treatments I mentioned in the division of illnesses are done, yet nothing helps: Then make cauteries in two ways, namely with hot water and fire.
The cautery with hot water is thus: take a pennyworth of aloes, peel it and crush two parts for the two temples, then make an incision in the forehead where the pain lies so that you can place the crushed aloes under the skin.
And when it is placed there, tie it up tightly and leave it thus for twelve hours; Then untie it and draw out the pennyworth of garlic, and let the wound remain thus for two or three days. Then place a piece of cotton soaked in butter on top until it protrudes from the wound.
After the dressing has healed completely;
And if you see that, then perform some of the cauterizing medicines I have written about or treat with cauterizing medicines.
The iron cautery follows this manner. Heat the cautery of which this is the shape:
And it is called 'closed' because the head is shaped like a clove with a depression in the middle and a small opening in the midst;
and place it on the painful spot, then hold your hand and twist the fire lightly until half of the point of the heart-shaped blade is burned;
And lift your hand so that the artery does not burn, which is behind, and let abundant blood flow.
Afterward, apply cotton wool soaked in oil and leave it on the spot for three days; then apply cotton moistened in wax, and then treat the wound with ointment until it is clean.
And if you wish to cauterize this migraine with the cautery called 'cultellare', do so at its entire tip, being careful not to touch the artery in this migraine which is not ancient.
de migraine
When you treat migraine as we have mentioned earlier in the division of diseases, and it does not improve, and you see that the cauterization previously described in medicine does not help, then you must heat the cautery called "culterellare" until it is white.
And take thus on the pulsating place a line half the length of two fingers, and lift your hand once, ensuring that you do not touch the artery and that you do not go as far as the bone;
And beware of the jawbone that moves when chewing, and let the nerve have no regard for its movement so that spasms do not come upon the patient, and beware of bleeding from the artery when it is cut, or cutting may cause great fear, especially to one who is not skilled and experienced. And leave the wound open in mid-air;
But I will tell you how to stop bleeding when an artery is cut, and I will show you where it is appropriate in this book.
And if you see that these cauteries do not suffice for the illness, and the patient endures pain, cauterize him by the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it is healed.
And if you see, administer the cautery that we have mentioned in the chapter on artery extraction, with the cautery having two blades; And these cauteries are better than that one and more helpful.
Here is the French text for "of the pain of the ears due to cold":
When cold pain comes to the ear and one has opened medicinal solutions thereupon and other remedies that we have mentioned in the division, but the pain does not subside, then heat this cautery called "pointe"
After, prick all around the painful ear, or around both if the pain holds in both, and mark the spot a little away from the root of the ear where you will start. And make ten pricks around each ear;
Afterwards, treat it until it is healed.
Of the Torture of the Mouth
Only torticollis that moves from fluid should be cured by cautery;
And do not perform cauteries on those similar ones that come from heat and inflammation of the nerves.
When you treat this kind of affliction that moves due to the flow of water and cleansings of the head and gargling, if it does not improve, then you must cauterize the patient with three cauteries. one at the root of the ear, and another a little behind the temple, and the third between the two lips;
and place the cautery on the part that appears healthy, and make a cautery mark above the head of the ear somewhat below the horn of the head, and another on the temple as long as a finger joint; and leave the cautery until half of the brand is burned.
And that is the shape of the cautery.
And this type of cauterizing knife is similar to what we have shown before, but it is slightly more delicate and the blade should be a bit thicker.
After treating the place as I said before, make sure it is healthy.
If you have an ancient case of apoplexy which you treat as we have said and it does not improve, and the patient has no fever, then perform four cauteries on them. Two cauteries on the two horns of the head, one in the middle of the head, and one where it is called "vessels," as we have mentioned before, and the last cautery on the mouth of the stomach.
And they should be treated as we have said previously.
Of litharge
For this illness, it is necessary to give the patient large drinks and pills that cleanse the brain.
Then raise the patient's head up completely, and place on their occiput the plaster of mustard that is written about in the treatise on plasters.
And this is the method for cautery: If you do it as I have said.
If he becomes better in this way, then it is good; And if he does not improve, make three cauteries on the middle of the head going down to the neck, with a space of two fingers between each cautery.
And treat it as you would others; if you see him sweat, then apply the cautery in the middle. And if necessary, apply two more on either side of the first two, and continue treating until healed.
And let the cautery used be called 'olivare', as I have mentioned before.
It is necessary that the head be cleansed of hairs and of those things which we have mentioned before;
After raising the patient's head, then apply the cautery to the top of the head, on each horn, and one behind and three along the spine of the neck;
And if you need more, and the body is moist and the patient is suffering, then apply four cauteries along the spine of the back. And let him remain until the strongest heat has passed, then raise your hand; Then treat until healed, using the cautery called 'olivare', which we have mentioned before.
Of epilepsy
The person suffering from epilepsy should not use a fire cautery unless they are phlegmatic. It is necessary to first modify the brain with remedies and other treatments that we have mentioned in the previous division, especially when the patient is large and tolerant of difficult medical treatment.
And if it is a child who cannot endure it, have them gargle and chew soft foods frequently to cleanse the brain.
Then place the king's head in the middle, and perform the cautery as we have mentioned before, and cauterize the vessel and each horn. And if the patient is strong and enduring, perform cauteries as I have said for those with paralysis and weakness of body, on the spine of the back and neck, using olive oil according to the method I have described.
If the patient is a child, apply one subtle cautery according to this manner:
When excesses or corrupt humors are present due to melancholy, then apply the cautery of many cauteries as we have said for those with paralysis.
And if the excess is inclining towards melancholy due to melancholy, and the body of the patient is moist, then give them something to drink by which the brain may be cleansed, according to what is mentioned beforehand in the division.
Then place the patient's head. Next, make a linen bandage, also like a circle, and put it on the head.
And let the patient sit cross-legged, and be held firmly on all sides;
Next, present the lint, and melted old sheep's butter. Heat it over a moderate fire until the dough can withstand having the hot water poured onto it; After emptying the circle from within around the head, let it cool down.
And do this to the patient once each week with another good regimen until they are healed.
But if you want to cauterize it, make several punctures all over the cautery.
This method of cautery moistens the brain excessively;
And then place moistened cotton in butter and chicken fat upon it.
of the water of the eyes When water comes first to the eyes with the signs that I have mentioned in the division, then begin by giving the patient something to drink that cleanses the head and guards against all moistures, and make them sweat or take several baths fasting.
After the patient reclines their head back, perform a cautery on the head and make two cauteries on both temples if the descent of the eye is affected at both eyes together, or one cautery on the temple where the descent occurs.
And cut all veins and arteries that are below the heart beneath each cautery, and let the cauteries be long according to the width of the temple;
And beware of loss of blood, and if you see too much blood coming out, stop it with such power as you have.
I will teach you how to extract arteries and make an incision with caution how you should extend them;
And sometimes a cautery or hot iron is applied beneath the two rear bones.
and one sees that they are cold surplus of phlegm, then he performs the cautery I mentioned at the beginning of the forehead descending towards the eyes. I perform one cautery in the head, and two cauteries on the two temples, and two cauteries or hot irons beneath the two bones. And if there is need for more, then he cauterizes the eyebrow bloodily above each small cautery.
When you treat according to what we have said in this division and it does not help at all, then give the patient three nightshade apples to drink. After the king's head, he performs a cautery in the middle of the olive-shaped cautery. And perform two cauteries called 'clavilis' on the two shins, a little below the knees;
And beware of the artery that you do not cut it.
And this is the shape of the cautery that is called "clavilis":
When the paper of the oil is softened by disease and moisture, then cauterize it with this cautery called "olivary. of which this is the shape
And if you see, perform two cauteries on the two shins as long as the hairs are;
and do not leave your hand there except until about a third of the paper is burned, according to the manner that I have spoken of.
of the hair that points the eye Sometimes it happens that the hairs of the eyelashes turn inward and prick the eye; in this case cauteries are performed in two ways: That is to say, by fire, or by burning medication.
For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; And if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
When they have grown and are even, then put the patient in your hand; After tracing on paper the shape of an eye that resembles the opening of a mussel shell; let the beginning of the sign be near the hairs.
Then place damp cotton in egg white and powdered rose leaves on the eye; then heat the cautery whose shape is as follows:
Then cauterize along the figure you have traced, little by little many times, until the skin is burned at that spot.
And the sign of the work's health is that you see the paper retreat and the hairs stand upright at the tip of the eye.
Then lift your hand, leave it like this for three days; then place damp cotton in butter until the burn is healed. After that, apply ointment until it is sound.
And if after this the hairs grow back and the paper becomes softened, then begin the cautery again on that same spot, just as you did at first.
If the hairs are missing, cauterize until the skin lifts back to its natural level and becomes even, without pricking the eye.
The cautery of fire used in medicine should be ordered to the patient so that they let their hairs grow long and even, then make a shape like the leaf of a myrtle from parchment.
Then take one dram each of French soap and live chalk, grind them together thoroughly. And make it quickly so that it does not cool down, then spread it on the shape you have made like a myrtle leaf and place it over the paper covering the eyes. If the patient has disease in one eye only, work on that one; if both eyes are affected, do so for both. And place moistened cotton under the eye with a sparrow's egg.
Hold the patient's head steady in your hand and place your two fingers over the medicine, pressing gently on it each time the patient feels the heat of the medicine, as they will feel heat like fire.
When you have done this for some time, then remove the medicine from your finger. And when the cauterization is over, then lift up the wound, and check if you see the paper raised as it would be by the constraint of fire or by incision. and if it is so, then it is well.
If not, then apply more medication to the wound where the medication has not opened until your work is even, and your eyes are on target;
then place cotton soaked in butter over it until the heart's heat subsides, afterward cleanse the wound with ointment called 'diaphoresis' and others until it is healed.
And if you must take great care in your work, lest any medicine falls into the eyes.
And if the paper becomes moist afterward, and the hairs prick at the eye, then recommence the medication on that wound which has softened from the proper paper, just as you did before; then cleanse it until it is healed.
And this is the form of cauterizing with a hot iron:
And know that men's eyes are diverse in size and smallness, and according to this let your constraint be.
and let not the straight path be closed off to him who practices this art.
The translation of "de la cure de fistule par cautere" is:
When you treat a fistula as we have said in the division of diseases, and your treatments do not help at all, then you must perform a cautery on it according to this manner.
Instruct the patient to place their head on your hand; And take the patient's head between your hands in such a way that it does not move or turn its head;
then place cotton moistened with egg white or onion juice on the eye;
Then heat the cautery that is thus shaped:
and is shaped like the top of a dove's feather, with the cautery being level together;
If you see it, let one end be pointed from one end to the other, and if you see it, let it also be like a tent;
but nevertheless, this which is shaped is more useful for your work.
Then press the fistula if it is open, and remove the corruption and dry it; And if it is closed, then open it, and draw forth the bowels.
Then place the hot cautery firmly upon it, and keep your hand on the cautery at the part of the eyelid above the eye, so that your hand does not act foolishly. And place the cautery in the fat around the eye, and burn it.
If you reach the bone at the beginning of the cautery, that would be good. If not, then repeat the cautery once more, and again if necessary, and leave it for three days;
After that, put on gauze moistened in butter, and continue the drying ointment until it is healed. And if after forty days it has not healed, then apply a caustic medicine until the bone is exposed. And follow the king according to what comes in his chapter.
And there is also a method of cautery for fistulas that some of the ancients mentioned. Understand this: fistulas, cut them open; Then insert into the opening one small tube made of this shape: And they do it to the amount of one-third of a pound; and hold your hand firmly over the cauterizing tool, and let the patient not move his head at all, so that the molten lead does not spill onto his eye;
and one must put on the patient's eye moistened cotton dipped in egg whites or egg yolk:
The lead is then placed at the location of the fistula, and healing occurs miraculously.
**And if the fistula is healed by the cautery we have spoken of, that is good.** **If not, then it is necessary to administer a probe to the nose and bring the fistula back to its proper place in the body of the nose.**
"cracks in lips" "Often, cracks in the lips called 'splits' occur, especially on children's lips."
"If you treat these cracks according to what we have said in divisions and the treatment does not work, then heat a small cautery knife according to this shape:"
And quickly place it in those crevices until it reaches the source;
then apply cerate to the location until it is healed.
When an abscess forms at the root of the throat, in the uvula, or on the palate, or at the roots of the teeth, it causes decay and rot, becomes inflamed, and turns into a fistula; and you treat it as we have said through incisions, but it does not help: then you must apply cautery according to the size of the fistula; After the blow or puncture of the fistula, keep your hand there until the hot iron reaches its base, and behind it;
And do this once or twice, after the treatment we have described in our cures, until it is healed.
And if it is cured thus, that is good. But if not, then uncover the spot and remove the rotten bone according to what you will find in its chapter.
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicines but it doesn't help, then put the patient's head in your lap. After heating the cautery whose shape will be described below, so that you place a band around the tooth;
And quickly put the hot cautery inside and keep your hand there until the patient feels the heat reaching the root of the tooth;
Then lift your hand and resume the cautery according to your will.
After, the patient fills their mouth with salted water, holds it for an hour, and expels rich fire.
"And in this way the tooth that was moving becomes fixed, and the softened gum is strengthened, and the corrupt moisture dries up."
"of toothache"
When tooth pain comes from coldness, where there is coldness or wind, and the treatments of medicine do not help, then there is need for a cautery in two ways: and cautery of butter and cautery of fire.
Cautery of butter is such that you take butter from a cow, put the tip into an iron or brass spoon; then take cotton and wrap it around the tip of a needle, dip it in melted butter, quickly place it on the painful tooth, and hold until it cools.
and do this often until its virtue reaches the root of the tooth. Then if you see that wrapping wool and cotton in cold butter and placing it on the aching tooth helps, heat iron until fire comes to the tip of the tooth.
The cauteries made of fire are such that you should take one made of iron or brass, and it should be so thick that the fire does not reach the mouth of the patient;
After heating the cautery, which will be described later, place it on the tooth and keep your hand there until the cautery is cooled;
Do this often, for the pain will be relieved that same day or the next.
And it is necessary that the patient fills his mouth with good butter during the application of this cautery, and then rinse well;
And this is the shape of the cautery:
And make a cautery of whatever size you desire, and according to your ability;
And this is the shape of the tin can:
"Regarding scrofula" When scrophules are caused by phlegm and cold moistures and are not responsive to digestion through medicines, then heat the hair cautery, of which the shape is given below, and let it have two openings for the smoke to exit from the other end;
And place the hot cautery on the abscess once or twice until it reaches the base of the abscess.
If the abscess is small, apply a cautery according to its size, and leave it on for three days. And apply moistened cotton in butter until the burn is healed.
Then treat with ointments and bandages until it is healed.
When moisture prevails in the pores of the lungs, especially when it is due to a cold temperament, then the patient must first be evacuated by soluble medications.
Then apply a cautery at the root of the throat, ensuring not to go all the way up to the throat and not to burn deeply but only slightly.
Then apply another cautery at the junction of the neck and head of the spine, using the cautery called "clavicle," as shown above.
And treat the area until it is healed, as previously mentioned.
When all diseases of the lungs are caused by cold moisture, and the patient has no fever or cough, and if it is an old disease, apply two fire cauteries on the chest in empty places. And one cautery between the breasts near the nipples
and let the cautery called "clavile" be made according to the shape described earlier.
And if you see fit, apply a cautery prick at every point where the cautery called "pointe" is used, whose shape is depicted above in diseases of the ears.
and let there be up to thirty points, or as many as needed around it.
Afterward treat the area according to what is said earlier, and use a cautery with three rows according to this shape:
"And because cauteries are lighter by making three at once."
"of the dislocation of the auxiliary ligament"
When the head of the shoulder blade is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. Afterward, make the patient lie on their back and side; then raise the heart which is inside the armpit with the fingers of your left hand;
and if the joint is dislocated inward, heat the cautery that has two branches until it resembles this shape:
and cauterize the lung until it pierces through to the side, and the figure of the cautery should resemble four cauteries combined.
And therefore cauterization is done with a cautery having three heads, because the marks of cauterization are six.
and the nerves are as fine as a thread, and that is the shape of the cautery with three heads:
And sometimes it is added onto this 1 nerve, therefore there are 8 cauteries.
Afterwards place on the cautery powdered wormwood with salt; then let the patient rest, and do not move the limb for a long time until they are well strengthened.
And if it is dislocated upward, which happens rarely, then perform a cautery on the thick part of the cautery clavile, or many pricks with the cautery.
For once the joint is closed and the moisture removed, the patient will be healed.
When coldness and excessive moisture accumulate in the stomach, altering its complexion and increasing phlegm despite customary treatments showing no benefit, then the patient should lie on their back, extend their legs and arms. Then perform three cauteries: one beneath the elbow of the arm equal to two fingers, entirely covering the clavicle, and two cauteries on either side of the ribs so that the marks of the cauteries form three angles, with enough space between each other so they do not join together when they throw out corruption.
And let the cauteries be deep enough to reach both parts of the heart, and let the shape of the cauteries be according to this form without deviation:
And if you see someone cauterized with a large cautery in the stomach according to this form;
and whoever fears this cautery, cauterize by pricking and holding it on the stomach for one point according to the amount you see fit; then cauterize with all of the cautery that is called 'point'.
After the treatment described above, ensure it is healed.
When the liver suffers pain from cold and moisture and great windiness, so much that it is far removed from its natural composition due to excesses; and the patient is treated with what we have said in divisions, but it does not help him, then the patient must be made to vomit. and apply three cauteries according to this form and figure and quantity on the liver, avoiding the hypochondria, where the rib cage comes.
And keep a space of two fingers between each cautery; and let the cauteries be long in length and do not press your hand too much on all of the cautery.
And let only half of the heart burn, and let the patient lie on his right side.
And if he cannot do this, then let him lie down, extend his legs, and raise his arms.
And if it is your will, then cauterize these cauteries of the knife, if you are skillful and wise in the art, and ensure that you do not burn all the heart, for you would cause the whole body to dry up. And let it not come near the belly, for the heart is very delicate there, and the flesh also.
When there is an abscess on the liver, and you wish to know if it is in the flesh of the liver or in the membrane: If it is in the flesh, the patient feels pain but not too strong.
And if it is in the membrane, he feels madness-making pain.
And then, when this treatment is applied by physicians, the patient must be made to sweat on his head.
And then, press firmly on the spot where the abscess is, and then heat the cautery that resembles a ray. Here is its shape: And cauterize with the cautery until the flesh is burned and come to siphon, so that all pus flows out.
After treating according to the treatment of abscesses until it is healed;
And only those who have studied medicine for a long time and by whom many such illnesses have been cured should use this cautery.
Therefore he can daringly operate; nevertheless it seems to me that it is better for him to leave (it).
Regarding the cautery for pleurisy
The ancients said that one should make cauteries for pleurisy with roots of bistort, in this manner: Take a large, dry root of bistort, as thick and long as your two fingers; And boil it in oil, then take it to the fire and make one large cautery between the shoulder blade and neck, and two smaller ones a little way down towards the area under the beard.
And place two cauteries between the fifth rib and the sixth, inclining slightly backward. And one cautery in the breast, and another above the stomach, and one between the two shoulders, and two on both sides of the breast below the cautery between the shoulders.
Do not press your hand, but hold it open as in smelling something.
And some ancient authorities say that certain men used to employ a fire cautery resembling that of a barber, heating it and placing it between the ribs until it reached the abscess. And when there is pain outside, as we have said concerning the liver abscess.
Yet in this operation there is fear, for the patient may die now, or a fistula may occur which cannot be healed.
Regarding mice
When you treat the disease of mice according to what we have said in the division of cures, and it does not help at all, then there are 3 good ways of cautery that can be used:
One method is to make three or four cauteries in a line according to the length of the mouse's body, following the shape of the liver cautery that we have described earlier.
And do not press your hand during the entire cautery process, and let the patient lie constantly on their back;
And another method of cautery is to heat the cautery that has two edges, as we have shown in the case of shoulder dislocation;
And raise the heart that is at the mouse, where the cost of the patient comes towards the left, and let the elevation be according to the height of the body, and the width of the cautery should be according to the breadth of the body.
Afterwards, thrust the two flaming edges so that the heart is pierced from the other side, then pull out the cautery, and thus there will be four.
And if you wish, cauterize with all three edges of the cautery.
After this treatment, if it has thrown off corruption over a long period of time, then it is better than the other treatments mentioned earlier.
A fire cautery is not suitable for a dropsical person, except in the manner called "ascites.
When you treat according to the methods that we have mentioned in divisions, and your treatment does not help, then it is necessary for you to make four cauteries around the neck, one on the stomach, one on the liver, one at the mouse, and two behind the back on the spine, and one near the breast; And let the cautery be placed close to the spearhead of the heart.
Afterwards, leave the cautery open for some time to expel corruption, and do not neglect the patient's care after the cautery. And healing would hasten, and both intentions would be together with God’s help.
The form of the cautery for the belly is the one we have shown before. And that for the back be olive-shaped, as it is depicted here.
When the feet of one suffering from dropsy are swollen and filled with yellow water, you must cauterize on the back of the foot between the little toe and the ring toe. And lift your hand with the cautery without turning it.
And do not enter too deeply at first; thus one would avoid causing injury like that caused by the aw within the citrine, and let the cauterization be done according to this form:
Then make two cauteries on each leg at the point of the shinbone. And let the cautery be long, one below the knee in front and the other behind, in the middle of the leg.
And let fire cauteries remain on longer without being cleaned until they are discharged.
After treating other wounds as we have described.
When an attack of colic comes from coldness and dampness, so that the retaining and digestive powers in the stomach and intestines are weakened, and cannot be cured by ordinary remedies; And you see the patient suffering greatly and having strong virtue, then make a large cautery on the stomach according to what was spoken of previously in the cautery for the stomach, using the circular cautery. And four small cauteries around the navel like one cautery on each side of the spine, and two cauteries on the hips.
"And if you see the moistures abundant and the patient suffering, make them a cautery on the point, and one cautery on each side, and two small cauteries on the stomach near the large one, for the treatment is beneficial when there is good aid."
"Of the Cure of Hemorrhoids"
When hemorrhoids are on the anus, one or more, and are old and consist of thick corrupt cold and moist humors, and have been treated by division as we have said without success, then apply cauteries: III upon the spine of the back, that which is all deflected below toward the shoulder-blade little by little in a triangle shape, and [apply] the cautery beneath the armpit II times;
and if you think that its stomach is cooled, and the flesh does not cook, and one sees the face swell, then apply one great cautery to the stomach as it is stated before, and another to the liver, and another to the spleen at all cautery points and let the cautery remain on for a long time. Afterwards, heal the place until it is clean.
When you cut into fat tissue, heat the cautery that resembles a razor, and then place it all ablaze upon that cut fat. and let your hand remain there until the cautery reaches the opening of the vein, where the blood flows out
do this once or twice, and if there is much fat tissue, cauterize each one as we have said afterwards, use ointments to aid in healing until they are clean.
And if you cauterize with a large cautery on alcatraz, it will have greater help.
When the patient cannot bear cutting or opening,
When a fistula occurs and becomes inflamed and filled with rottenness and corrupted moisture, you should probe it gently with the tip of your finger, ensuring that you know the full depth of the opening.
And after heating the cautery which resembles a razor, put it into the fistula according to the quantity that the tent entered there, and begin again with the cautery until those corrupt and rotten bodies are burned, once or twice or three times, depending on what is needed.
And beware of burning the nerves that are nearby, and the large veins.
If the fistula goes to the body of the bladder and the intestines, then beware of these places, and do not perform this operation except in a fleshy area, and think that it is not persistent.
Then heal the place until it is clean, and if the place is healed, and the matter has been removed for a long time, then know that the place is entirely healthy.
And if the matter is not removed, know that the place is wounded, and the bone at the front is rotting. And so like one of those we will mention later.
When pain from cold comes to the kidneys, and from great flatulence, and she does not menstruate, then you must perform a fire cautery on her kidneys on both sides with the clavicle cautery that we have mentioned before.
And if we cauterize it in the middle, it will have three cauteries in a row, and this will provide greater relief.
Of the bladder When the bladder is weak and flaccid from cold and moisture so that the patient retains urine, then perform cautery on the front part of the bladder where the pubic hair begins, one on the right side and one on the left side, with each cautery being as long as a barleycorn.
And perform one cautery at the back if necessary.
And let the clavicle cautery be according to the shape mentioned before.
When the womb is cold and moist, preventing conception due to this reason, and the menstrual flow is corrupt with delayed periods, and when they come, great pain is felt: then it is necessary that one performs three cauteries around the bladder, as we have said regarding the cautery of the bladder, and two cauteries behind the back:
and the cautery should be performed with a hot iron, as we have said.
When viscous moisture descends to the hip joint, and for this reason it moves from its place, and the sign is that one thigh appears longer than the other when measured together;
and the location of the joint's separation is found, then you must cauterize the patient around the hip joint with one circular cautery, and seal around the joint as it turns, so that the joint is inside the circle;
and let the cautery be like those used to cauterize the stomach.
And if this cautery is not available, then perform three large olive-shaped cauteries, and let the cautery be as deep as all the others;
and let him rest until he is healed
Of the pain in the hair When pain comes to the small of the back due to coldness and dampness, and the patient has been treated with what we have mentioned in the division but is not cured, and the disease is chronic: Then you must purge the patient of thick humors using fetid pills or similar good pills. Afterward apply a cautery;
and the manner of the cautery is in two ways: namely, hot remedies together with fire cautery.
Fire cautery has many ways, one of which is this:
such that you cauterize the small of the back with three triangular cauteries according to this shape, and they should be deeply and widely made, and there should be the width of two fingers between each cautery, and the cauteries should be olive-shaped.
Sometimes one cauterizes in the middle upon the top of the small of the back, for which there are four cauteries according to this shape:
And if you wish, cauterize it with the circular cautery which we have mentioned previously for the dislocation of the hip joint.
but do it in such a way that the circle contains the entire hip joint, and all the spokes of the heart are burned
And this is the manner in which it is done for sciatica, when the pain holds at the hip and does not reach the thigh or the leg.
And if it extends to the thigh and leg, apply two cauteries where the patient feels pain, and one cautery above the ankle on the left side
and let the cauteries be ellipsoidal, and let the thickness of the heart be burned.
and if the patient feels that pain extends to two fingers' width from the foot or further, cauterize where they feel pain three times or four with a cautery called "points". And if necessary, do more.
And if the pain is felt below the knee towards the thigh, apply a cautery with an ellipsoidal or circular cautery, and take care in all your cauteries not to leave the cautery on too long so that you burn the nerves and large arteries, and do not cause greater harm and contraction to the patient.
And I myself have seen many who have performed cautery on the ankle of the foot, and they left it until the whole leg was swollen, and the foot likewise, and it became perforated and corrupted completely. After a bellyache that resulted in death.
And if the pain is in both parts together, perform cautery on one and the other, according to this manner.
And the wise say in cauterizing hair, of which this is the method: make such iron and let it be at the head as thick as a hazelnut or somewhat less, and let it be perforated and let there be spaces between each perforation equal to the thickness of a hazelnut.
And let the perforations be open at both ends, like nuts, and let there be many well-made iron pieces;
This is the shape:
And let it be heated until it is entirely red-hot and then place it on the diseased scalp, turning it towards the sound side;
and cauterize once with one cautery, and leave it three days; And then make an ointment of butter and let the wound remain open for a long time; after treating with ointment until it is healed.
Albucasis says that we use this cautery little because of its great heat, and few see those who use it;
And furthermore this is one of the good cauteries which he can withstand; and at the place where it adheres.
And the cauterizing iron for burning is such that you make an instrument with interlaced openings in which the edges of the door descend, and it should be of brass or iron on one flat side, and have two nuts at the top, each separated by the quantity of a finger. and let them be turned over and open above, and join together according to this shape:
Then place the box of the poultice on the sick person lying on their healthy side, and press your hand firmly on top of the box. Then place between the two circles of the hot awl which has been heated in the fire for a little while, and let it sit there for an hour of time, and let the patient bear the heat and burning from it.
For it finds biting like that of fire.
And when the blisters have passed, raise your hand with the instrument and lift the hair from the wound gently, and leave it thus for three days, and apply butter until what is blackened by the burn is gone. And leave it for three days until corruption comes out of it.
And this would be the final help after the treatment with ointments, as long as it is healed.
And if the pain has spread to the thigh or leg, make another instrument like the one you used on the wound and increase it accordingly.
And this is the manner of the hot cautery, which I have written about in the treatment of medicine. Take quicklime and live chalk, an equal amount of each, grind them together, and place them in nine pots. where there is a small hole through which the point of a razor can enter;
where there is a small hole through which the point of a razor can enter; And put another well-sealed pot over it and place quicklime and hot water and gentle heat on top until there are two fingers' width of powder when you press it in your hand.
And let it be thus until it descends with water and iron or lead, then take all that water and throw it onto heat and into alkali as before.
Then it will be very hot and administered in many works of medicine and cauteries on other members.
But it performs the same work as fire, and has other medicines with which one may cauterize the hair well, such as treacle and myrobalan honey, heat with soap, all these things mixed together.
And Galen tells us of a cure where a man was healed from the pain in his hair and sciatic vein. He praised it greatly, saying that no other treatment was needed, and the man was completely cured after just one application, as described below:
And say in this way that you take fresh and dry green copper vitriol, grind it much with a spoonful of fat, place it on the hair, thigh, and leg where the pain resides, and let it sit;
and leave it for three hours until the patient no longer feels burning.
Then have him enter a bath until his body is somewhat warmed, and lay him in bed; then the pain will all go away and he will be healthy.
And know that no one should use a cautery with such medicines unless after an evacuation of blood.
And Dioscorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with goat's gall, it helps much;
And the cautery must be applied in this manner. Take linen, anoint it with old oil, and place it on the hollow between the big toe of the foot and the one called the cuboid.
After taking dry goat hair, set it on fire until it becomes charcoal; then put it on wool and let it stay until it is extinguished.
and do this again in the same way; do not stop doing this until you think it is time to reach the hair and the pain has stopped.
This method of cautery is called "goat's cautery".
of the pain in the back
When pain comes to the back, whether from falling or impact or from too great an evacuation, or from signs of spread cold matter, none of these signs warrant cauterization except for that which comes from infusion of cold matter.
After the patient is emptied of fetid pills or similar substances, one should perform three rows of five cauteries or more on their back where the pain is located, depending on the strength and amount that the patient can tolerate.
And the cauteries should be performed using a cautery called "the point".
If you see fit, perform three or four cauteries on the middle clavicle according to this shape:
Frequently this disease affects young children; its beginning is marked by them having a narrow gait when they stand up, and fear; And you find in the lower spine of the back, near to the appearance that comes upon the other spines.
When you see this, if you wish to cure it, then cauterize with the clavicle cautery according to this form: So that the cautery may evenly burn each part of the spine.
And if you see fit, cauterize around the spine with a cautery point that burns two or three lines deep, and let the points be close together.
Then heal the place until it is clean according to what we have said, and make sure you do not apply cautery on any gibbosity that is near a nerve.
of pain in the joints
When pain in the joints comes from moistures that are spread throughout each member of the body; and when pain comes into the feet, which doctors properly call 'podagra'; and when it is from a cold cause and cannot be cured by medicines, then it is treated with cauterization in this manner:
Make many cauteries around the ankle joint, and let the cautery be olive-shaped according to this form:
And if it is necessary to prick the face of the foot, use the cautery called "point". And if the pains extend to the knees and other joints, which happens often, then make three or four cauteries on each knee, all olive-shaped.
And if you need more, then make them; but do not hold your hand far from it until the point of the knife is burned.
And if the pains descend to the knees and back, then administer the cautery that we have mentioned in our chapter.
And if the pains are at the hands, then make prickings around the fist two lines;
If there remains no pain in the fingers, then make prickings on each joint and on the hair of the hand;
And if the pains come up to the elbows or up to the shoulders, then cauterize each part, and have good care of the patient and take medicine.
But if you provide good care and purge phlegm, he will be healed with the help of God.
When rupture comes to the anus, and the bowels descend to the hips which is recently happened, then it is necessary that when you see him cure, he should not eat that day; And that he use things that leave the stomach empty so that the feces descend from his belly;
Afterwards make him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to hold his ankle until the bowels are replaced, and then move them to his thighs, and press firmly below the rupture onto the bone of the wrist, and there will be a sign like half a circle above the body;
Then heat the cautery whose shape is described here:
Until it becomes white and casts shadows. Then reset the bowels to their place and the attendant shall keep his hand upon them so that they do not slip back
and open the patient's thighs wide, place a cushion and two blankets beneath them, and another one on their chest to keep their hands warm
then place the cautery on the sign with your whole hand, holding it with your right hand and pressing until you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, try again until you feel the bone and be careful that the bowel does not slip out while performing the cautery lest you burn it or else the patient dies or suffers some other harm.
And know that if you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your efforts are worth nothing.
And the cauteries for children must be thin according to their size, and those for adults large enough according to theirs
after three days, treat the wound from the cautery with butter until the burn is healed
After treating other wounds until they are clean, let the patient lie on their back for 40 days until the wound is well healed.
And it is necessary that his bindings be left on for a long time so that his bowels do not protrude when he gets up to go to bed.
And after 40 days, when he wishes to rise, provide him with a well-made bandage and let him wear it for another 40 days.
And let him have good rest, working little and guarding against excessive consumption of drink and food, and against loud laughter.
And when he follows this instruction, he will be entirely healed.
And I shall tell you after the cure of cutting in its chapter.
When fistulas appear in other bellies and are known to be growing, if you see that they are not increasing any further, apply a cautery iron according to their size, and burn the third of the heart. After treating according to what we have said;
And some of the ancients have said that it should be cauterized with the cautery at three angles according to this form:
But first mark the point of beginning and draw a line across the width above the rupture, and another below it, and then cauterize with your hand in the middle at all points.
But the first cauteries are lighter and gentler.
"From ancient pain in a certain limb" If pain comes to any limb, from falling or striking, and that pain persists for a long time, and medical treatments do not help, then it must be cauterized with the cautery called 'poins', and the cautery should be performed according to the length of the limb and its size, weakness, strength, location of twists, and the nature of the pain.
If it is without the first cautery, that's good;
If not, then recommence another cautery on top of it, for it is customary that it must move to the limb that it is near, so you should make the cauteries until the patient is healed.
Some cases are sometimes helped by cautery with great benefit, especially those diseases that arise from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
When cauterizing the eye, be careful if the disease is at its beginning; and if it is cured according to what we have said in the division, and neither descends nor remains, and you doubt that corruption may spread throughout the patient, then make five cauteries on top of it One at the nape of the neck, and another towards the forehead at the end of the eyebrows; And two on each horn, and one behind on the hairet;
And leave your hand there until the cautery reaches the bone, and until the scabs come out so that the vapors of the thick humors can escape.
And cauterize the mouse according to what is written beforehand.
And if the swelling is widespread; And if it is clear that [the swelling] is present, then you should cauterize [the patient] with these cauteries that we have mentioned: one at the head, and one near the neck, and two on the spine of the neck, and six on the spine of the back, and one large one on the breastbone and another nearby, and two on the shoulders; And two on the ribs, and two on the tendons of the foot, and one on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands;
and beware of the nerves that are behind the heel bone, so that you do not burn them;
And sometimes one cautery is made on the wrist bone, and another on the stomach bone, and another on the liver.
And know that the more cauteries you make, the greater the benefit will be to the patient.
Know this: the patient feels no pain from the cautery as the healthy do, because the body is already entirely corrupted.
And it is necessary that the cauteries be large and small according to the members and joints, as you will find them described in the various forms of irons.
After applying a poultice of vetch flour with honey, perform other treatments until it is healed.
When swelling occurs in any limb and is treated with medications, oils, and plasters, but it does not heal, then apply cauteries to the limb according to its size and smallness.
And let the cautery be a bit deep into the flesh of the heart; Then treat it with oils until it is healed.
And sometimes cautery is applied to the hand, foot, and back at the exit of the nerve that moves the limb, and thus the swelling is removed;
Yet let no one intervene who is not knowledgeable about limbs and the exits of moving nerves in the body.
When the disease called 'albaras' is inflamed, and the means of medicine do no good, then cauterize it with a deep cautery according to the quantity of the flesh of the heart until the inflammation is removed and its color changed;
Then apply a poultice of wheat flour, lentils, and rose oil mixed with plantain leaves, and donkey's blood and almond milk, each in equal parts. And mix everything together, tie it with a cloth, and apply it to the place until it is healed.
Li cure de chancre par cautere est bonne chose et utile; quar quanque il est enveilli et eschauchié et dure longuement, il s’ensuit que la membre devient chee et que l’en est empeschie. Donc adonques le cauterise d’un cautere de fer ardant qui soit un pou entre en l’espés dou keur; puis ensi come li cautere est ostee, prent on une espice d’arsenic et de salemongier et les met ensemble, et fait on de la farine. Ensemble met on une partie de sanc dou chancre et une partie de sanc de chèvre ou de brebis, ou de sanc dou chevaulx ou de l’autel; puis prent on un peu de la farine d’arsenic et de salemongier et la mele a ces sanz et a oile roset. Et soit ceste medicine mise sus le chancre tant que li cautere y soit ostee et que li sanc dou chancre ne chei plus; puis fait on un emplestre de farine de fuces et de lentilles, de plantain et d’ache avec oile roset, et met on ceste medicina sur le chancre. Et quant il est tout gueris, adonques on l’envele et on mete y une medicine de vinaigre de vin blanc et de farine de fuces et de lentilles avec oile roset; et puis fait on une cautere plus petit que li autre, qui soit un pou entre en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure continue de la medicina de vinaigre et d’oile jusques a tant qu’il soit tout sanez.
When a chancre appears at the beginning, and you see it has stopped, then cauterize it with a hot iron that seems to resemble an ellipse, all around the circumference of the chancre.
Also, wise men said that one should perform cautery in the middle of the cancer;
But I do not think this is good advice, for I fear that it may cause ulceration and corruption, as it has happened before in some cases;
And a more correct thing to do is to perform circumcision-like cautery around it, as we have described in many cauteries.
When someone has an illness called "adubelati," which lingers due to the excess it produces or due to the weakness of the patient when they are very old (i.e., too elderly), and they have poor blood flow, or due to the time; And you shall hasten its death: Then cauterize it around with many small cauteries, pricking it. After that, leave it thus. For she will rush to die.
Et se tu la ves percir à tot le cautère,
And place your hand on the middle of that disease called 'adubelati' until the cautery has pierced the heart, and let the cautery be so hot that the patient feels it like this: so that the course of the corruption is eased.
After the treatment, as long as he is perfectly healthy.
Another kind of disease called 'corrodens', which is nothing other than the destruction of limbs, for it consumes them like fire consumes dry logs.
If you see this disease in a place that can bear the cautery together with fire, then heat the cauteries of small and large nails according to what is needed for the place where the disease is located;
Then cauterize it on all sides until you remove all the corruption, and nothing remains of it, so that everything that is corrupted may be removed.
And then leave it for three days, and place over the cauterized places a poultice made with oil until the burns of the fire are healed, and all corruption is removed.
After the treatment of ointments generating heat.
And if after three days you see that healthy flesh does not grow, then it is good;
If not, then recommence the cautery on what remains of the corrupted places.
And this wound has sometimes been cured with hot medicine instead of fire cautery;
But still, fire cautery is of greater help, and I have already mentioned the cure of hot medicine in its proper place. Take as much as you need.
"Porrelz" refers to swellings or tumors. The phrase "des porrelz qui vienent as piez" means "swellings that come from the feet." Here's an example of how it might be used in a sentence: Often there occurs at the feet a disease called "closure" according to our understanding, and it is a large broken thing that wounds the foot.
And the cauteries for this disease are in two ways That is to say fire cautery, and cautery of hot water
Fire cautery is such that you heat the hair cauterizer like an owl's feather, and it should be made of good iron to the measure that it can encompass the nail on all sides, and have subtle edges;
After placing it hot on the nail, twist your hand all around the nail until it reaches the base of the nail; And leave it like that for 3 days until it begins to discharge pus; Then make a poultice of wild mallows crushed with salt, and leave the poultice on all night, and the nail will fall out and be extracted from its roots.
Then anoint the location with healing ointment until it is clean.
And if they are inverted by force against the body, which happens often in hands and feet, then you must bring a cautery of hot water. And it is done in this manner: Take a tin or iron pipe, or an owl's feather, and place it on the nail and the surrounding skin, that is to say, warts; And place the vessel on so that it grips all around, then put a bit of warm water inside, and hold your hand steady, and press your hand as you turn so that the edge of the vessel reaches the root of the nail, and can find the deep warm water pathway to the root.
And let the patient endure a little the biting of the hot water for an hour; Then leave it thus, and it will be pulled out entirely by all its roots.
Do this one after another until you have rooted out all those on the body, then treat them with healing ointments that bring forth flesh.
When someone trembles from coldness of the nerves, or from quartan fever or other, then you must make them four cauteries or five on the spine of the back, one cautery between each spine; And one cautery on the foot, and one on the stomach at the olive-shaped cautery.
This will stop the trembling, and the warmth of health will chase away the cold disease.
Sometimes it is apparent on the body's surface when there are wet ulcers or foul pustules which come from corrupt matter.
When they first appear, it is necessary to make a cautery on each head of the boil; A subtle cautery made of myrtle wood, whose point has been heated in fire, or of long Aristologus root, or of the lenticular cautery.
And sometimes they cauterize at the beginning when they appear, in this manner, and they cannot grow back afterwards; but the excess from which they come is dried up, and they are sound.
but it is necessary that this be done after the evacuation of blood
Many times there are great flows of blood from the artery that is cut at the wound that comes from behind, or at the incision of an abscess, or at the cautery of a limb, and similar things and it is very difficult to stop.
And furthermore, when this happens to anyone, quickly place your index finger on the vein wound and press firmly until the blood quiets under your finger and no more drops come out
Then put olive oil cauteries of various sizes, both small and large, into the fire until they are all red.
Then take one, whether large or small according to the wound and where the artery is situated, and place the cautery on that vein while you hold your finger [or forceps], and hold it until the bleeding stops.
And if it happens that when you lift your finger from the vein and the cautery is extinguished, then quickly take another one of the cauteries that are in the fire.
And continue doing this one after another until the bleeding has stopped;
Be careful not to burn the nerve that is nearby, and ensure that no other harm comes to the patient;
And know that when blood flows from an artery, it cannot be easily stopped, especially if the artery is large, unless by one of the four methods we have mentioned; Either by cautery, or by extracting it if not already treated, or by tightly tying a thread, or by applying medicines that have the power to stop bleeding; And let it be bound and compressed properly.
And do not think that stopping bleeding will be brought about by binding too tightly with bandages or putting hot things on it, or other similar things, for it profits little if at all.
And if this happens to anyone and he does not have a physician or medication present, then he should place his right index finger on the vein wound as we have said, stretching it out well until it is tense over the wound and the vein. And do not move your finger, but moisten it with cold water often enough so that it is very cold until the blood congeals, thickens and becomes tense.
And make preparations ahead of time for those who need cauteries and medications.
We have told you in the first chapter all diseases for which a fire cautery or burning medicine is necessary, and the ointments, causes, instruments, and forms of cauteries.
I have placed this chapter from head to foot in the previous one, and I will follow the same path in this chapter so that one may find more easily what one desires.
And before I begin this one, dear friend, you must know that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first about cauteries, and therefore it requires greater caution.
For in the work of this chapter, there is often evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in treating wounds, and extracting arrows, and cutting into stones, and similar things. Where there is doubt and fear, many die.
And I warn you not to undertake foolishness. For many kinds of people come seeking treatment. If some come from those who harm themselves so much with their illness that they die easily because of the madness that comes from it and the greatness of their wickedness; And one should fear these things.
And there are those who give you their sense and say: Wait, I am healed. And the disease is stubborn.
You should not consent to those who come to you with this manner, but put greater care in your honor than in your desire, and do not open foolishly but wisely for those from whom you are certain, and for whom you can take glory.
And use prognosis and indication in treating your patients so that salvation may be achieved;
This will help you acquire good reputation, glory, and praise.
"Dear son, our Lord grant you good understanding and uprightness, and if you wish to aspire to the holy inspiration of His hand, amen."
"And I have arranged this chapter for you in sections, divided into chapters according to what is before the chapter on cauterization, which I previously discussed from head to foot, so that you may find more easily what you need."
Know that this disease often comes to children during childbirth, especially when the birth canal squeezes the head of the child too tightly;
And sometimes this occurs due to a hidden cause that remains unknown.
I have never seen this disease affect anyone but children, and all those I saw died quickly. And therefore it seems to me that I should leave off working on such cures.
I saw a child whose head was filled with water, and it grew bigger every day until he could no longer hold it up.
And the moisture increased so much that he died, and this moisture collected under the bone above the nape of the neck, between the heart and the bone.
And if this moisture is located between the heart and the bone, with small abscesses present, you should make a wide cut in the middle of the head.
and it should be as long as two fingers, so that the moisture runs out;
And here is the shape of the spina bifida:
"If the moisture has grown more and the swelling is larger, then make two incisions in the form of a cross, according to this shape:"
And if the moisture is under the bone, and you see signs such as the head's scalp raised on both sides, and water squirts out when pressed with your hand inside, but nothing comes out: If you must cut around the head, make three incisions as follows:
And after the incision, remove all the moisture outside. After straining the wounds with cloths and powders, apply vinegar and oil, leaving it thus until the fifth day;
Then unbind it, and dress the wound with compresses and ointments, keeping the head wrapped evenly. Give the patient dry food from a moist-free pot until the limb is healed.
And another method of incision is to observe where the abscess appears large and its assembly of water;
for sometimes it is in front. sometimes behind; sometimes on the right and sometimes on the left.
Cut where the abscess appears and where the water collects, according to your ability;
and be sure not to cut the artery. Lest the patient die from blood loss and evacuation of moisture.
"When someone has an illness called 'catarra' in the ears or in the anus, and the illness is chronic, and medicinal treatment does not help, then the last resort is cauterization with the cutting of the two arteries."
It is therefore necessary, when you cover the eyes, that the patient turns his head back; afterward rub the place with a coarse cloth until the arteries appear, then wrap the patient's neck tightly in the cloth; then look where the vein lies, and its location is near both ears, with few being behind them.
then mark the locations of the ears, then cut both with a sharp spathule of two parts until the vein is cut to the bone, and this should be done near the width of the head.
"And if you see that you have not cut deep enough, slide the scalpel under the artery and cut it from above, cutting horizontally about two fingers wide."
"Once the vein is cut, blood flows out continuously."
And if the arteries do not appear upon feeling, then measure the distance of three fingers' width, then mark and cut until you reach the bone.
and the amount of blood that should be let out is six ounces, and sometimes a little more or less, depending on what the patient can tolerate, and the filling of the artery.
Then examine the wound: If it remains on the bony point of the hip, if swelling prevents abscesses from appearing, then press the wound and bind it, applying ointment until it heals.
"de emigraine" translates to "of migraine". "When chronic migraine comes with severe catarrh, accompanied by moisture in the tears and heat in the temples, along with long-standing frenzy and similar symptoms, and medicinal treatment does not help, then we should cut the arteries of the temples and perform cauterization as described earlier."
And the manner of extracting them is thus: let the patient raise the hairs on their temples and listen to the artery that opens in the temple, for it beats well and is rarely heard outside except in some men who are too cold
and if it is heard, then the patient should tie their neck with some cloths, then rub the place with an abrasive cloth and raise the place with warm water until the artery appears plainly then take the speculum made from this form then carefully scrape away the skin until you reach the artery, then grasp it with forceps and pull it upwards, cutting it well from the tissues beneath each part
And if the artery is slender, then twist it with the point of the nail clipper; afterward cut off that portion according to the quantity of two heads. If it is not cut, blood will not flow freely throughout.
And draw out six drops [of blood], up to three at a time;
And if the artery is large, then you must tie it in two places with a strong doubled silk thread so that putrefaction does not come before the wound heals and bleeding stops.
Then cut off the excess that is between the two ties at that very moment, and then, if you wish, cauterize with a hot cautery knife until the bone is exposed.
And this is the major work, if the patient does not have fever and has a warm constitution. For the cautery helps to finish off moisture: So it is of greater help in moist conditions.
For the extraction of arteries, one must fill the space with old cotton and place well-made tents upon them;
And when they are dislocated, they should be treated with dry medicines that cause flesh to grow, and with bandages, until they are healed.
And if the skin of the artery is torn as often as you work there, hurry to cover it with a cautery, or use the place of vitriol and press your hand so that the blood is staunched. And if you do not have vitriol present, place your thumb on the location until the blood congeals, then rinse the location with cold water until the bleeding stops, and apply pressure as needed.
And there should be one thick nail of space between the two knives, and then when you have marked the two locations with incisions, place the red-hot iron upon them until it reaches the bone, and cut the vein in two places; And let the two shoulder blades be kept apart, for they are not completely suited to this cautery.
And this is the shape of the cautery:
And those who are skilled and lighter in extracting the artery should cauterize the vein with this cutting cautery of two parts, but let the cuts be well-spaced to retain heat longer. For when the tools are too thin, they retain less heat.
of tears When the tears of the eyes descend into the veins that are above the forehead on the head, and there is no benefit from any medication applied there, and you see the patient's face become reddened, and they feel a throbbing in their forehead like tremors; and the eyes are thin and moist such that the hairs of the eyelashes have fallen out, and the eyelids are heated and burned by the heat of the tears, thus this treatment is necessary. And the ancients called this 'treatment for contusion', and it is to be done thus: first, have the patient with this illness grow hairs on their forehead, then make three evenly spaced incisions along the length of the forehead;
And the ancients called this 'treatment for contusion', and it is to be done thus: first, have the patient with this illness grow hairs on their forehead, then make three evenly spaced incisions along the length of the forehead; and let one of the incisions be as long as two finger widths across the forehead downwards until it reaches the nose, and the other two should be at either side above the eyelids, but beware of cutting the arteries that are situated on both sides above the eyelids;
And keep your hand away from the line of the lower jaw, let each cut be the size of three barley grains across.
And prepare a sponge and many cloths to wipe away the blood, then insert the spatula two parts of which are shaped like this:
from the first cut that is due down the temple to the second cut; Then peel away all the skin that is between the two incisions up to the eyebrow bone above the eye, then do similarly from the middle cut to the other second cut, and then remove this spatula. Then insert into the first incision an instrument called a "cautery knife", which is very sharp on one side and smooth on the other without being sharp; this is its shape:
And place the sharp side of the blade towards the flesh near the heart, and the blunt side towards the bone, and press until it reaches the middle groove.
And cut away all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes until the incision is continuous down to where the heart opens, then similarly do in the middle cut down to the other side;
then drain the blood evenly, and press the site for the collected blood.
Then put a bandage of old cotton in each incision, and cover them with cloths moistened in wine, oil, and axle-grease, ensuring that no abscesses form.
On the third day, loosen the bandages and apply abundant cold water compresses; then treat with basilicon ointment mixed with rose oil, and other treatments for wounds until it is healed.
If the veins come with Cataract accustomed to appear, and you see the eyes thin and small, and weaken sight, and burnt papers; And hair falls out, and there is deep pain in the head with fever, and the patient sneezes; Therefore know by these symptoms that those materials and that catarrh come only from many veins, and the cure for it is this:
And you should command the patient to raise their forehead, then make a large incision across the forehead, and another from ear to ear. And begin the incision from the left temple to the right temple, going down to the bone; and keep your hand away from the nerves near the temples that move while chewing;
and when the bone is exposed, wipe away all the blood with a sponge; then open between the two lips of the wound and place cotton wool and linen strips. Then, tie wet cloths moistened in wine and oil upon it, and guard against hot abscesses.
When the bone is removed, then you must rub it until flesh begins to grow, and then treat it with drying agents that promote tissue growth.
In this manner: Take 2 parts of wheat flour and 4 parts of colophony, and make a plaster with them; And apply it to these wounds to promote tissue growth throughout.
Chapter on the Stopping of Ears
All that falls into the ears is one of four things or grains, or some kind of creature, or a piece of metal ore or similar thing like iron or seed, such as peas, beans, lentils or flowing things such as water and eye mucus and similar things.
When something like a stone or another object falls into the ear and does not fit or grow in it, place the ear to the sun.
If you see the stone, then pour some drops of violet oil or sesame oil onto it, and then perform extraction; And when it sneezes, cover its nostrils with a cloth or wool wick when the sneeze comes, and place around the ear And they lift up the ear.
Often fever comes from this treatment;
And if fever does not come, he should perform extraction with fine forceps; here is the form:
If it bursts open with the forceps, that's good;
if not, then perform extraction using a thin hook of small thickness;
And if it does not come out with that, then make a reed of thin bronze and insert the tip of the reed into the hole in the ear with force, and plug what is around the reed with soft wax so that the vein cannot enter with the reed; Then draw out the fever strongly, for often fever comes as we have said;
And if it does not come out in this way, then take some pitch like what is used for birds, and put some on an instrument that is pointed for this purpose, and put some cotton around it; Then press the pitch onto the stone or whatever it may be, and draw out the fever.
And if it does not come out of all these things that we have said, then hurry to cut the ear before a hot abscess arrives and causes spasm;
And the manner of cutting is that you first make the patient lie on their back, and draw out blood according to his strength, then make the patient sit between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and make a small cut at the root of the ear at the level of the fat. and let the cut be like a crescent moon until you reach the stone, then break it according to your strength and suck it out quickly with your mouth;
And continue treating him until he is healed.
And if it's a stone that is inside and it is inflamed, then perform an extraction.
If it cannot come out, then administer the thin, subtle spatumile in this form: And arrange incising of that grain.
But do not do this if you think that the stone is moist due to the moisture of the ear until you have broken it into many pieces;
Then extract with subtle tweezers and sugar, as we have said, so that the extraction is aligned.
Therefore, when water falls into the ear, it is necessary for the patient to perform sneezing several times and fill the ear with old cotton wool. And let him lie on that same ear where the water is. If it jumps out by itself, that's good.
If not, then take many needles according to the length of your middle finger, thin and light, and heat them a little in the fire. And let the patient insert one or more of these needles into his ear, and stick out on the other side with its foot, then pierce another needle onto the one that is in the ear. And do not stop piercing needle into needle until all the water flows out, and thus it will all flow out.
And if you see, then take a reed, insert one end into the ear and wrap the other end in fire until the reed is well burnt.
Then repeat with other reeds until all the water flows out, as we have said earlier about needles.
In extracting an insect, if it is small bodied, such as a flea or similar thing, treat it as we have said in the section on dissection.
But if it's from a large body where one can feel it, then introduce the extraction of forceps. And this is the easiest thing to remove that exists in the ear.
In extracting worms from the ears, when you treat it as we have said in division and where treating distillations, and the treatment does not help, then you must examine the ear in sunlight: If no worms appear, use fine forceps to remove them, and if none are seen, then take the tube with the form as follows:
And let it be narrow below and wide above. And insert its finest tip into the ear according to the amount of suffering experienced by the patient, then suck strongly through the entire tube; Do this often until all the worms emerge.
And if they do not obey and come out, then stuff cotton around the tube as I have said regarding stones;
And if they still do not come out as we have said, then introduce the distillations that the ancients have proven effective in killing worms, and you will find them discussed under treatments for distillations.
And then drip your oils and medicines into the ear with all this equipment, of which there is the shape here as you see: And let it be made of silver or thin brass underneath with small holes, and above for dripping.
And for pressing inside the distillation, have an instrument made of well-made brass for this purpose, and if you wish, take a razor and wrap cotton around its tip carefully; Then pour your oil or juice, along with what you wish of your medicines, into the tube, and the tube should be in the ear;
Then insert the razor with all the cotton, and press your hand temperately until the oil has distilled out of the ear; And let the patient sense it inside, and let the distillation be a warmed flask over the fire before you drip it into the ear; Ensure that it is not too cold, for then the medicine would not be as effective.
Chapter on the Stopping of Ears
No child is born without any holes in their ears.
And the same is true for adults through injury to the ear, or flesh growing inside it, and these blockages sometimes occur deeply within the ear so that they cannot be seen.
Sometimes there is a defect in the hole and it can be seen well.
Therefore, when one occurs deeply and cannot be seen, it is difficult to treat in many cases, and in the case where it can be seen, you should place the patient's ear towards the sun. And look inside: If you see the obstruction apparent, then proceed according to the method described here.
Let it be pointed and sharp in front and behind, so that it does not cut into the ear;
If the obstruction is flesh growing or a growth in the ear itself, then use fine forceps to gently pluck it out until all of that flesh has been removed.
And if the wax is deeply embedded in the ear, take a fine, light razor and heat it slightly over fire, then place it on the body of the ear.
If you notice the operation from which the patient feels pain upon hearing it, pierce easily, and ensure that you do not harm the nerves of the ear;
then place in the ear a wick according to the width of the hole, and moist it with Egyptian oil. Do this for several days until the wound is healed, or take a wick and moist it with rose water, then sprinkle ground glass powder upon it;
and if you see the ear swelling up, then it is necessary to remove the wick and insert another one moistened in cerote which has been made with rose oil and wax, until the swelling is gone; then continue treating it until it is healed.
And if there is discharge of blood, take a sponge and wrap it in cold water, then place it on the ear, and use other remedies that stop the discharge of blood which are found in treatises on distillations.
These growths that come on paper from the eyes when they are moist and dry should be stretched out with forceps and pincers, and cut off with a spathula at their roots; then place ground glass powder upon the wound.
And if there is blood on the skin, then cauterize it with a small round cautery; after the incision, movement will be easier.
and often they return, for nothing remains of their roots; And when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
Of hail Often there come upon the eyes things like hail in shape and hardness, and therefore this illness is called 'hail'; it is a gathering of thick moisture on the paper above and below. The operations are as follows:
The operations are as follows: Be aware if the 'hail' moves from side to side; this is easy to know;
Then make an incision of moderate size, gently scrape off each part, then grasp it with forceps and remove it.
If you cannot remove it without piercing the paper a little, do not worry about harming the patient;
And if the wound is large, join it with a suture, and treat it until it is healed.
And if it is small, do not apply too much force, for the ointments will heal it soon and join flesh together.
And if hailstones fall inside the ear towards the upper part, turn the paper, grasp the hailstones with tweezers, and cut and press them from one side to the other.
And if the paper moves away due to the incision, it matters not.
And once the hailstones are cut out, rinse the ear with saltwater, and treat the place where flesh joins until the patient is healed.
Of the grease of the eyes Euxinach is a grease that enters the threads of paper wicks and this happens more in children than in adults, causing great pain to their eyes. In the mornings, they have cataracts and cannot look at sunlight because tears rush to their eyes.
And for this reason they lie on their faces constantly, and sleep thus, with their papers beneath their wet eyelashes so that the inflammation and appearance cover the exinatch which opens into the eye. And when you press hard with your thumbs and feel the exit through them.
And the manner of working is such that the patient places their head in your hand;
Then take a linen cloth and prepare a tent in the shape of a circle according to the quantity that contains the exinatch from each part, then place it on top; And press with your two thumbs on either side so that the exinach is gathered within the circle;
Then make in the middle of the moisture with the sharp spatula a slit no wider than the wound made when letting blood;
And cut through the skin so deep that you reach the exinach; And in many cases exinach comes out of the slit like a piece of white fat.
Extract then a whole piece of soft cloth between your fingers at the front, and turn your hand to left and right until it is dispersed;
and ensure you do not touch the opening with your fingers lest you reach all the way to the eyeball and accidentally cut yourself.
And if the exit wound does not open at the beginning of the incision, gently widen it a little until it opens.
Then extract as we have said, then wet cloths in warm water and put them on the wound, and bandage it tightly.
And there are some men who crush bile and place it on top to corrupt that moisture which remains.
Then the burn until it is clean.
And if a hot abscess comes to its head, then cauterize it with gentle emplasters until it is clean.
Of the hairs of the skin When hairs grow on the eyelids that are not natural to them and are entwined, they harm the eyes and cause diseases such as constant tearing and softening of the lids and cloudiness, leading to damage to the eyes.
And there are four ways to treat it: Either by burning cautery together with fire, or by hot medicine as described earlier in the chapter on cauteries, and it is done either by incising and stitching or by tweezers, according to what I will say.
It is necessary that you place the head of the patient in your hand, then turn the paper of the eye towards your left hand.
If it is inverted, that's good If not, then insert a needle along all the threads and let this be near the edge of the paper where the hairs grow around these hairs, and draw the thread upwards along all the paper, and turn it towards the razor
then cut in the part below the paper, below the hairs close by, with all the scalpels fitting, from the large ear down to the small
then extract the thread, and place under the paper a small tent of cotton and linen, then press on the paper with an iron, like a minting hammer, but be sure that the figure matches the quantity you see lifting up the paper that is divided into twelve parts.
And if one needs to cut off a large amount of the paper according to how soft it has become
Then draw on all the spleen according to the two lines you have marked out, beginning from the large kidney stone up to the small one; And let one of the incisions be near the natural hairs in the thickness of a root; then place the cautery into one of the two corners of the heart, and burn it completely;
Then join the two lips with a single stitch of an awl and fine thread; wipe away the blood, and wipe off any gluey substances on the eyebrows if you see fit to do so.
And if not, pay it no mind; then leave the stitches and threads for three or four days;
Then heal the wound without stitches using dry and constricting substances; for paper adheres to the union of the wound and impedes it, but stitching is harmful (as the ancients say); this is done without fear. And there is another manner:
And there is another manner: And it is that you draw on the paper a figure similar to the shape of a myrtle leaf, as we have described, with three points spread out according to the form shown here:
then cut those which are above the small squares evenly according to the form which is here
And if you lack the power to hold the tweezers, and the thing is not even, then take a needle with one thread attached and insert it into the figure; and place one thread near the large tear, and the second thread near the small one, and bring together the threads evenly between your two fingers;
then lift your hand evenly, and lift up all the skin where you have marked it, as we have described, then bring together the two lips of the wound with stitches, and care for it until it is healed.
And if an abscess forms at your incision, soothe it with cerate and similar softening ointments;
And sometimes the hairs of the paper are curled.
Thus you must use what we have said about incision;
But stitching in one way or another is more artistic.
The treatment of cankers is according to this form: and it is that you fold the paper and pierce it according to what I have said, and then make two cankers by art, and two subtle threads as long as the paper and the width of the spatula is; and cut off two heads of two parts where you hold the threads;
then join the two subtly on what is above the paper of the eye, and press the two cankers of the two parts firmly; and leave it thus for a few days, and the skin that is pressed will die and blacken and peel off until it falls away by itself.
If it takes too long, cut it with some force, then treat it until it is healed;
And when the wound is closed and the paper lifted, hairs will no longer grow there;
And this is the form of the two splints you shall make according to this figure, and according to this length and width:
The procedure is as follows: take a fine needle, and thread through it one strand of soft silk. Then tie the heads together gently, with the length of the threads being a palm's length.
Then take another fine silk thread briefly, and tie its ends together.
Then have the patient place their head in your hand;
And stand in the sunlight so that the procedure is clearly visible; for it is a subtle and delicate procedure. Then insert the needle along the entire length at the root of the hair, pressing into the paper quickly until you draw it out naturally along the hair.
Then pull the hair out until it reaches the needle's eye, and insert into the eye one or two or three hairs or more;
Then draw your hand across until the hairs come out entirely on the paper with their natural growth.
And if the hair is plucked and the hairs do not come out with it, then pull the hair at the bottom until all the threads that you have ordered are gone, so that the hair comes out entirely from the hole above and you can see it with your eyes.
Then pluck out the hair and thread, close the eye and leave it closed for two or three days until the hair grows back in its place and flesh forms on top.
And if the hairs are short, then accompany them with one long hair from the head, and lift it up with that one which you leave until it is lengthened and then raise it up.
About the corruption of the eye When this disease called "aleacrati" or putrefaction comes to the eye, there are two ways to treat it:
One is natural and the other unnatural.
And it happens suddenly from a wound, or from cutting or cauterizing, or from similar things.
And the manner of the operation is that you cut this joint, separate its lips, and place linen tents within it, until it is healed.
and thou shouldst not use in the treatment thereof things that dry and constrict. For if thou dost this, then returns the illness worse than it was before.
but there ought to be applied things softening, such as fenugreek; and rosewater or saltwater and linseed boiled, and applications of diaculion melted in some oil, and it should be wrapped with a linen cloth, and the treatment thereof.
And the aim of thy treatment is that thou shouldst take care that it does not heal according to its former shape.
And these operations which we have spoken of are but redressings of this disease, that it may not return according to its former shape.
This illness that is below what is truly called "axacrati" is natural and accidental
The accident comes from wound and cut and burn and things similar;
And the way to perform this operation is that you take a needle with a doubled thread and insert it into the flesh, making it pierce from the left eyelid towards the right, so that the threads come out on both sides of the flesh.
Then stretch the flesh above the entire needle and cut it with a broad spatula. And if the shape of the paper returns as it should, that is good.
But if not, then take a razor and place it in the crease, turn the paper over, and make two cuts inside the paper along its edges.
And let the ends of the two cuts be the two corners of the incision you have made, and form an angle such that when they are assembled, the shape is like the shape of the Greek letter 'I'.
Then remove that piece of flesh according to the length and width of its edges from under the paper, then join together the two parted sides and sew them with a thread of wool.
Then comes the care of those we have spoken about regarding mollifying medicines, and tents, until they are healed.
And if the disease comes from a split or cut or burn, then you should make a full-length split under the pubic hairs, following what is written above; Then insert between the two leaves of a tent, as I have said
Then insert between the two leaves of a tent, as I have said and one should perform the procedure according to the shape of the disease, for it is very varied in shape; and wise masters arrange all their strength to make the form return to its natural state
And the patient himself, according to what is necessary for the procedure and tools in various dispositions.
When this union happens in many men in such a way that the skin above is stuck with the white of an egg and cannot move or perform its natural functions, then you should put the point of a razor under the skin and lift it up
And stretch them like tweezers, until you grasp what is suitable for the subtile spatula, which should not be too sharp nor too cutting, so that the patient cannot suffer if the spatula is too sharp or blinds the eye.
And make your cut, from which you scrape away that collection, lightly so that the paper returns according to its natural shape;
And remove all of that collection, and sometimes apply salted water to the eye, then rinse with fresh water and collyrium;
Then place a linen tampon between the paper and the eye, and apply wool moistened in egg albumen onto the eye; And after the third day, apply cold compresses until it is healed.
Know that a nail can be in two ways: Either it is nervous and similar to hard skin, or another that is not nervous but resembles moist gel, which when touched by iron and attempted to be grasped with tweezers, cannot be held.
And both kinds begin near the great eyelid, growing gradually until they cover all the sight and all the light and movement of the eye.
Then the manner of incision is such that the patient places his head in your hand, then opens his eyes. And lift the paper to your hand, then fold the corner like small tongs, and press it on top; then take a needle, and insert a horsehair, or cow hair, or ox hair, and strong thread; And fold the point of the needle slightly and insert it into the corner, pushing it through completely with the needle, then tie the corner with thread and press it down, and scrape off all the hair on the side of the corner that covers the pupil and silk to the top of the hair, then cut the remaining at the root of the eyelid with a sharp scalpel and tweezers, leaving the natural flesh on the eyelid so that tears do not flow through the incision as usual;
And sometimes the nail grows only on the little finger, and on the thread, as we have said; Then remove all the soft skin around this area; here is the shape:
And ensure that the spatula does not touch and tear the delicate tissue, and that the needle is not pierced;
After the incision, pour some crushed celery seed into the wound, and make a plaster of litharge, and leave it until the next day; Then treat this condition until it is healed.
And if the nail is not painful and you cannot insert the needle, nor can tweezers enter, often this type of nail is cured by medications;
And they grow as I have described in the section above; if you observe them carefully, open the wound of the patient and gently take a little spatula according to this shape: And carefully raise the nail up; and if you see that it does not thin out and the root is pressed, then distill from your mouth into the wound a plaster made of litharge and red lead and crushed celery seed, and seal the wound until the next day;
If nothing stands in your way with the eye, such as a hot abscess, then apply the cautery, first treating the hot abscess until it is clean, then resume the work as before until it is clean.
Then continue the other operation according to this same work until it is all removed.
And if the appearance of the flesh from the eyelid causes harm to the eye with great damage, then suspend it with a needle and cut off a part, but not all, so that no tears come from it.
Then distill into the eye red collyrium made of litharge
In some men's eyes, there sometimes grows red flesh which covers the pupil and sticks to the membranes, pushing them forward like a pomegranate seed.
And the operation is this: the patient places his head in your hand, then you open his eyes and grasp all that red flesh with suitable hooks, and hold it firmly
then cut off the first piece of flesh, and keep cutting until it is all removed, taking care not to injure the eye during the operation
And the incision of the eyelid should be made in the same way as the incision of the nail and the small ligaments from which bone is removed, as shown later in this chapter
And when the incision is complete and all the flesh is removed, apply to the eye crushed celery seeds or distill upon it red collyrium and similar corrosive medicines; then place on top a wisp of cotton with egg white so that it may be securely sealed against a hot abscess.
And if anything remains and the wound begins to grow hot, and you suspect a hot abscess, then leave off the eye treatment and cure the abscess with cool remedies.
Then return to your original task once it is healed, and thus do in any case where flesh has adhered to the eye by this method.
But nevertheless you should relieve the treatment of each weak eye according to its natural course; And also according to any accidental course, in regard to iron work.
Do not put your hand into any of these operations while you see that this limb is suffering from such treatment.
Before veins are red which cover over the eye, causing their operation to be obscured and weakening the eye every day.
It is therefore necessary for you to first examine whether the eye, in which there is an abscess, is hot and if there is no other feverish illness besides the abscess; Then tie it in such a way:
Command the patient to place his head on your knee, then suspend those veins according to their wisdom, and let the bandages be doubled subtly according to this form:
And two onions per degree in a single course according to this form:
Then tie the bandages tightly, pressing gently on the veins, and squeeze out blood drop by drop until you see the veins swell beneath the skin.
And be sure not to cut the eye with the points of the tweezers, and perform this procedure at midday before the sun, being very diligent in your work so that you do not let any blood flow other than from those veins.
And when you have done this, then distill into the eye a mixture of green and red collyrium to corrupt what remains of the stone.
And if you cannot remove the stone completely in one sitting, then apply a plaster made of soothing substances to the eye until the pain is eased and an abscess forms. Then resume according to this method until the patient is healed.
And these are the forms of remedies:
A surgeon calls a fistula 'arissati':
When you treat it with a cautery and with medicine that burns hotly according to what I have said before, and it is not yet healed, then there is deceit within it which you should cut upon the abscess where it must be burst, and draw out all the moisture that is there until the bone is exposed.
And when the bone is exposed, and you see the corruption and blackness, then cut with all the instruments that are mentioned here in their proper form:
And this is called 'sharp head', and should be made of hot iron from its head to its end, and be pointed like a chisel as it is in the present form:
And place it on the location of the rotted bone, then turn it between your fingers, and press your hand a little until you know that the corruption is scraped.
And do this several times, then apply medicinal remedies that dry up (the wound).
If the place is sound and flesh is born there, and the body of the bow is sound, and remains thus for 40 days, and it does not renew nor become inflamed, and no evil happens to it, know that it is healthy.
If not, then there is no other remedy than to bring the fistula back to the opening of the nostril according to this method: And it is that you uncover the bone with iron a second time, and with hot medicines; and when it is uncovered take iron forceps in this shape, and let the head of the iron be at three angles, and thin out the handle up to its end as shown here:
Then place it on the bone near the tear duct, and keep your hand away from the eye socket; then turn the forceps entirely until it pierces the bone, which the patient will feel because the wind will hiss if they hold their hand over their nostril
and then restore the place with dry medicines as I have taught you; and when the flesh has grown and the joints have hardened, then it will go to snow. So it is easier for the patient.
When both eyes open fully and evenly, and nothing obstructs or diminishes them, then you must bind the patient;
then heat [the patient], then place cupping glasses or leeches without cutting to suck; then put on the eye a poultice made of aloe and frankincense and sarcocolle, and then close the eye, and cover it with bandages and cloth.
And the manner of the cloths is that you take soft cloths and fold each one into four layers, then place them one on top of another according to how much the eyes need.
then secure it tightly with a hard bandage from above and then recommence the cupping glasses to suck without cutting;
Then remove the cupping glasses and keep the eye constrained day and night. If the ligature loosens, then you must pull it out.
Then remove the ligature after the day and night, and if you see the eye improving, that is good.
If not, Then resume the emplastrum and dressings and ligature and cupping glasses until it is healthy.
of a burst eyeball If disruption comes to the eyeball wound, then it opens, and blood flows from the paper like a grain of resin, which is frightening to see.
Then if you see it close, the procedure is such that you insert a needle into the root of the part below up to that above, then insert another needle where there is the doubled thread of the eyelid. and pierce it with this, leaving the first needle in its position;
then tie the doubled thread at a suitable location and bind one part of the eyeball around it tightly. Then remove the needle and place a damp linen cloth soaked in egg white over the eye.
Allow it until the thread falls out with the boil, then treat the eye with comforting substances until the wound is healed.
And sometimes the wound is held closed by the boil on each side of a circle of cloth until it is healed.
And if the eye appears swollen, then pierce it with a fine needle that comes from deep within the eye, and draws out the moist albuginous humor and causes the eye to descend, entering therein quickly.
Then extract it until it is healed.
This condition called 'alcunnati' is nothing but bowed moisture assembled in the eye, resembling descending water, and it is not water.
To observe the appearance of this condition, make the patient sit on a prepared and upright seat, then take their head between your hands from both sides, and move it until you see the bowing rise up to your eyes. Then it should be inserted, without descending, and the light should be removed; let the patient see as he used to.
And if it does not descend below, know that it is acute, and if the descent of the bowel is not arranged as we have said.
Make the patient sit between your hands, then take the fine spatula and pierce through the corneal tissue one or two fingers along the length of the conjunctiva with the cornea and crown until the bowel exits.
And once it has exited, distill hot water mixed with honey or boil fennel seeds in water and honey, then cleanse it with another dressing until it is healed.
Aigues of the eye We have shown the similitudes of acute conditions in the division, and those that should be pierced; if you work according to the health.
It is necessary for you to make the patient sit between your crossed hands, away from the light of the sun, and tightly bind the sound eye.
Then place the paper of the eye on your left hand if the eye is left, or on your right hand if it is right.
Then take in your right hand, if the eye is left, the instrument called 'almagda', or in your left hand, if the eye is right.
Then place the point of the instrument near the crown where it is about the thickness of a ray on the eyelid at the side closest to the lesser eyelash, then gently push the instrument called 'almagda', turning your hand until it pierces into the eyelid and you feel that almagda reaches the empty space.
And ensure that the measurement of the path of 'almagda' is equal to the length from the measurement of the space between the pupil and the end of the blackness. and this is the crown of the eye.
If you see the bone through this paper due to the clarity of the corneal cloth, then place the instrument up to where the water is, and then express it along one vein after another.
If water descends now, then the patient sees before them and the instrument in their eye.
After resting for a moment, if the water rises up the second vein, then apply pressure with the instrument; and when it is inserted deeply and it does not rise, then gently extract the almagda while rotating your hand little by little.
Then put back in water a drop of this precious stone, and rinse out the eye with it inside. Then place a plug made of wool soaked in rose oil and egg yolk over the eye, securing it with healthy eye ointment.
Nowadays, we put crushed cumin on wounds with plenty of egg yolk.
And if almagda cannot enter the eye because of its hardness, for there are such men who have very hard eyes, then it is necessary that you take the instrument called "alberit", of which this is the form:
And then carefully pierce only the conjunctiva, not too deeply but rather gently and delicately; insert the almagda as we have said.
And when the operation is complete, prepare a comfortable resting place for the patient on his back in a dark room.
And keep him still from all movements; let him eat light foods and not move his head either to the right or left, and have him bound according to his condition for three days.
Then he unties him in that same dark house, and tests his sight, and makes him see some things, and then puts the bandage back on for seven days.
but you must not do this during the hour of treatment or after incision immediately, but you should lay him down, because water rises quickly.
If an abscess begins to form, untie the bandage before the seventh day, and apply a poultice that alleviates abscesses
and when it is soothed, then uncover the sight and put on his face a piece of linen to cover for a few days, and keep him always in that dark house.
Then gradually leave the house little by little, and let him gradually return to his usual way of life.
and know that no disciples should interfere in this case And someone came to us from Iraq who said that in some lands they make an instrument called almagda for piercing the eye, through which water is sucked out, but still I have never seen one in our land nor have I ever read about it in books of the ancients. and by chance it may be a new thing
And these are the likenesses of Almagest forms, so that those who do not know them may see them;
and let them be made of pure silver "And their fronts should have this same subtlety, and their backs should have three sharp angles."
Sometimes joints grow together unevenly, among which some resemble scorptions with many feet
And there are such that have flesh of yellowish color, and soft flesh of good color. Therefore, in those soft flesh which is not hard, you should have the patient sit between your hands facing the sun
Therefore, in those soft flesh which is not hard, you should have the patient sit between your hands facing the sun and open his nostrils, and pour oil on that flesh, and rub it forcefully. for cut away everything that you can sustain with a sharp knife from one side until you know that all the flesh is removed
And if there remains any part that cannot be cut away, then open it with all the delicate instruments lightly, so that nothing remains And if blood overflows, or a boil breaks open, then cleanse it promptly as is necessary.
And if they are malignant boils, then hurry and cauterize them until the blood is staunched and all the flesh is removed, then apply fresh lint and wine or vinegar. If new growth occurs, and moisture reaches the mouth, know that it is without disease;
And if moisture does not permeate as it should, know that there is bone growing above the flesh, to which the instruments do not come for cutting:
Therefore you must insert a thick linen thread into it, moistened with our hands, and have between each knot at least one finger or less; And let the patient put his head on the thread's end with some force, and pull it out while smelling until it comes into the mouth;
And many children do this at school, and it is easy for those who wish to do it;
Then grasp the head that comes through the snow with one hand, and the other head that comes through the mouth with the other hand, and pull them apart gently, as we do who are present.
Do this until you know that the wound has corrupted that flesh, then pull out the threads, squeeze out the blood, and wet the thread in Egyptian oil, and replace it into the snow as before;
Do this for three days or more, until the ointment corrupts all that remains of the flesh
and then place in the snow a hot poultice for some days until it is healed, and if dry medicines are needed, use them
And this is the form of the instrument to purge the head, in which one distills oils and medicines onto the snow
And it should be made of silver or bronze, resembling an open lamp like a tube, with its channel also
and if you wish, make a closed tube, and let the instrument be full for purging the head
And let him have much of this to hold his head when heating the oil or any liquid.
To remove flesh from the nose
Frequently, a disease called 'telul' appears on the head and grows large, becoming visible to see.
And for this reason, you must cut it off at the beginning, and then remove all the skin, before applying a cautery or hot medicine.
And if one delays cutting until it is large, then beware if it is hard, of dark color, and poor sensation:
do not touch it with iron for it is an enchanted abscess; for when it is cut, great harm comes to the patient.
And if the abscess is soft to touch, not dark in color, and you see that it can be completely cut out, then empty the patient and cut without fear, and afterwards treat with drying and tightening things.
Know this: when water comes into one of these joints, it does little good, unless in some men.
Therefore, when this happens to anyone, one must examine whether the wound is entirely fresh in all its blood; And then join the two lips to a stitch, then heal it until it is clean.
And if the lips are already dry on both sides, you must scrape away all parts of their core until they are sound, then join the two lips together with a stitch, and bind them, and sprinkle dragon's blood powder, and crushed incense upon it. And place on the powders a strong plaster or other adherent plaster, and leave it until it falls off by itself, then heal it with ointment until it is sound.
The method of stitching is that you bring together the edges: or by needles, as we have said in the abdominal stitching. or by thread, as I have shown you.
lipomas
There are many people who have hard abscesses within the lips, resembling grains of millet, some smaller and others larger;
Therefore you must turn back the lips, make an incision on each knot, grasp it with forceps and cut it into each part;
Then apply powdered vitriol after the incision until the blood is stanched.
And then the egg yolk, and heal the wound with dry things until it is healed.
Often there appears on the joined gums a growth called "albulus" by the ancients;
Therefore you should hold it with tongs and cut it at its root, allowing the blood to flow freely.
Then apply powdered vitriol or other restricting and drying powders to the wound;
And if that flesh returns after being cut, which often happens, then cut it a second time and cauterize it. If it does not return after the cautery;
Sometimes they appear gathered together at the head of the teeth inside the mouth between the gums, rough and sharp excrescences; And sometimes the teeth are black and yellowish-green and wormy, causing corruption in the gums, and the teeth stink.
It is necessary that you make the patient sit between your hands, and their shoulders be within your grasp, raising the teeth or the edges until nothing remains. And likewise remove blackness, greenness, yellowness and other stains until they are clean;
And if one removes what is there due to the first cause, it is good. If not, then begin again on the second and third day until everything has been removed;
And know that teeth require various forms of instruments to remove them according to what the task demands, for those used to remove protruding teeth have different shapes than those used to remove teeth between others. And these forms and others should be prepared with you.
When curing a toothache, one must delay extracting as long as possible, for this should not be done at all; For it is a very delicate structure until there is no excuse to extract.
Therefore, when the patient is constrained due to toothache, you must be certain of the aching tooth. Many times the pain leaves the patient, and they believe it is from the tooth of St. Denis, and have their good tooth pulled out; and yet the pain does not leave because of this, so much that the bad one is removed, for we have already tried this with such sinners;
And when you are certain about the aching tooth, then it is necessary that you scrape around the tooth all around with a strong spatula to protect the gum from all sides;
Then move it with your two fingers or with fine forceps bit by bit until it is well loosened, then firmly grasp it with the forceps; And hold the patient's head between your knees, and keep it still so that it does not move.
After extract the tooth correctly without breaking it, and if it does not come out easily, then take one of these tools and insert it gently on each side, and with the lever, move it as you have done before.
And if the tooth is pierced and hollowed out, then you must fill it with small wads of cloth where the hole is; And hold it gently with forceps so that it does not break when being pulled out.
It is necessary to operate skillfully around the gum to extract a tooth.
And be sure that you do not break it, and if a piece remains, it will cause the patient greater pain from the root's wickedness than before.
And beware that thou dost not do as foolish surgeons do, who through their haste and boldness sometimes break the cheekbone, and do not bring about what we have mentioned.
But through their rashness they sometimes cause great diseases by the roots left behind or the cheekbone broken, as we have often seen.
And when the tooth is pulled, wash the area with wine, vinegar, and salt.
And if bleeding occurs, which often happens, apply powdered vitriol to the area
If that does not help, cauterize it.
The shape of the tooth-extraction tools with which one first moves teeth should be long-pointed and thick-handled, so they do not bend when pulling the tooth.
And these are the forms: "And they should be of thick members so that they do not bend during extraction, and they should be made of good iron and have teeth to hold the tooth in place."
"for the root of the teeth" When the root remains after extraction, you should place on the area cotton soaked in butter for one or two days until the area is softened, then insert the tongs called "algefri," with which the jaw resembles a parrot's beak.
And they shall be made within as if with a file; this is the shape:
"And if the roots will not come out with all these pliers, you should uncover the flesh entirely around the root and insert into it the instrument called 'althali', which is like a spatula. And this is its shape:"
And let it be strong and thick so that it does not break, and if the root jumps out by chance, that is good;
But if not, then use all the tools whose forms are given hereafter:
"And also help yourself with this instrument which has two rows, of which this is the shape:" "and other iron instruments that are placed in front of the root of the teeth, and also help yourself with this instrument which resembles large pliers. And here is its shape:"
And let this tool be strong so that it cannot break, and know that many tooth tools are like this; And also other tools which are not enumerated;
And the wise master shall find his own tool according to what his work and the illness show him, for there are such illnesses where no ancient tools were taught due to their diversity; and if one breaks a carriage or other bones where it could be used, then one seeks among the tools that are necessary, which I have told you about, and uses gestures, of which this is the shape:
And let them be thick and well-fitting to hold the bone so that it does not escape but can grasp and remove it;
And then restore the joint with appropriate medications for this condition; if there is decay in the bone and it is small, scrape it away with all these tools.
When teeth appear not according to their natural course, and the form is ugly, especially in maiden women, it is necessary that you know if the tooth is next after the one beside it and not in its proper place, and neither can be drawn nor smoothed.
then remove it; and if it is close to the tooth, take this tool whose shape is depicted here, resembling a small beak of iron sharpened on its end.
"And work little by little with your hands over several days to remove the tooth because of its hardness and so that you do not move the others. And if it is visible enough to be smoothed, then smooth it with a rasp like this one here, of which this is its shape:"
and is also like the file used for making needles.
And gently file the tooth a little each day until it falls out without moving too much.
Then smooth the edge at the end with any razor, and if the tooth is too sharp and hurts the tongue, it is necessary to file down its sharpness until it no longer hurts the tongue or impairs speech.
When the front teeth are knocked out, either by an impact or a fall, and the patient cannot chew their food without it falling apart, even after treating them with constricting medicines, then that is of no use;
then they should be secured with a gold wire, for silver becomes green and rotten, but gold does not change.
and let the wire be neither too thick nor too thin, according to the size of the space between the teeth;
And if you see that the teeth need to be straightened, then take the wire and the double-ended pliers between two healthy teeth, then place the ends between the loose teeth, if there is one or several, until you can barely see blood between the healthy tooth on the other side. then start wrapping again up to where you began, and gently pull your hand tightly until it no longer moves.
And let your ligature be at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape.
Then grasp the jaws of the file with some pliers, join them together, and place them between the healthy teeth, and position it so that it does not burn the tongue.
And then let it remain thus tightly until it can stay, and if it loosens, or the files become round, tighten them with another file.
If it remains thus, it will serve throughout its time, and this is the shape of teeth and the arrangement of two healthy teeth and two molars, as you see.
And when a tooth falls out, replace it in its place, gently, as we have said;
And let no one who is not wise and patient meddle with this, and sometimes a tooth made from cow bone is used, placed in the space where there is a deficiency, and it is tightened as we have said, and it remains and serves for a long time.
Sometimes this union comes naturally underneath the tongue at birth; In case of an accidental wound.
And the treatment is as follows: open the patient's mouth, hold their head steady in your hand, and raise their tongue.
Next, cut the frenulum of the tongue with a scalpel until the tongue is disconnected from its attachment. If there is scar tissue or a nodule present, which can occur due to an injury, insert the nail and cut it away.
Ensure that the cut does not go too deep so as not to injure the artery located underneath.
After performing this, lift up the jaw with warm rose water or warm vinegar, or cold water, then place a linen pad underneath the tongue.
And have the patient rinse their mouth each night so that the wound does not adhere.
If bleeding occurs, place powdered vitriol on the wound. And if the blood flows abundantly, cauterize it with a slow-acting cautery that is suitable for this purpose. Then treat another wound until it is healed.
And if you see a fleshy growth of black or hard color which the patient cannot feel, do not touch it, for it is cancer;
And if it tends towards blenching and there is moisture, then apply the onion poultice, make an incision with a sharp lancet, and release it on both sides. And if blood hinders your work, then apply powdered vitriol until it is staunched, then return to your task until all bleeding stops.
Then raise the area with stitches and needle, and treat other wounds until it is healed.
"throat abscesses" Sometimes there are lumps that form in the throat which are called "godath," and these are properly known as tonsils. If you treat them according to what we have said previously but they do not heal, then be careful:
If it is a hard boil with little sensation and fleshy color, do not touch it with iron.
And if they are red and the root is large, then do not touch it with iron for fear of blood letting; but let it be until it is ripe, and then you shall sever it, where it will break on its own;
And if it is of pale color round, and the root is slender, then have ready your instrument to cut, but first check if the boil is warmly resting and quiet.
Then make the patient sit before the sun, and their limbs in your hand, and they open their mouth and take the servant's breath between their hands, and press the tongue down with all the instrument, of which this is the form;
And it should be made of silver or fine brass like a knife:
When you press the tongue with this instrument and see the boil, take the lancet and insert it into the navel, and draw it up more than you can bear;
And take some things from the cloths with it, then cover it with the instrument, of which this is the form, that appears as force. And moreover, the heads are curved, and one towards the other, and are very sharp, made of iron or steel
"And if you do not have this instrument at hand, then take pincers, of which here is the form:" And let it be cutting on one side, and named on the other
And after cutting one of the mandibles, cut the other in the same manner; then let the patient gargle with warm water and salt-water, and if blood flows, let the patient gargle with water or cooked pomegranate skins, or myrtle leaves, and similar things until the bleeding stops Then treat it until it is sound
And sometimes other abscesses arise in the throat besides the two mandibles; then cut them in the same way as the two mandibles are joined.
And I treated a woman for an abscess that was close inside her throat, namely one of small size
And indeed, I had nearly closed the entire throat, so that the woman could not exhale due to the blocked passage, and she could neither eat nor drink, and would have died if left thus for one or two days.
And the abscess had grown so large that it filled both openings of the throat.
I then quickly fetched a needle, inserted it into the woman's throat, and pierced through it with great force, cutting away a large portion of her windpipe.
Then I closed another part of the wound with the needle and opened her mouth, pressing down on her tongue.
After this, I pierced these abscesses with the needle and cut away some of it; only a little blood came out. And thus the woman's throat passage was opened, and she began to drink water then wine; I continued cutting away at this abscess for a long time.
And the abscesses kept returning, filling up again the space I had cleared out until it became very large once more.
Then I bandaged it and burned with the cautery within the throat Thus it remained without growing;
and I left these parts, and I do not know what God did with him afterwards.
"de l’uve"
When rheum descends to the eye, and it is inflamed and protuberant, it is called "perpendicular";
and if it is below, thick, and round, it is called "uve".
When it is cured as we have said in the division, and the cure does not profit, and you see that the surrounding swelling is appeased, and it is subtle, then you must cut it;
and that which is rounded together and is not long; if it is sanguine or of dark color or black, then you should avoid incising it. For there is great danger to the patient.
Therefore, when you see it, according to its manner of blennor and length, you should have the patient sit before the sun, and press their tongue with the instrument mentioned earlier; then insert the awl into the eye, draw it downwards, and cut with the first of two instruments that I mentioned in the incision of two testicles.
And you must not cut beyond what is naturally excessive;
for if you cut more, it hurts the voice and speech;
and after the incision, use what we have said in the incision of two testicles, until it is healed.
And if the patient has fear of cutting, then you must use an instrument for the cauterization to make him fearless.
And the manner of cautery is sharp and burning. It is necessary that the patient put his head in your lap, and then press the tongue with the instrument mentioned in the chapter on cautery, and cauterize with hot water so that it is neither too thick nor too thin; and here is the shape of this instrument:
And at its top has a hollow where one puts the medicine, like the hollow of a spoon, and put the instrument over the whole eye with the medicine;
And let the patient lie on their side, so that saliva and mucus flow from their mouth away from the medicine inside, so it does not reach the throat.
Then hold your hand over all the medicine and press it on the eye for half an hour's worth of time until you see it turn black and the pain from the medicine has ceased.
And if you see, take cotton and wrap it around some instrument, wet the cotton in the medicine, and put the instrument with all the cotton into the eye socket until the cotton touches the eye.
And do this often until the cauterization is complete, then let it dry and fall off after four or five days.
And if you need to restart the cauterization with the medicine, then do so, and afterwards wipe around the eye with cotton dipped in butter, and cleanse what is around the medicine.
And let him rise from cold water, and let him rinse with gargarisms until he is clean.
This remedy is safer than incision or cauterization;
If it is treated by fumigation in this manner, take calamint and hyssop and origanum and rue and camomile and mugwort and similar herbs, gather them all or some into one pot, put ashes there, and let it boil;
And the pot should be well sealed with clay, and in the pot there should be an instrument for shaving like this: And it should be made of silver or brass, and one end put in the patient's mouth so that the vapor rises to the eye through the canal until the eye is numbed;
Afterwards, repeat often until the eye dries up, and be careful not to do this at the beginning of the appearance of a hot boil, for many things could happen. And do not apply cauterization heat except during the draining of an abscess boil.
And if this instrument is not present, take a cane and put the tip of an egg into it so that the mouth of the patient does not get too hot. For the eggshell does not let the steam harm the mouth, and this is a good combined remedy.
Often a bone, fish spine, or any other object becomes lodged in the throat.
So then you must pull out what you can see, and press the tongue with the sunken instrument so that you may move the object.
And what you cannot see and is stuck in the throat, you must make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach. Perhaps then the object will be expelled through vomiting.
Or if the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of apple, or a root of lettuce, or a morsel of dry bread. And tie the sponge with thread, then stitch it together. When it reaches its place, she will stand up, and then you pull fire.
And if it does not come by fire from what we have said, then take the lead instrument according to this form:
And let the instrument be bent at the head so that it can enter the throat more easily, and have its head raised high. Be sure not to touch the epiglottis, lest the patient choke, nor push the bone inside.
And it is better for the patient themselves to insert the instrument, so that they know where the thing stands upright. Then push it down until you draw fire evenly along the entire instrument, until it is fiery hot.
**de la sansue de la gorge**
Sometimes the sinew is healed, as I said in my previous work, through treatment with medications; And if this does not help, then observe the throat of the patient in the sunlight, after pressing their tongue with the instrument I mentioned.
And if you see a vein, then tie it with a very small thread, or use fine tweezers suitable for this purpose.
And if this does not help, then take a peeled cane and insert it into the patient's throat, then place the end of the cane into hot iron and do this frequently. And if the patient sweats cold water all day.
Then take full handfuls of cold water, open the mouth, pour it in without swallowing, and move it around with your hand often. And as soon as the patient feels the water, they should lie down.
If it does not fall as we have said, then fumigate the patient with asafoetida, using the same instrument mentioned in the fumigation of the eye.
Repeat this many times, for it will fall without hesitation.
The manner of fumigation is thus: take a pot with live coals inside, cover the pot with a pierced cloth in the middle, and place the head of the instrument into that hole;
Then you throw your fumigation into it, and the patient places the head of the pipe in their mouth and closes their mouth so that no smoke escapes, but reaches the patient.
And now the boil will fall, and if it does not, then repeat the fumigation many times;
And let the patient endure thirst, and eat salty foods also, but do not drink water.
And then it will be necessary for it to come out through this treatment.
And the shape of the instrument with which one treats sciatica is like this: when it can be seen, it resembles curved forceps for entering into the throat. And it has the appearance of a bird's beak and sharpness like that of a rasp, so that whatever it grasps, it cannot let go.
Many kinds of abscesses are described hereafter in this book, and they are differentiated by piercing and cutting.
And there are two types [of abscesses]: one is similar to itself, and that which holds moisture.
And the second manner is for those places where they are on the body.
For the apostemes of the head are different from those of the fundament, and the apostemes of the fleshy part are different from those that come in joints, and each has its judgment in the work.
But not all abscesses should be pierced until the boil has burst according to its fullness.
And there are some that must be pierced when they are ripe, even if they do not burst according to their fullness, such as abscesses near joints.
For when apostemes come near joints, and one lets them be until they are completely rotten, sometimes the ligaments and nerves of the joint become corrupted, which causes contraction in that limb.
When an abscess is near the main limb, if you delay its opening until it becomes gangrenous, it will harm the main limb.
or if it is near the fundament, pierce it before it becomes gangrenous
and it is not necessary to pierce a hard abscess without prior digestion being completed, except for one near the fundament, which might otherwise penetrate deeply and become an internal fistula and thus cannot heal in a short time.
And you should know the signs of opening a gangrenous abscess according to its development: when the pain stops, and fever subsides, and pain and redness decrease, and the swelling and hardness at the head of the abscess subside, along with other signs.
and it is necessary that you make the incision where the abscess hangs lowest and where it opens more easily
and the incision should be long enough for the body; and if the abscess is on the hands or feet, or in joints near arteries, make incisions equal in length wherever there are no folds. In cases where they strike, follow according to this member.
And when an abscess is in a fleshy location, it is better that you delay perforating until it is confirmed to be digested completely, as we have said.
For if you pierce it before this, then the body will be filled with its venom, and it is full of much filth; and perhaps it would harden the lips and the depth of it.
And if any abscess is pierced according to the width of the body, according to what the member needs.
And you must bring small abscesses, small holes; and in large abscesses, large holes, and many crevices according to the likeness of the size of the abscess.
And if there are such abscesses where it is necessary to strike with fire and cauterize; when they have become like thatches, and are softened, then you must do likewise as one does for boils.
And if there are such that are split into three angles, and if there are such that one cuts like the leaf of a mulberry tree, as abscesses of the angels;
and if there are such where one makes a round cut, and other cuts and similar incisions.
Those that have no head, like soft superficial abscesses, you must pierce them openly;
And when an abscess is large and it has collected much bowels, and you pierce it, then do not draw out all the bowels at that hour, but draw out one part. Then stop up the abscess until the next day, then draw out some more afterwards; Do this repeatedly little by little until all the bowels come out.
Similarly if the patient is of weak strength, or a pregnant woman, or young children, or very elderly men. Because sometimes the spirit leaps with the release of the bowstring, causing the patient to die suddenly, without you noticing.
Therefore, proceed with great caution in this chapter, and once you have pierced your abscess, then cleanse the wound, and see if the wound from the abscess is small. And if it is a deep incision, then bring linen or old cotton bandages; And if it is a large abscess and there are many perforations, then you must stuff each one with a bandage so that they come together.
And if you have cut a piece of skin from the abscess, and you have shaved around it, then you must fill it with dry cotton or lint from linen cloth without moisture, and bind it until the third day.
Then remove the bandage, and apply an ointment until it is healed.
And if bleeding occurs during your operation, apply cold water and gauze, wet the cloth, and press it on the wound repeatedly.
And if the bleeding persists, apply treatment and care, and the powders that I have mentioned earlier in this book, especially during wintertime when the limbs or abscesses are very tense, then you should place hot wet cloths on them dipped in wine and oil.
And if it is summertime and the area is fleshy, then you must place wet cloths dipped in water and oil, or in cold wine and oil, until the third day, as we have said.
And then drain the abscess, clean it, and treat it until it is healed.
And this he must know universally in treatments of abscesses:
As I have told you how one should proceed with the treatment of abscesses, here is the chapter.
**Where small boils come from the head**, they are like those we have in our skin, similar to the eggs of a goose, and there are many such similarities.
There are some that are fatty and such where there is moisture like mud;
and some that are hard and stony in appearance, and there should be no doubt if the artery opposes it.
And the work of cutting is that you test all tools called 'entromissoire', from which its form comes hereafter, what it contains.
But if it contains moisture, so let it flow through above for a long time.
And when the moisture is drained, scrape away without leaving any skin that contains this moisture, because it returns immediately if anything is left.
then dip cotton in Egyptian oil if present; if not, then in water and salt, and use it to dress the wound, leaving it until the next day; And this will consume what is remaining of the night.
Then recommence with cotton, as before, on the second day and the third, until you know that none remains of the night;
Then treat the wound with appropriate ointment until it heals.
And if the boil holds out fat, cut it according to this shape, along its length; and cast your spices on it, and scrape it from all sides, and give all your care to draw out the clot that lies within it;
And if the artery opposes you, then do as I told you afterwards.
And likewise do it for an abscess if it is hard, and with cutting and dressing as I have told you.
And cutting into a hard and moist abscess is easier because they contain little blood. And if some of these boils have no moisture at their head, or are those boils that I cut from the head of an old woman;
and found the boil just like a hard, rough, and white stone, and could not be broken; And if one had struck it, they would have inflicted upon it as much of a wound as from a stone.
In other boils coming at the head, besides those that come at the heads of children and the roots of ears, the incision should always be made in the lowest position so that the bowels may more easily issue forth.
And treat him as it ought to be.
Many times these abscesses occur at the neck and under the armpits, and in angles, and sometimes they come elsewhere on the body, and are numerous, and intermingled with one another.
And each boil is properly within its coat, like the pustule and the abscess of the head, as we have said; And there are many kinds of these boils.
And there are many kinds of these boils. There are some that contain moisture, and there are also stubborn ones that refuse to heal.
Among these, therefore, that which you see with good touch and is similar to the color of the skin, moves on each side and is not hard towards the nerves of the neck or the artery nor the vessel, and is not deep;
Then you should cut it from above and scrape off each part; hold the two lips of the heart open if needed, as we have said for abscesses of the head;
And cut it bit by bit, and make sure you do not cut the nerve nor the vein; let the scalpel be neither dull nor sharp so that your hand does not slip, nor go too deep lest you cut what you should not.
And if you cut the vein or artery and it does not bleed freely, then place powdered vitriol or some powders that stop bleeding in the wound, and press the wound. and leave it until the abscess is pacified, and the wound begins to soften and decay.
And when the bleeding has stopped, then return to your work, completing it;
then search with your finger for any small scabs that may remain, cut them off and cleanse them.
But if there is a large vein at the root of the scab, do not cut that scab at its root, but rather tie it with a strong doubled thread and let it fall off without harm;
then fill the wound with Egyptian ointment-soaked cotton, then dress it.
And if you cut the entire scrophule, then it is necessary to bring together the two lips of the wound and sew them together now, since there is no longer any excess left due to the size of the scrophule. If you must grasp the root of it and draw out fire, and stitch it as we have said.
If you must grasp the root of it and draw out fire, and stitch it as we have said. The scabs that hold excess fluid, prick where they open more.
And pierce it as before mentioned, depending on it, then bring plaster with ointment and similar things so that it may corrupt what remains of the corruption. And when the wound is clean, apply an ointment that penetrates deeply into the flesh until it is completely healed.
The ancients said and spoke of the cutting of the throat; But I never saw anyone in our land who performed it, and this is the writing of their words.
For those with squints, the flap of the throat called "epiglottis" must be avoided; And one should not help by this means because all the veins and the membrane of the patient are hot in the mouth or throat or both.
When the disease is in the throat of the lung, it is necessary to close the epiglottis to escape the danger that comes from strangulation.
Therefore, when we want to cut the epiglottis, we should do so below three circles or four, a small slit across between two circles or by the quantity of the slit of the thyroglossal duct, not in the cartilage.
And these places are so connected to the section of the epiglottis that there is no flesh in them, and the vessels are long.
And if the master is fearful, he should stretch out the skin of the neck at its full length, then cut the throat until it reaches the windpipe; and avoid the blood vessels if you see any, and then cut the hyoid bone as we have said;
This is demonstrated by the cutting of the windpipe's channel that leaps out from the place that has been broken, and by the loss of voice;
And leave the wound open for a short time.
And when the hour has passed of which strangling is doubted, join together the two lips of the wound in the heart and sew it up entirely without cartilage;
then administer medicines that cause flesh to grow until it is sound.
Albucasis says that one should not do this until the throat is completely blocked, and the patient is judged to be near death, and the breath is gone. Then cut the epiglottis so that the patient can swallow again and breathe through the wound, thus preventing death;
And therefore the ancients commanded that one should leave the wound open until the worst of the illness passes, and it passed in three days or four. And afterwards they commanded to sew up the wound and dress it until it was healed.
I will tell you what I saw. I saw a damsel take a knife and stab it into her throat, and cut some of the veins of the lung.
And I was called to heal her, but found her already dead.
"I uncovered the wound and found that the blood issuing from it had not cut any vein nor carried off the throat, but the windpipe issued forth through the wound."
I hurried and sewed the wound, and dressed it until it was healed.
And nothing happened to the damsel except that her voice became hoarse, and later she returned to her usual self.
Therefore I say do not fear cutting the epiglottis.
This type of abscess is called 'throat hernia', and it is a large abscess with the color of a chestnut, occurring often in women.
And there are two ways about this: of essence and accident.
or it has no natural faculty.
And accident is of two kinds: one resembles pus in some ways, and the other is like an abscess from an artery. and there should be fear in both cases, but one must only operate with fire when it is small, and prove and search this throughout the entire intromission. If you find it like our pus and not attached to any vein, cut it off as we cut out pus; remove all of it if there is any. Search everywhere around it, and treat it as needed until it is perfectly healed.
There are many kinds of pus, all of which I will describe:
And now I must explain the difference between pus and discharge.
I say that discharge is hot and has fever as long as boiling does not pass, and corruption is complete; Then, the fever and heat will cease.
Without heat or fever or pain, the nut contains syrupac, which is its own juice and has the color of flesh. It starts like a jar and becomes large;
And according to two similarities, it is either greasy or moist, with many colors as I said in the division.
"When you come to the treatment of fatty tumors, first examine and explore with the instrument called the 'introitus', according to its form as described in the chapter that follows."
And the method of investigating boils is to take the moistest part you find in the boil and twist your fingers bit by bit until you know that the point has pierced the center, then continue according to the size of the boil.
Then remove the probe, taking care that nothing spills out.
If there is running moisture in a boil of any color, cut it as I have said for other boils;
And if no moisture comes after the probe, know that it is greasy. Then cut it in a cross and take it with pincers, lightly scraping each side and carefully peel off the skin where it lies to draw it out cleanly with the nut.
And if you cannot pull it out whole, then pull it out in pieces so that nothing remains.
But if anything remains, the illness will return many times;
And if even a bit remains, and the blood grieves you, then apply to the wound some hot caustic powders, bind the wound, and put on things that soothe an abscess heat, and treat with other treatments until it is healed;
And if the illness is great, then cut the two lips of the wound open, and treat those that go inward in flesh.
And if the vein beating is against you or otherwise, then hasten and apply ground vitriol to its place, let it lie for two or three days until the wound rots, and let the blood ebullition rest; Then return to cutting those that remain of the boil.
Here are the shapes of intrusive instruments, and they come in three kinds Great, medium, and small
And there are three squares called "albaret", one called "breb", and they come in three kinds: Large, medium, and small to enclose the abscesses of fistula;
And they are also like the needles used to stitch wounds, and are made of yellow brass, iron, or silver; those that are gold are more valuable, and they are especially praised for enclosing the curves of fistula;
And they come in three kinds Large, medium, and small according to the quantity of the width of the holes.
The shapes of the needles are very similar, as you can see here:
And there are also needles with two curves that come in three kinds
And there are needles with three curves, which also come in three kinds
And there are needles with two curves and needles with one curve only, both of which come in three kinds
And all these are necessary in their place.
The heads of these tools are sharp-edged, and there are some that cut only from one side, which are used to scrape off bone in order not to sever the vein or nerve.
And among these introducers are the alemeles that are kept in many hands so that the patient does not perceive them during the opening of abscesses.
And they come in three types: Large, small, and medium-sized, as you see;
And use them only on bare skin, such as legs, arms, breasts, angles, and similar places.
Sometimes another small tool, resembling the skin of an onion, is made according to this shape, with which one stops bleeding: "and it is placed sometimes at the location where veins and arteries have been cut, and sometimes they are made according to this large form:"
Some men's breasts swell when they begin to be corrupted, making them appear like those of a woman.
And remain unsightly and swollen; whoever wishes to treat them must do so according to this shape from line b to g: Then scrape away the fat, dress the wound with healing ointment inside, then bring together the two lips of the wound to stitch, and tend it until it is healed.
And if the breast hangs down and is soft due to its size, like that of women, then cut it open at two places on top through two similar incisions. So that one holds onto the other at the end of each, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form:.b. up to line.g. Then scrape off the skin between the two lips, and remove the fat. Dress it as we have said for stitching and powders, and do what is necessary in tending until it heals.
And if it does not heal, or the incision is not fully made because the patient will not rest, or due to bleeding, then you must fill the wound with cotton moistened in corrosive ointment. And let him chew on the remaining flesh and fat, then clean it until it is sanitary.
These hard swellings that appear under the arms are types of scrofulous tumors with hard edges, and there are some that contain moisture.
Those who contain moisture must be cut according to this form, from line .b. to line .g.: And when all the pus in the boil is emptied out, then fill the wound with old cotton and leave it overnight, then remove all the cotton and heal it with suitable ointment until it is healed.
And if the swelling resembles scrofula, cut it as we have said in the section on scrofulous sores, and if the wound secretes pus, apply a cautery as we have said earlier.
When an artery is cut and the skin above is sewn shut, abscesses often form; likewise when a vein bursts and there is an abscess.
If it is known that it is for the artery, then the abscess will be long and deep; And when you feel it with your two fingers, it feels like a pulling sensation.
When it is for the vein, then it appears red and swollen.
And it's foolish to cut this abscess, especially when it is located under the armpits and groin areas or near the neck and many other places; it will be very large. Therefore one must avoid cauterizing with fire; and the one who is at its head must also avoid it, as well as the one that is caused by inflammation of the artery that can be seen through the skin.
Then perform an incision on the thighs, and carefully separate the artery from the tissue until it is exposed.
Then place a needle underneath one side, and pierce it until it reaches the other side. Tie the artery with a double thread in two places, as I have shown you in the extraction of the two arteries that are in the temples.
Then insert an introjector into the space between the two ligatures until blood comes out from there, and let the abscess be opened.
Then dress the wound every day until the ligation falls off. Then apply an appropriate ointment until it is healed.
If the abscess is caused by a vein incision, then you must hold what you can of it in your hand with forceps. Then place the needle underneath the spot you are holding and pierce it until it reaches the other side, so that you may draw out one double thread. Then tie the abscess, as I told you, with thread taken from one of its two parts on the skin.
And if you doubt that the threads may break, then insert another needle through all of the threads beneath the entire abscess at the incision of the first needle, and tie the threads at four points.
Then cut away the abscess until the superfluity comes out; then cut away the excess from around the heart, leaving what is tied.
Then place a damp cloth soaked in wine and oil on it; then apply dressings and ointments until it is healed.
Also, boils come to the artery and vein,
And this occurs more often on shoulders and toes, and in all places where there are joints; these are serious abscesses, their color resembling the color of flesh, and they exist in many forms without pain.
And when it is pressed strongly, the patient feels pain; but this is not deep within the body, rather near the heart.
And it moves well on all sides, neither going forward nor backward, nor below nor above, and one that is in joints should not be covered with iron: For fear of contraction occurring there; And the one that is on the head or forehead, cut the skin at the temples.
And the one that is on the head or forehead, cut the skin at the temples. If the abscess is small, grasp it with tweezers and cut its root;
And if it is large, suspend it with forceps, scrape it off, then cut and sew the wound together, caring for it until it heals.
Sometimes occurs in bellies and nowhere else, called 'fungus' due to its appearance, with thin roots and large heads;
And there are both small ones and very large ones.
And I saw a man who had two in his belly that were more like fungi than anything else; they were white and had thin roots, and they were often cracked open with moisture flowing from them.
I weighed them and found one weighing XVIII ounces, the other VI. The procedure for incision is such that you should consider whether the patient is moist; the color of the artery is pale and moist with a subtle root. If the cut is wide, have the cauterizing iron hot and ready in your presence.
If the cut is wide, have the cauterizing iron hot and ready in your presence. For at cutting comes often too great a flow of blood; if the blood overcomes you, then hasten to use the cautery.
And if you see the patient afraid and fearful of the incision of iron, then take a well-made thread of tow, tie the artery as we have said, and leave it for two days.
Then tie it again; do not cease pulling on the thread of tow until it cuts through the artery without effort.
And if the roots are large, one fears cutting even for the belly; but you can cut half of it and then cauterize so that it does not bleed again.
Then heal the wound, but ensure you do not cover the telum which is of fox-like hue, poor sense, and produces milk.
"For this is an enchanted aposteme, and I will speak of the cure of chancre later on."
"When the belly is full" If the appearance of the wound comes from a cautery burn or a fissure of syphilis, and is located on the belly, as it happens in other ruptures, or from blood flowing from veins or arteries as mentioned earlier, or from windiness
and if it is due to the rupture of syphilis and the exit of the bowel, then the color of the abscess is similar to the color of the body, and it causes little pain or discomfort with varied discharge. And if it is due to an intestinal issue, then it becomes more diverse, and when pressed with two fingers it sinks in and then returns, and sometimes it becomes hard, and increases greatly at the entrance of the bath and with heavy labor.
And if it's due to moisture, it's not serious; when you press it with your hand, it yields well without being tense.
and if it's due to blood, then the abscess appears large and hard, adhering firmly like a quantity. and if it's due to windiness, it is soft to the touch, and its appearance can indicate whether it's from arterial or venous blood, or windiness.
and if it's due to windiness, it is soft to the touch, and its appearance can indicate whether it's from arterial or venous blood, or windiness. Therefore, you should leave the treatment alone. Fear and doubt exist regarding this matter, as I have said in the chapter on abscesses, concerning both artery and vein.
And if the appearance is for the intestine or bowel, then you must command the patient to draw up their knee and extend it fully straight, then press firmly all around the belly. then have them lie down constantly between your hands; then go around the place you marked with the entire palm of your hand, then stretch half of the abscess upwards with the full width of your index finger. Then bind it firmly with a strong thread or cord of strong silk, and let the swelling be released completely.
then open half of the abscess stretched over the bandage, and insert your index finger, and search for the intestine if you find it trapped by the bandage, untie it, and bring the intestine out from in front of the abdomen
and if you find the bowel, grasp it with your index finger and cut away any excess.
and if the artery opposes you or the vein, then proceed gently around; then return to your work and take two needles, and thread them with two strong threads, and insert the two needles around what you have pierced in a cross shape
Then press the boil at four points over the needles; if you see, remove the needles and let it alone until it rots; and cut away the dead flesh. Then cut it when it is ripe and ready; then treat it as necessary, and cut away the boil as we have said.
Then cut it when it is ripe and ready; then treat it as necessary, and cut away the boil as we have said. And draw out the blood or moisture that you find, then treat the spot as needed, and close it up.
chancre We have said in the previous section about the kinds of chancres and how one must operate by medicines, and how to avoid surgical treatment.
And let's discuss the chancre in the marrow, and caution must be taken in treating it; ancient authorities say that when a chancre is in a location where it can be shaved off completely, like those on the breast or hip, they should be removed entirely at the outset.
No one has ever been healed from this before me.
And the operation, when it is in place where it can be removed, as we have said, is that you should purge the patient of black bile at least once;
Then make the patient fast if he has shown signs ofpletion, then prepare the patient in a good place to perform the operation;
then cut away your Oncines or Chancres, and shave the hair from all around it, and remove it completely without leaving anything behind;
and let the blood flow freely, and press firmly on the wound with your hand or some other thing, and if the bleeding from the incision of the artery or vein opposes you, cauterize it until the bleeding stops; then treat him with another remedy until he is healed.
of dropsy We have already spoken in the previous section about the similarities of dropsy, how water collects in the body and the signs of each kind, as well as the remedies made by medicines and those treated with iron;
and one must not use iron in these two cases: namely, tympanites and hiposarches, for they are deadly matters.
Therefore, when treating this type of dropsy called "eclites," if the treatment does not help and the patient is weak or has other illnesses such as dropsy, tumors, or similar conditions; then do not use iron, for there is doubt involved.
And if you see that the patient has strong vitality, and they have no other illness besides dropsy alone, and are not too young nor too old, then you should proceed thus: Have the patient lie down straight on your hands, and have an assistant press the abdomen strongly while pouring water onto the lowest part of the back, then take the spinehook shaped thus: And let it be cut into two parts. with its point, but not so deeply that it can reach the intestines when inserted, nor cause injury;
then look if dropsy has entered towards the intestines if it is necessary that you cut with a lancet three inches below and above on the shin bone. and if dropsy is due to liver disease, then make your incision on the left side of the shinbone three inches below.
and if it is due to phlegm, then cut on the right side, and ensure that the patient does not lie upon the incision so that the excesses do not flow into that weak area.
then pierce the skin with an awl and insert it, raise your hand to cut through the entire spermatic cord between the skin and the scrotum as in castration.
then pierce the scrotum until the spermatic cord reaches its proper place, and this is the opening for water, then draw it out and insert this instrument of which I have described. And it is similar to a fine silver needle, made of brass or light copper, with a small hole at the end. And on one side there are three openings. And two on the other side, and one on the other.
And the head is cut like a feather, and this is the shape of the incision that scribes use to cut feathers:
At the top of it is the almond; so when the tool reaches the water, it sinks now upon the tool.
Therefore empty about half or one third of it; because if you empty more than is necessary at that time, perhaps the patient will die due to the release of his spirit from the weapon, or he may faint, or come close to death.
But empty according to the amount of its power, and according to what the indications of the patient's power signify, and his pulse.
Then withdraw the tool and hold the water back; it is held back now by the heart, which stops up the hole that is above the stomach, as I have spoken of.
Then restart the treatment the next day if you see the patient enduring this, and apply a small amount of water.
Do this for several days, but be careful not to remain there too long, just a moment with a little water.
And if you doubt about the patient and leave too much water on them, their cure will be like that of the grave or hot sand; they will sweat excessively or take a bath in the sun; they should drink sparingly. And apply drying medications until they are healthy again; cauterize the stomach, liver, and spleen after removing the water, as I have mentioned earlier.
Never are children born without an opening in the penis, or with a small one, or one that is not in its proper place.
If it must be, let it be pierced at once with a very fine lancet according to this form:
Then place a subtle skin clip of lead there; tie it and hold it for three or four days. When he wants to urinate, remove the clip, let him do so, and then replace it.
And perhaps this is not necessary, because the urine that comes forth does not remain closed.
He whose hole is small shall be treated with lead ointment as we have said; it will widen.
Those whose opening is not in its proper place are blind, for some are born with the opening at the head of the penis, which prevents them from urinating until they lift their penis upwards; and cannot void properly because matter cannot reach the bladder, and this is a serious illness.
And the method of treatment is that the patient should lie on their back, then raise the head of the penis and cut it like the shape of a feather's tip so that the opening falls in the middle, as it should be;
and beware of excessive bleeding that often occurs there; if it happens, use something to stop the bleeding and heal the wound until it is clean.
sores on the penis Many times these swellings come on the penis, which are ugly looking growths of flesh;
and some are malignant and others not.
Therefore you should seize them with a delicate pincer, cut and cleanse them all, then apply moistened cotton in Egyptian ointment. Then, the treatment of anointing with ointment, until it is healed.
And if the bath is malignant, of foul color and stinking, then you must bring cautery to it.
When you have seized [the dislocation], and if the hip is above the penis, and part of it is inside the skin and part outside, then you must remove the hipbone that is inside first; and once it is removed, then treat what remains outside.
For if you treat them together, the head of the penis is not secure and may be pierced, and blackness and corruption come to its tip and in the scrotum;
Therefore cut away all that is black and corrupt, then apply a plaster of honey and flour mixed with the rind of pomegranates and figs, then treat it further until it is healed.
And if bleeding occurs, then apply the lunar cautery according to this form:
The cautery helps in two ways together: namely, for the discharge of blood and for corruption;
And if the head of the penis is corrupted and retracted, then you must insert a lead tube into the channel of the penis, so that the patient can urinate through it;
And when the skin is raised at the head of the penis, which happens to those who have not been circumcised, whether due to wound or abscess, then you must cauterize it with a hair-removing instrument until the adhesion is loosened, and the head of the penis is delivered from all sides.
And if it is difficult to separate them, then you must cauterize with the spatumalium at some point near the head of the penis and the skin.
Then carefully separate them again, and place a thin linen cloth moistened in cold water between them to prevent them from sticking together again.
Circumcision is not a continuous cleansing like other wounds; Nevertheless, when we perform this operation willingly and properly on children, it is necessary that we do the best work and cause the least harm.
I say that the ancients did not practice the circumcision of their children, for they did not use it in their law, and we have only what we have acquired by experience.
For most masters and surgeons who perform circumcisions cut around the foreskin with forceps, using only one instrument.
If the heart fails because there are two valves, and by chance one above is cut and the other below remains. Or if it recovers, it feels doubled pain, and at the cleansing that comes from the removal of the bone, the point of the limb is not securely held.
and during the cleansing of the nail, the iron might escape and damage the work, and many times they grow such that they do not need cleansing, which I have seen.
As for the cleansing that is done with force on all the length of the thread, I have found its goodness through experimentation, for it cuts evenly both above and below.
For when you press your hand down evenly in one second. but make sure the threads are tightly woven around the leather;
and that the way of the first work is such that you make the child understand, if he hears, that you are only tying the thread around the rod, and then let him try all the ways that he can.
Then hold it upright between your hands, and hide the cords between your hands or under your feet so that the child does not see them or any tools.
Then place your hand on the root [of the dislocation] and blow towards the heart, drawing it upwards until the head of the shoulder is in. Then cleanse it well from the dirt that has gathered there; then bind the joint with a doubled thread, then bind it under the buttock with another binding.
Then cleanse it well from the dirt that has gathered there; then bind the joint with a doubled thread, then bind it under the buttock with another binding. and hold it thus with the second band at the pouch and index finger of the hand, and cut between the two bands; then raise the heart quickly upwards and draw the head of the shoulder. then let flow the blood from buttock to buttock, for this is the cure. and put powder on it and on the powder a bandage of a half of a cooked egg yolk tempered with rose water, mixed with good fresh rose oil; and leave it thus until the next day, and treat further until he is healed.
The formula for preparing the plaster is as follows:
Let the two halves be thin and sharp-pointed, and let the heads be likewise large and equal in size to a hazelnut:
The error of washing is when the heart fails during an incision;
Therefore you must stretch it to your fingernail before the place forms an abscess.
And cut evenly; and if you cannot hold it with your fingernail, then use tongs to cut it.
And if they pass three days, and the area below the bone is swollen, let it be until the abscess is quieted, and scrape it gently.
Then cut as much as you can move, and be careful around the bone; this will not harm anything at all.
Therefore treat the place with powder for sudden wounds, as we have said when treating powders; and if you cut into the heart too much, and it goes upwards, then it will not harm.
Therefore treat it, as we have said, until it is healed.
On the retention of urine
The retention of urine is due to the obstruction of a stone, or coagulation of blood, or bowels, or birth, or similar things, which we have mentioned in the division.
And if the urine is not released, and you see that it is retained because of a stone in the neck of the bladder, then the patient must bend over on his knees. And have him place his feet on his back, extend his belly from the part above his back, and let the patient strain as much as he can; and thus the neck of the bladder is pressed for the expulsion of the stone above, so that the urine is released.
and if it does not come out as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you must perform an extraction with all the instruments called 'syringe', of which this is the form:
and it should be made of thin, light silver wire, like a bird's feather; And the tube should be one and a half palms long, and thin at the tip.
And the method of extracting urine is that you take a doubled thread, and tie at its head a ball of wool or cotton, and put the head of the thread inside the syringe;
And remove the excess of the linen and place it up to the top of the syringe, then oil the syringe with oil or butter and ashes of eggs, and make the patient sit on the seat, and raise the bladder and penis with moist oil and olive oil and hot water.
Then gently place the syringe in the penis until it reaches the root of the penis, then bend the penis upwards towards the belly.
Then push the syringe forward until it reaches the bladder, and the patient feels that it has reached its destination. However, if this is not done correctly according to this procedure, it may be because the tube leading there is twisted.
Then stretch out the thread along with all the linen slowly and gently, and let the urine follow the linen, then remove it quickly, and direct the flow of urine.
And continue with the syringe until the bladder is emptied, and the patient feels relieved.
When urine or blood enters the bladder and decay accumulates there, and you see water and medicine being distilled out of it, do this with all the instrument called "clepsydra," and its shape is:
It is closed, but has three perforations: Two on one side, and one on the other, as you can see;
And the high place is raised so that the medical compress may fit tightly on the wound without needing additional padding, so that moisture can be drawn out and applied when necessary;
And when you see your medicines going into the bladder, place the head of the catheter in the moisture and draw while squeezing what is inside.
Then draw out the moisture from the catheter, and then strongly push the catheter back in; So the moisture will enter and go to the bladder now, so that the patient will feel it.
And this is the form of the subtle enema used to irrigate the bladder.
It is made of silver or brass, with the head higher up;
And below has one seam where the ligature falls.
Then take a sheep's bladder and put in the moisture you want to use to irrigate the bladder, then tie it between the two seams with a doubled thread, and heat one part of that moisture over the fire;
Then place the tip of the clyster in the rectum, then press your hand on the bladder until all the moisture arrives, until the patient feels that that moisture has reached the bladder.
And if you don't have a bladder, take a piece of parchment, make it into a circle, and pierce it evenly all around. Then insert a strong thread through these holes, then gather the circle as one gathers a net, and put within it what you want of oil and moisture and water, and tie it in the instrument.
And do as you did with the bladder, pressing your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
"from the stone"
We have already discussed in the chapter on stones their types and combined extraction methods;
and I have spoken of the difference between kidney stones and bladder stones, all their signs, and in which stone one should operate by cutting. and in the bladder and in the rectum;
And I will tell you plainly and briefly.
I say that stones which are inserted into the bladder happen more often to children, and this is a sign that water jumps from the bladder similarly to water in its subtlety;
And it opens widely, and the patient's penis becomes hard, and he pants many times, and then it becomes rigid; And many of these jumps cause foundation problems;
and is easy to treat in children until they are four years old, and is very severe in the elderly, and is moderate in young men, those who are between youth and old age;
And it is easier to treat those with large stones than those with small ones.
And when we come to the treatment, it is first necessary to cleanse the patient with an enema, in order to remove all the waste that is in the intestines. For sometimes it hinders searching for the stone.
Then take the patient by the feet, and lay them down and move them below so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, and sometimes comes out from above;
Then have him sit between your hands prepared, and his hands should be under his thighs, so that the bladder is completely tilted downward;
Then seek and touch within [the dislocation].
If you feel the stone in the space, then quickly cut above the stone.
And if it does not fall out on touching completely, then moisten your left-hand index finger with oil, if the patient is a child, or moisturize your middle finger if the patient is mature. And insert it into its base, and seek out the stone, and when you feel it with your finger, guide it towards the neck of the bladder.
Then press with your finger, and push it to the outside where you see to cut.
And instruct the helper to press the bladder with their hand, and command the patient to extend their right hand upwards, and with their left hand remove the skin that is underneath the pubic hair in the area where the incision will be made.
Then insert the spatula like this: And make an incision between what is between the pubic hair and the buttocks, not in the middle but on the left side of the navel.
And let it be right upon the stone, and your two hands always at the base, and hold the cutting edge so that it is wide on the surface, and narrow inside, according to the quantity of the stone, not too large.
Perhaps the pressure from the hand at the base may cause it to slip without effort;
And know that there are such stones with angles and edges: It is difficult to remove them
And some are smooth, like a glass marble, and round, from which the exit is easy.
Therefore, for those with angles and edges, make your incision larger
And if it does not come out, then you must extract with forceps that are like a pair of tongs at the end, to move and extract the stone so that it does not escape; Or you insert underneath it a fine, curved instrument at the tip
And if you cannot grab it this way, then widen the hole a little, and if blood oozes out, stop it with vitriol
And if there is more than one stone, first place the largest at the neck of the bladder, then cut above it, then burn the track, and then the smaller ones afterwards if there are many.
And if it is very large, then it must be done carefully, causing a larger wound. When two things happen to the patient: Either he dies, or urine flows constantly where the wound cannot heal.
But nevertheless, try to remove it with forceps, or extract it with tweezers, piece by piece;
And once you have completed your task, fill the wound with incense and aloe and dragon's blood, then bind it, and place over it a wet cloth soaked in oil and wine, or oil and rosewater and cold water, to cool the hot abscess. Then cover the patient with his cloak, and do not untie the bandage until the third day.
And when you do untie it, wash the wound very well with oil and water, then dress it with balsam of Joppa and balsam of Basilicon until it is healed.
And if hot abscesses and corrosion appear in the wound, and clots of blood form in the bladder, causing urine retention that occurs in this manner without any pain with urination: Then press your thumb on the wound, and extract that blood, for if it remains there, it will corrupt the bladder and cause it to swell.
Then wash the wound with water and wipe it clean with a cloth or bandage, and assist him in every way you know until he is healed.
And it is necessary that all the times that you treat him, you bind his two thighs together and apply the medications on the spot.
And if the stone is small, and it is in the passage of the penis and stuck within it, and urine cannot pass out then the cure that I mentioned earlier, cutting him many times, is excused from cutting for this cure. I have already proven this to be so.
Take one iron rod according to this shape and having three prongs forged into one piece of charcoal:
Then take a thread and tie it around the penis below the stone so that it cannot move back into the bladder
then insert the probe gently into the penis until it reaches the stone and turn the probe with your hand against the stone, little by little, until you can pierce through to the other side of the stone
If urine comes quickly, then press your hand upon what remains of the stone inside the penis. If it breaks soon, and jumps out with the urine, the patient is healed;
and if you cannot do this for any reason that hinders it, then tie a thread underneath the stone and another above it; then make an incision in the penis at the stone's location between the two threads; then pull it out, untie the thread, and cleanse the wound with congealed blood. and continue treating him until he is healed
Of the stone of women
It sometimes happens that a stone gets lodged inside women, and if it does happen occasionally, its treatment is difficult, and it is prohibited for three reasons:
one reason is that perhaps the woman is a virgin;
and the second reason is that one cannot find a skilled woman who can uncover herself for physicians, especially if she is modest.
And the third manner is that perhaps one cannot find a skilled woman in this field of medicine;
And the fourth manner is such that the stone of the woman is more profound than that of the man; therefore it must be cut deeper and there is great fear involved. And if you advise them to do this, then you must take a knowledgeable doctor with little experience, and if you cannot find one, search diligently for a skilled surgeon
And present to him a wise woman who understands the lives of women or a woman who knows some part of this art, and instruct her to perform what you command regarding the examination of the stone and examine very carefully whether the woman is a virgin
and examine very carefully whether the woman is a virgin Then she must put her finger into the fundament and search for the stone
And if she finds it, she should press down on it with her finger and instruct the patient to lie on their back, then insert her finger into the vagina and seek and press firmly with her left hand on the bladder.
If she finds it, then she must move it little by little from the entrance of the bladder until it reaches below the root of the thigh
Then strike upon the stone at the root of the thigh against the middle of the knee, where it moves and appears distorted; feel the stone in that part. And do not move his toe above or below the stone; let the cut be small at first.
And do not move his toe above or below the stone; let the cut be small at first. Then insert the probe into the cut; if you feel the stone, widen the wound until the stone can exit forcefully; know that there are many kinds of stones.
namely: small and large, sharp and smooth, long and round, and those with roots.
if you know their appearances to recognize the outcome.
And if blood is abundant, then put powdered vitriol in the wound; hold it there for an hour until the blood stops flowing.
Then return to your work until the stone is expelled; have tools ready that I told you about for extracting stones from men to help you in your task.
And if blood flows abundantly, and this is due to an artery being cut, then place powder on the wound; press it with bandages and cloths; do not resume cutting again; leave the stone alone and do not attempt to remove it, lest the patient die. Then heal the wound.
And once the heat of the blood is subdued and the spot is healed, then return to your work until the stone is removed.
A white substance is called ramice aquouse that is located under the liver of hens, which contains the egg;
and is called 'saffron,' and sometimes it is properly found in the membrane of the egg, so that one might think it to be another egg; And it is the skin of the hen between the white saffron we have mentioned;
There would not be any if not. And the formation of this hernia occurs due to weakness in the testicles, with the matter being spread out and expanding
Sometimes it comes from striking hens, and this moisture has many colors: Either it is colored declining towards yellow, or it is red without, black, white, aqueous and watery, and other things happen;
And these are the signs to know this assembly: for if it is in the white saffron we have mentioned, then the abscess will be round and long like the shape of an egg, and it will not burst open because there is moisture all around.
And if there is moisture in its own lining, then the abscess is ripe with part of an egg, and therefore it is believed that this is another egg.
And if the moisture is between the skin and the flesh, then one can sense it well.
Therefore, when you want to know the color of the moisture, test the entire instrument with square openings, as its shape is shown here. Therefore, based on what comes out after using the instrument, you can make a judgment about what is inside.
And when we cauterize it with iron, then the patient must be strengthened according to his ability and the fullness of his body.
Then have him lie on his back on something slightly raised, and place many blankets underneath him;
Then sit on his left side, and instruct the assistant to sit on his right, and extend the cautery iron towards one of the two ribs near the heart of the lung.
Then take the spatula and make an incision in the skin of the lung near where the long muscle joins the chest wall, ensuring that the cut is straight and reaches down to the white flesh of the lung. Then strip it thinly according to your ability;
Then pierce the bladder full of water with a large opening, and remove all the water, and then place your bandages, and let the bladder remain above.
And do not touch the heart of the kidneys, but only the bladder itself. Remove it all or in pieces yourself carefully, so that if you do not cut it well, water will return
And if the egg jumps out during your work, put it back in its place once you have finished the task with the bladder
Then sew together the two layers of the kidney's heart using stitches, then heal it as you would other wounds until it is healthy.
And if you find the egg corrupted by another disease, then tie up the vessels that suspend it, preventing blood flow.
Then cut the kidney along with all its suspensions, remove the egg, and heal it as we have said
And know that if water is gathered into two parts together, they are both branches. If you cut the other part just as you did the first one evenly, then wipe away the blood, and put moist lint soaked in rose oil into the wound.
If you cut the other part just as you did the first one evenly, then wipe away the blood, and put moist lint soaked in rose oil into the wound. And put another piece of moist lint soaked in wine and oil on top of the two wounds, then place doubled cloths over them, and tie it all together according to this method:
Then take two cloths, fill them with lint according to this shape and sew them together at the waistband of the breeches, one should cover the buttocks up to the back, and the other should cover the elbow area.
And the other two ends should be tied together over the two angles, and all the restraints should be gathered together at the loop of the breeches.
And sometimes this dressing is used instead of iron branding, and you should take one scalpel, carefully cut the skin around the wounds, heat it as we have said, so that the white surface which contains water is exposed.
Take the cautery according to this form, pierce the skin thusly once, then scrape it with this subtle hot cautery.
And cut in every way you can until you remove everything;
and make sure the fire does not touch the eye;
Know that this operation is safer. Move cautiously to avoid bleeding and close the incision.
And if anything goes wrong, such as an abscess forming or bleeding occurring or any other issue, treat it according to what is written above.
And if the patient is fearful and unwilling to undergo this procedure due to its horrifying nature, perform a perforation as I instruct you. When you are certain that the patient has lain down on his left side according to the signs we have described, make him sit upright on a raised seat; Then pierce the abscess at its lowest point near the entire scrotum and insert the hot iron of the cautery into the body.
And let the opening be wide enough so that all the water runs freely.
Then place cotton on the wound, tie it, and let the rest of the water flow out; then treat it until the wound is healed.
And if the white cloth does not let water flow out of the mouth of the wound, then you must insert a feather or the instrument used to treat water from dropsies, the shape of which is shown here.
And widen the wound's opening, and know that when water returns and gathers again after six months or so, then it will be assembled as before; and thus the patient will pass their days.
Know that in cutting this artery there is danger and many difficulties, which is why it seems to me better to leave it alone.
I will tell you the work and the similar things about an abscess.
I say therefore that many abscesses come to be in the body, especially in the thighs. And it often happens.
It is known to happen due to acute acidity and heat, which spreads to the joints or occurs due to impact;
And the color of the abscess matches the skin color; And there is no pain felt, yet it is a serious abscess;
Sometimes an abscess may be pale and purple, and have a foul smell, and sometimes it comes from near an artery or swelling of a vein.
When it is near an artery, it is recognized by the hot appearance of the abscess when pressed with two fingers; And you should not touch it.
That which is caused by swelling of a vein is recognized by its appearance when touched with two fingers, and one can also perform the incision on this type of abscess, as well as others. And you should cut the skin of the joints, then stretch it upwards, and the egg-white-colored tissue should be delivered from all around the egg.
If the egg is already hard-boiled with these new roots, then you must draw out the egg, and remove the shell.
And if it is air-filled in the syringe or those inside the vessels, then you must release all that tension, and cut around neatly.
"And if the birth of the flesh is behind the joint, then you should cut all of it and extract the egg, as we have said."
"And when your work is complete, dress the wound with oil and wine-soaked wool, then apply other dressings until it is healed."
This is an abscess enclosed in an enclosure resembling the testicle, with softening of the joints, and the patient cries out in pain when he walks.
And the treatment of this disease is also as dangerous as the one mentioned earlier, yet we will tell you its workings according to what the ancients did.
You must make the patient sit on an elevated seat, then place the suspension device for the testicles below your hands, near all the vessels close to the penis, and hold them gently but firmly.
Then cut sharply and wide with the scalpel across the vessels until they are exposed, and then strip from each side as we have described in the extraction of arteries in the temples.
Then he inserts a needle where there is double thread, and ties it to the first place where the wound appeared, and ties it again at the other end. Then cut the threads evenly in the middle according to the length of the body, and remove the corrupted moisture.
Then dress the wound as one would for other injuries caused by a blow, so that no vessel may fall out of its place.
For this reason, there is no harm done, and if blood comes from all the vessels, then one must draw out the threads from all the vessels. So that the bone does not lose its nourishment due to the cutting of the vessels, and they dry up and cannot help each other.
The outcome of this procedure is the opening that comes from the groin or the extension on the abdomen in the region of the hips, through which the intestines descend towards one of the threads.
And this opening is found either at the groin or from the extension of it, and these two ways come from many causes
From blows, from falls, from throwing oneself down, from lifting heavy weights, and similar causes.
And the sign when it is due to stretching of the hip joint is that it happens gradually, over a long period, and does not come suddenly. The abscesses are even up to the depth because the hip pushes on the intestines.
"And the sign of this rupture is that it causes sudden pain at the beginning, and there is uneven swelling under the skin near the scrotum, due to the exit of the intestines from the body through the opening in the scrotum."
"Sometimes the testicles also descend with the intestines and become trapped there, causing great pain for the patient, especially when they are pressed upon."
"And in such cases where there is fear of injury from iron, one must avoid using it."
And the manner of treatment is that you instruct the patient to insert their hand into the wound and push back the intestines if possible. Then press firmly on his neck with your hands and lift up the thighs;
then raise the heart above them and cut away all the long sinews of the hips. Then insert hooks into the sides of the waist according to what you need to open the wound, and make them wide enough for the bladder to come out.
Then strip off the hip joint that is beneath the long sinews of the hips until all sides of the white hard bone are exposed.
Then place your two index fingers into that which instructs the loin, that which is between the first lumbar vertebra below the skin of the kidney and between the second lumbar vertebra, and separate what is behind the kidney and between the second lumbar vertebra.
And then move your right hand inside the kidneys' heart, and stretch the lumbar vertebra upwards with your left hand, and lift the kidney towards the lumbar vertebrae at the waist. And instruct the assistant to extend the kidney upwards, and loosen that which is behind the ligament.
And seek with your two hands if there is any intestine wrapped around or hard lumbar vertebra, and if you find anything, put it back into the abdomen below.
Then take a needle with a large thread made of silk, and insert it into the rear part of the lumbar vertebra, which is behind the kidney's skin. After the waist, then cut the heads that appear from the threads, until there are four threads remaining. Then they put them together one on top of the other in the shape of a cross, and tie it with sinew, which we have discussed earlier, being underneath the skin of the thighs, with a strong thread of two parts. Then wrap the heads of the thighs and tie them firmly with two parts, so that none of the vessels that nourish them can enter inside, lest any abscess come there. And then place the second tie according to the first one, two fingers away from it. After these two ties, leave some sinew that is under the skin of the thighs for a finger's length. And after everything else, shape it according to the roundness that an egg has.
Then cut into the part that is under the skin of the thighs until blood flows and the bowels, as we have said earlier
Then prepare wool moistened in oil, place it on wounds, and bring the tie that we have mentioned. "And sometimes it is necessary to cauterize the white fibrous tunic of the scrotum that we have mentioned after the incision, in case of excessive bleeding." For this happened many times, leaving the ligature to fall through itself.
and if it is delayed in falling, let it be raised with warm water, and place upon it what we have said until it falls.
then heal the wound with another remedy until it is perfectly sound.
Here's a possible translation of the given Old French text into modern English:
In this branch of medicine, I never saw anyone daring to treat by iron.
And the ancients said that it is done like the branch which is bound around the wrist, tying the vessels lightly after the incision below.
then cut through it in the middle, and heal the abscess with what opens until the vessels fall out;
and heal it as we have said until it is sound.
Sometimes a rupture occurs in the angles, as we have said, exposing the place;
and no intestines descend to the corners, and if any do, it is little, and repair them all hours.
And yet if it remains too long in this place, the wound becomes large or inflamed until the intestines descend;
And this happens due to the stretching of the sinew which is at the joints, as we have said, for it becomes stretched, then softened and swollen the place and opened.
And its treatment is by cautery, as we have previously stated;
Sometimes it is treated with iron in this manner: And the patient lies on their back between your hands, then cut the swollen place of the rupture three finger-breadths wide;
Then extract the sinew that is under the skin where it was cut, then take a thread and place it over the exposed surface of the sinew;
And press it at the depth of the abdomen, then sew up the two exposed surfaces of the sinew over the head of the thread, and sew both one and the other;
Then remove the head of the thread, and do not cut into the sinew nor stretch it further, as I have taught you in the treatment of intestinal prolapse; Then treat it with wound care.
Then treat it with wound care. When you cut threads, cleanse it and dress the wound until it is healed.
"Gangrene is constrained and does not appear in the rupture; cauterization is milder in this site and closer to healing."
Regarding the softening of the skin of the scrotum
Often the skin of the thighs becomes softened in some men because the flesh inside is softened, and it is easy to see.
and when you wish to treat it, make the patient lie on their back, and cut away the softened skin from the natural skin.
Then join the two lips together with a suture, and if you wish, first sew up the excess softened skin with three or four stitches firmly.
Then cut between the sutures, and heal it like other wounds until it is sound, then remove the thread.
Regarding castration
I know that astrologers are reproved in our law, and therefore I would like not to speak of them in this book.
And it is necessary to make an exception for two reasons:
one reason being that the doctor should be able to answer when asked about it and know its treatment.
And the other one, because we often need to castrate certain beasts to help us, like goats and sheep and cats and others.
I say therefore that castration is done in two ways: Either by attraction or by cutting open.
In the one we do by attraction, we make the beast sit in warm water until the testicles are softened and hanging down; Then grasp them with your hand so they are held back and you no longer feel them.
On castration by cutting: It is necessary that you tie down the beast, press the skin of the testicles with your left hand, then tie the suspensory ligament, and cut each one with one cut after you have well scraped them.
And leave some small part of the scrotum and the thin skin that is over the vessels;
And this manner of castration is more effective than that done by attraction because sometimes some part of the testicles remains, causing the beast to desire lust.
Then heal the wound until it is healed.
Of hermaphrodites
Hermaphroditism exists among men in two ways: The first way is when between the two testicles opens also like the figure of the nature of a woman's genitals, with hair growing there, and sometimes it is opened even in the skin.
And another way in women, they have on their pubis both a penis and two testicles.
And the treatment for both men and women is to cut away all the attached skin, and heal it like other wounds;
In the second way, there are those men whose urine flows through the skin of the testicles, for whom there is no treatment.
Tentigene is an attached skin on the natural part that is too ugly to see; And some women have it as large as their hand, and this is its treatment.
You must shave off the excess skin of the tentigene with your hand or scissors, and cut it away gently;
And do not go too deep, so that there is no bleeding, then heal it with other remedies until it is healed.
And there is another ulcer that appears at the mouth of the womb, and the belly button, sometimes it jumps fire, and is like the appearance of a cow, therefore the ancients called it 'cow disease'. If it is necessary to cut it, as we have described for tenetio, and continue treatment until it is healed.
An error occurs when the woman's nature is not pierced, or the hole is small; and it is either natural from birth, or accidental due to illness that has come about there;
and it is either natural from birth, or accidental due to illness that has come about there; or it is caused by adherent flesh, either thin or thick, and it is formed deeply within the womb, or on the sides, or below, wherever it may be;
And prevents conception, childbirth, and sometimes the flow of menstruation;
The knowledge of this is by the appearance of the womb.
If the stoppages are close at hand, then seek them with your two fingers or the reed.
If it is thin and close to the second leaf, then hasten and cut around it like this:
Place your two index fingers together, and have the woman lie on her back with her legs spread;
Then are the two books so shaped that the subtle sieve is round, and it overlies the stoppers.
Then take wool, wet it in oil, place it on the spot, and lay the woman on her back each day so that it cannot dry.
And if the bone is hard and dense, you must cut it like a leaf of laurel.
If the stopper is of newborn flesh, then suspend it on the donkey's horn and cut it off;
And have ready blood-stopping medicines such as achiote, dragon's blood, frankincense, mixed with egg yolk.
Then prepare a wide lead funnel so that the wound cannot heal shut;
And so let it be for a long time, and let them provide a tent made of dry linen.
Then other treatments should be applied until he is healed.
And when flesh-colored matter comes to the wound, you must cut it according to this manner, unless it is an incurable abscess. For an incurable abscess that is in the wound, one must not touch it with fire.
Emorroides are swollen veins that occur around the rectum and anus. They can cause discomfort, pain, and bleeding during bowel movements. Here's how they were described by ancient physicians: Hemorrhoids are veins that normally do not release blood, and when hemorrhoids become old they become hard (thelul).
And we have already spoken in the section on their likeness and signs, now I will speak of those that require treatment.
I say that hemorrhoids and piles, when deeply embedded in the marrow, and cannot be felt upon examination, are not suited for iron treatment.
Those which are at the mouth of the anus, that can be felt, are those which can be cured.
It is therefore necessary that you place the woman in a cold house, then set the altar with pincers, and grasp the womb by its roots, then powder it with medicines that restrict blood, such as acacia and dragon's blood, and similar things.
then place her feet against the wall for an hour, then immerse her in cold water.
and if blood flows abundantly, then make her sit in a decoction of sumac and pomegranate bark and gall nuts and similar things, and then take barley flour and mix it with honey and bile, and apply the poultice on her back.
And if she is cured, that is good. If not, make her swallow leeches placed on her back and breasts without piercing them.
then take linen, wet it in plantain juice or elderberry juice with old wine, and apply it to the affected area.
And when the abscess has broken, then dress the wound with ointment until it is clean.
And that which is called 'albathir' is red, resembling a sharp head, thus it must be covered as I have said earlier. And then care for him until he is healthy.
Many kinds of abscesses occur in the marrow, such as cancer and bone abscesses, herpes, chilblains, fistulas, hemorrhoids, hot abscesses, and many other diseases that I have mentioned in the divisions.
It therefore behooves me to discuss in this treatise the hot boil that appears on the buttocks, which is not among those that burst.
And if you wish to know the work of iron, look to see if the boil is hot at its beginning, full of heat and fever, and turns red as you can see. Therefore do not hasten to pierce it, but make it burst when the pain is subdued;
and then have the patient sit on a chair, with two small chairs for them to lean on, and support their back while bringing their feet together.
And let their thighs be spread wide, place their arms beneath their knees, and bind them securely with a good bandage;
Then follows the bile towards the right side, and there brings the tool with which one opens the mouth of the gallbladder, about which comes later its form;
And it is necessary that when you bring this tool there, you first insert the reed to know the depth of the gallbladder, so that what enters from the tool does not go deeper than it should, and does not harm the patient; And if the tool is too large, then one must cover the depth of the gallbladder with rags so that the tool does not cause injury;
And it is necessary to place the funnel of the tool on top, and to grease the tool.
When the abscess opens, and one cuts with soft hand, then it is necessary to cover it with warm linen;
When the gallbladder is emptied, then you must put in the wound clean rags moistened with rose oil or dry green oil;
And place a hot cloth on the wound, and put it over the wadding, and lay on top of that a linen cloth moistened with water or mallows that have been cooked.
Then, after two days of appropriate ointment application, until it is healed.
And sometimes lift off the wadding and the wound with an enema of water and honey, then water in which lilies and long-stemmed aristolochia have been cooked. Then reapply the ointment.
And if the wound is located in the marrow, then it is necessary that you guard against cooking with fire, but cure it as we have said in the division.
Of childbirth It is first necessary that she knows the figure of natural childbirth, and the signs are when you see the woman bearing down and wanting to smell the air.
Then the child quickly emerges from outside. Therefore know that this birth is according to the natural form, and the afterbirth is beneath its head, along with the child.
And when you see these signs, then gently press her belly so that the child emerges quickly.
Because when it descends upon its head, so also does the second one with it, and the uterus is cleansed of its excesses by good cleansing.
And that which comes differently does not come naturally
For sometimes it comes on its feet, causing the body or head to bend over backwards and the hands to stretch out, or it comes on its belly, or at times it turns upside down on its neck, assuming various evil forms;
Therefore it is necessary for the midwife to be wise and skilled in these matters, watchful against error and deception, and I will show you all the forms and how one must assist her.
If the child comes out on its head naturally and the woman delivers it with difficulty, and her strength is weak, then make her sit on a saddle or have women hold her up;
and raise her nature with oil or cooked fenugreek, and then place the little spatula between her thighs, of which this is the form and pierce the secundine, and cut with its nail until the moisture within flows out;
And press down on the woman's belly until the child descends; and if it does not descend, then you must administer to the woman a suppository of ground fennel seed with sesame oil.
then make her inhale condimentum and sneeze; hold her mouth and nose for one hour: The child will now be born.
And if the two hands come out first, you must gently push them back little by little; and if they cannot be pushed back in, then have the woman sit down and lift her feet up. then tilt the chair towards the ground, and hold onto the woman so she does not fall during this maneuver;
and if the hands still cannot be pushed in and the child is dying, then cut through the skin at the joint placed beforehand, extract the child, and reset it evenly.
after the child emerges feet-first When the child comes onto his feet, then you must lift him up. And then slowly turn him bit by bit until he is even;
Then seize one of the legs and stretch it gradually.
When it reaches the thighs, then command him to grasp it, and let him sneeze accordingly; If fever occurs, God willing.
And if it does not come forth as we have said, then turn it little by little until it is according to the natural figure. For then it will come forth easily.
And if fever does not occur as we have said, then take musk, aloe, sesame oil, melted gum, and grind them all together in one mortar; And place this ointment on the woman's womb and keep her sitting in hot water up to her chest;
And when she is warmed underneath, place for her a collar of myrrh, put it beneath her, and let her wear it for an hour; Then have her sit on a chair, then make her sneeze and hold her mouth and nose, and gently press her belly, for the child is coming out now.
"of the birth of the child onto her knees" When a child arrives in this form, then the bailiff puts his hands softly and softly. Then he is suspended by his neck, with his feet dangling down, lying on the bed And folds his hands gently and gently, then he takes the hands onto the belly, removing cushions underneath until it's aligned below If the child does not jump, take his feet and shake them firmly, then move your belly upwards, then place your hands And raise the child gently and instruct the woman to hold on until the child comes out
"of the birth of the child that comes from the womb with one hand held back;" I must devise how to reset the hand If it cannot be reset, then have the woman stand up and walk around
If she cannot walk, then have her lie on the bed and forcefully raise her legs
then apply the muscilage that I described
And if she does not give birth, have her sit on a seat and then examine how to reset the hand Wash the child according to its natural figure, and make it sneeze, and instruct her to take so much that the child passes wind.
"of the birth of the child onto its neck with hands spread out and face turned towards its mother's back;" It is necessary for the servant to take his hand, then turn it little by little, and wash it gently;
And when it is even, put on the muscular nature of old mallow and oil, as we have said, then instruct her to move little by little;
After you have done this, make her sit on the seat, and instruct her to take it; And make her sneeze. "In the same manner for the afterbirth;"
"In the same manner for the afterbirth;" When the child passes wind in this manner throughout the entire afterbirth, cut off the afterbirth with your fingernail until all moisture is emptied;
And if the child lies on its face and neck, cut off the umbilical cord at the navel so that it is not retained, lest the child die;
Then place the child inside, until you have positioned it as necessary, and instruct the woman to push once more:
"Concerning the birth of twins;" It happens frequently that twins are born, sometimes three or four at a time; and this is not an uncommon occurrence. It is rare for them to live long, if they are even born.
It is rare for them to live long, if they are even born. I know that they are multiplied in number and are destroyed by the evil spirit who cuts them apart, which is joined to the womb;
and sometimes they come out naturally like one whole, as we have said.
And if they are born crying, then the treatment should be carried out as we have said, and the physician should be skilled and act quickly and gently. He should do this in such a way that it leads to healing. "Concerning multiple births;"
Sometimes they are formed in the mother’s womb one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, or even more up to fifteen, and all are perfectly formed into the shape of a child by the measure of the glorious sage, and the physician should know all these things because such things may happen. If it is done according to what is necessary.
Concerning a dead child:
When you treat a woman for a dead fetus or pregnancy outside of its usual course, and there is no progress, and you are compelled to intervene. It is necessary that you know if the woman has a healthy temperament, and whether she has any accidents or fears death.
It is necessary for the woman to be laid on her back, with her head inclined downward, and her legs raised.
And the assistant should hold her thighs at a 90-degree angle, or tie her to the bed so that she does not slide down during childbirth.
Then rub the woman's mouth with moist oil made from mastic and fenugreek seeds and flaxseed, then anoint your hands with these oils and preparations.
Then insert your hand into the woman gently, then seek the location where she feels contractions, and ensure that if the child is coming out, it does so face down.
If you insert the hot iron into his eyes or neck or mouth or throat or cheeks or below the beard or in the armpit or near the ribs, and if the descent is on foot, insert it or prick at the sides of the chest.
and he must hold the hot iron in his right hand, place the curve between the fingers of his left hand, and gently press it with all his might, inserting it into any of these places that we have mentioned until the thing is emptied.
Then insert it against the other cautery iron, or the third one if necessary, so that the extraction is even.
And then stretch it evenly by moving from one side to the other for easier removal, and let the cautery iron have teeth for better grip, as shown here:
And if some part remains, then oil some of his fingers and press them on that part, and pull the other part.
If it remains there not at all, place this poultice higher up and do so until all the fire exits.
And if one hand comes before the other and it cannot return due to tension, you must wrap a cloth around it until it releases all. Then strike at the joint of the sole or the wrist, and likewise do so for the other hand, and for both feet.
If the child's head is large and narrow at the outlet, or has a sharp point assembled there, you must insert the spine of the spatula between your two fingers, split open the top, and extract the point. Or else round it with the instrument called 'almidach', from which the form comes with the instruments that are in the chapter following this one.
And do likewise if the child is born with a large head naturally.
Then pull out the bones with tongs; and if the head is stuck and held by forceps, split it open until the moisture in the piss outlet comes out.
If it cannot come out, then cut it apart piece by piece until you can.
If the abdomen or lower ribs are swollen, you must pierce it so that the moisture escapes.
And if the child is on its feet, the attraction is light and the directions at the mouth of the uterus are easy
And if it is stuck in the belly or breast, you must pull it out with a cloth wrapped around your hand; and make an incision into the belly or breast until the moisture comes out.
And if other bones remain and the head stays in place, insert your hand deeply into the socket and pull it out through the mouth of the socket; then put one or two fingers inside and pull it out forcefully.
And if the mouth of the socket is narrowed by heat from inflammation that has come there, then do not work it further, but apply moist and fatty substances. And use plasters for treatment, as well as warm, softening, and moistening ointments.
And if the child is on his side, and you can make him even, then apply what we have said regarding a living child.
And if there is no power [i.e., no one available to help], then perform trepanation with caution, leaving nothing of the afterbirth behind.
And once you have done this, if [the patient] is suffering from hot abscesses that come about in the marrow.
And if there is bleeding from the veins, let it be drawn with warm water, and other treatments applied [to the patient].
And I saw a woman in whose belly one child had been killed, then she conceived another upon it, and the other was killed. After many days, there appeared an abscess on his cheek, which swelled until it opened, and then began to discharge copiously.
I was summoned to the hospital, where I pondered long and could not heal the wound.
I applied a plaster with strong adhesion, from which came forth one bone, and after some days another one. I marveled greatly because the belly has no bones.
I thought that it was the bones of a dead child.
I saw the wound, and many bones were injured, until the woman was at her wit's end; And the woman lived thus for a long time, and a little bit of bone came out from its place [i.e., the wound].
I wrote this chapter so that when a master finds something unusual, he may know how to provide assistance.
Hereafter comes the form of the pressure [appliance], which is illustrated in books;
And to the return of the two heads of the two kidneys. Nevertheless, let the horn be more subtle than the restrictor, and let it be made of ebony or boxwood;
And let the mouth of the wood be two inches wide, and the edge of the tree one-half a palm long; And in the two ligaments there should be two joints of this same wood that close on both ends, each half a palm long or a little more;
And these two joints are placed in the mouth of the mallet to open when one turns the two horns.
Another form, more subtle and lighter in appearance, should be made of ebony or boxwood wood, resembling tweezers; And have at both ends two joints, each half a palm long and two inches wide;
And when you want to open the mallet with all the instruments, have the woman sit on a bed with her feet dangling and legs spread apart, then place the two joints joined together into the mallet and hold the head of the instrument underneath between her thighs; Then open your hand to the instrument, just as you have done with even forceps, according to the quantity that you see opening the mouth of the wound, until the boil bursts.
These instruments are all mounted, and their appearances are multiplied; And when the physician has prepared them, the faster the operation is, and the greater it appears to people because of its quantity.
Do not disregard any instrument until you have prepared it, for their necessity is not negligible.
When the secondine is retained during childbirth, you must instruct the woman to raise her buttocks and then make her sneeze with condisium powder, while holding your hands over her mouth and nose; And if she sneezes because of it, all the better.
If not, then take a pot and make a hole in the lid, and put herbs that can open the mouth of the wound in it, such as calamint, rue, anise, chamomile, alkanet, and centory; All these herbs, or some of them, should be cooked in water over the fire.
Then place a tube with holes from the pot's opening into the mouth of the patient and hold it until steam enters the patient.
Then make them sneeze, as we have said. If the woman expels quickly
And if after this treatment it remains uncured and not free of fever, then order the maidservant to moisten her left hand in sesame oil or in musk-mallow ointment, then place it on the navel and rub gently. And when she has found it, take it and pull it out gradually and gently, so that the patient does not fall during extraction.
But one must move it lightly to the right and left, then draw it out. If it comes and gets disentangled
And if the patient's mouth is narrow, we have mentioned the treatment of sneezing and fumigation with herbs.
And if it is not as we have said, then make sure you do not err in the treatment.
However, you must tie what is at the mouth of the womb to the woman's thigh, then perform a cleansing with oil of tetraharmacon. If it swells and returns, then fire will come.
But nonetheless, when it swells, evil odor comes to the stomach and head, and harms the patient. Therefore, fumigations suitable for this are necessary:
Many of the ancients have proven fumigation with mustard and dried figs.
The form of the instrument used to fumigate women retained in labor or delivery is as follows
And it is similar in appearance to a cake, and one places the head carefully on its nature, and the wide heads on the fire;
and let the fumigation be upon the coals, until the thread is consumed, then begin another.
Many children are born whose anus is not pierced but obstructed by some subtle membrane: Therefore it is necessary for the bath attendant to prick this part with her finger, and not pricking with a sharp point, carefully cleansing the wound so that she does not touch it.
Then place moist linen soaked in wine and oil on it, then apply the remedy of ointment until it is clean.
And if you suspect that it may become blocked again, insert a lead tube into the opening and leave it in place for several days, then remove it when the child is ready to go to bed
And sometimes this swelling comes suddenly from a wound or an abscess; So one must cover it suddenly: Whether it is cauterized, as we have said about the boil.
Fistulas that come underneath the fundament are called nodations, and growths that come near to the fundament, or in the space of the anus, if there is one fistula or more;
And when that nodation is ancient, it opens up, and emits moist foul-smelling or subtle bowels, and sometimes these fistulas are persistent;
And they are recognized by this: that there is a discharge of wind or farting when the patient excretes, and sometimes one sees a worm leap out.
And there are fistulas that pierce up to the bladder, and up to half of the penis; and reach as far as the hip joint, and even up to the knee.
And thus one recognizes a fistula piercing the fundament, not the skin: and it is necessary that you insert your two index fingers into the fundament and insert a thin needle of brass or iron into the fistula where there is no winding.
And if it has windings, then insert a thin reed or horsehair into the fistula until you feel the reed or hair with your finger;
and if you do not feel it and there is no discharge of air through the opening, as we have said: know that it does not pierce. If you hurry to cure it.
"And when the fistula persists down to the bladder or down to the passage of urine, so that urine squirts out and cannot be stopped by medication."
If it pierces as far as the hip joint, then the reed comes out at that place; if there is no winding and the pain around it increases, then it is necessary to leave it be, and no medication or salve will help;
And for these Persian fistulas there is no remedy except effort, it is the vainty of foolish physicians who meddle with them.
In those that are not Persian nor ancient, there is hope of healing through iron; as I have experienced, and it is necessary for the patient to lie on their back between your hands.
And lift the legs up to the thighs, and keep the thighs inclined toward the abdomen; Then insert an awl or trocar if there is coiling, until you know where the tube emerges.
If the patient feels it around their anus, then you must insert your two index fingers there, until you feel that the tube has pierced through.
And when you feel between your fingers either the sigmoid or the flesh, then know that it is Persian; If not, do not work on it unless one can heal it.
It is said everywhere that some can be healed well, but this happens rarely.
And the aid one performs here, is to heat the cautery according to the width of the fistula, as it has been said before. And place the heated cautery into the fistula until it reaches the bottom; Repeat this twice or three times, until you know that these broken hairs are burnt, which resemble a bird's feather;
And then apply wet lint to burn until those hairs fall out, and finally apply ointment around the wound and bandage it.
If it is healed thus, all the better.
If not, otherwise it cannot be healed;
And if the tent enters but does not reach the depth of the fistula, place between your two fingers and the tent a thick covering of flesh or wax, so that you can see where the fistula opens. So find the entrance of the fistula, insert the tent first, and then apply the cautery afterward until it reaches the tip of the tent; and the pain will cease, and it will fall away;
then remove those shattered bones that resemble a bird's feather, so that nothing remains.
"And if your hand trembles and cuts between you and the work, then cauterize it with fire or with hot medicine."
For the fire cautery has two uses: that is to say, the burning of these adhering bones and the stopping of blood flow and the drying of moisture.
then treat moist pains with wax or crushed herbs until the place swells up and the burned bone appears in the swelling
then treat the wound by applying poultices of hot oils and hard grease, which are dry medicines.
"For when it is restored, then it is healed and does not return."
"And if the fistula comes from deep inside the fundament and is far away from the body, put your finger into the fundament and feel for it."
If you feel the pain and between two there is cloth or skin or bone where it is about to pierce through, then use fire with caution and hope, by administering one of these three methods:
either cauterize it as we have said, or cut it until it reaches the bottom, or if you can, apply dressings and treat it as at first.
And go not too deep, lest thou touch the holding that holds the fundament; let the evacuation come forth without will. Then the treatment, as we have said;
Then the treatment, as we have said; Perhaps it will then be healed; or remove that covering and cleanse it after it has been cut near the fundament, either by attempt or by some other pointed instrument; Then cleanse that faulty flesh which is in the wound as much as thou canst; Then consider how to restore the wound and keep the fistula away from the fundament:
Then consider how to restore the wound and keep the fistula away from the fundament: So that it may be easier for the patient.
And sometimes fistulas are of this manner: When thou dost thrust the needle into the fistula, and it is on the side of the fundament near the skin above, then take a needle pierced at the head thus: "And tie one thread around two places, and put the probe all the way into the fistula until it reaches the tip."
If it passes into the margin of the fundament within, then pull out the thread from that piercing, so that thou dost thrust thy thumb upon the fundament;
And draw the head of the thread, bring together the two shoulder blades, bind one to the other, leave it for one or two days;
And restrain it several times until the threads cut through these tissues that lie between them and separate;
Then dress the wound until it is healed and clean.
"If the fistula does not open on its own, then make it open in every way that you can, if it is not too deep." "For it is not necessary to cut so deeply for the closure and then treat it as we have said until it heals."
The shape of the spinal needle used to create a fistula should be thin and pointed. And on the other hand not sharp, so that one does not cut what one should not cut, as you see here:
There are two kinds of emorydesis: Either they are within the fundament like grains of resin, some small and others large, there is blood on the skin at times, some have one and others have several, they are defective in the fundament or at the head of the fundament;
But those that are defective lack moisture and appear on the skin with a little yellowish water or blood, having the color of flesh;
And the treatment for those who have them in their fundament, it is that you instruct the patient to strain while going to the latrine, until the fundament expels them, and then they will appear. If you hurry, grasp it with forceps or pinch it with your nail, then cut it at its roots;
And if the tweezers cannot hold them due to moisture, then grasp them with cloth or cotton, or a piece of chamois leather; Then extract them with your two fingers, cut them off, and apply some warm powders in place of a cautery. Or you may cauterize them as is said in the chapter on cauteries, then treat them with other remedies until they are healed.
And if the fundament cannot expel them, then administer to the patient a strong and harsh enema to wash out what is in the fundament so that it can be excreted openly. If the patient is unconscious, and if the hairs are forcibly removed at their base, then treatment is easy.
If the patient is unconscious, and if the hairs are forcibly removed at their base, then treatment is easy. And you should grasp them with your nail or forceps and cut them, then treat them as we have said until they are healed, so that he fears incision by iron. You must arrange the suturing in this manner:
You must arrange the suturing in this manner: Take one thread twisted, and pass it through a needle, then draw the thread upwards and pierce the needle on the other side, and turn both ends of the thread under the needle, and let them be wide.
And pull the thread firmly, then tie it, remove the needle, and do likewise for all the others, leaving one free to correct any excess blood.
Then place a damp cloth moistened with rose oil or wax on the base, and cover it, and instruct the patient to rest;
and then let him be until they fall out, and when they do, treat them with ointment and other treatment until he is healed.
on the drying of fecal matter on the fundament Many times there is a drying of feces in the intestines, and this occurs due to constriction of nature, especially when the patient is elderly or when medication is ineffective If you must reset at the tip of a spatula or with your nail, scrape off the scurf on top so it does not get wet. Then treat it until it is solid as it ought to be;
And if it cannot hold fast, then start the scraping again more vigorously than before, until it bleeds freely and becomes raw. Then treat it until it is clean.
fever Ants are small creatures that often appear on the body, and they bite deeply;
And sometimes the cold finds them, and it feels like death from trembling, spreading throughout the whole body, but especially in the hands.
And the treatment is this: take a cane made from a goose feather or a strong eagle feather, and place that cane on the trembling so that the circle encompasses the trembling entirely; Then twist your hand around the entire cane until you have covered all around the trembling, drive it deep inside and crush the trembling from its roots.
And if you see fit to do so with a feather of iron or steel according to this form, and it should be thin underneath and tapering at the tip Does not perceive, to hold the two, and press the muscles.
And if you see, cauterize the trembling, as it is before in the chapter of cautery.
Sometimes a silver or lead enema is made, or melted gold or hammered tin;
and sometimes these tools are made small and large according to those for whom they are intended. Therefore, those which are prepared for the treatment of children and those who are weak and feeble should be small
Therefore, those which are prepared for the treatment of children and those who are weak and feeble should be small The shape of a small or large clyster is as follows: wide where the belly is bound in this manner
And if there is a disturbance or the belly is bound up, as you see, and the entrails are pierced within;
and there are two perforations on one side and one on the other.
and the belly is placed where medicines are put into a beast's bladder or parchment, and is pierced all around with small perforations, and there is one space between each perforation; then strong thread of roughened wool is twisted in an X-shape or wound around, and the belly is closed like a goat. And when the medicine is inside [the patient], then tie it to the instrument beforehand with a strong thread, and then administer an enema.
And this is the shape of the circle:
Let the medicine be neither too hot nor too cold, and grease the tip of the enema with oil or a mixture of egg yolk, or something similar, then insert it gently. Then the minister presses with both hands together until it is completely empty, then remove the enema, and the patient lifts their legs towards the side, and if the medicine wants to come out, tie it as much as possible. And if he sleeps all night [after this treatment], it will be of greater benefit.
"And if you perform a clyster on someone with abdominal descent disease, and the medication rushes to come out, then begin again until it is finished."
And if the hemorrhoids are at the fundament or abscess, let the enema be as subtle as for a child;
This is the shape of the subtle enema where the skin is stretched:
We have already spoken about the treatment of wounds in the section on divisions;
I shall tell you about treatments for hands and medicines according to their fulfillment.
"I say that wounds are diverse according to how they are made, and according to where the wounds are made, and of what they are made."
Wounds are made by blows from stones, cuts from swords and knives, or from lances, clubs, arrows, or similar things.
or according to the location on the body, such as wounds that fall on the neck, head, thigh, belly, liver, and similar limbs;
And I will tell you the treatment for each wound, beginning with simple head wounds, for memory will come in its chapter.
I say that when a simple wound comes to the head and the bone is not broken, take care if it was caused by a blow from a stone or similar things, and if the skin is torn all around and the wound is large, be wary of a hot abscess forming. Then quickly wash it with cold water from the Cephalic source, especially if there is a flow of blood from the wound, and let the washing be done towards the opposite part of the injured area;
And let the patient avoid being full of wine and fatty foods.
And if he does not wish to recover, then his food should be reduced, and he should drink no wine nor eat meat.
And put on the wound, if an abscess appears there, cotton moistened in rose oil alone or in astringent wine.
And if there is no hot abscess, then put on the wound, fresh blood from its entirety and not moved by air, powder which I will mention later.
And if the air has moved it, then put some ointments on it until it is healed.
"And if the wound is large, such as from a sword cut or similar things, and the lips cannot be brought together by tension, then bring them together by stitching, as I will describe for abdominal wounds."
If the wound is open to the bone and gaping, and hangs only by a little, cut it off. Then treat the wound with medicines, and replace hard flesh in place of skin, and order the patient to eat fatty foods such as testicles and cooked wheat, also poultry and similar things.
And if you find rottenness in the skin without reaching the bone, cut out all the rotting flesh and cast it away, then dress [the wound].
And if there is an artery in the wound or vein without skin, which cannot be stopped by medications, seek out the artery. If you find it dislocated, tie it with a thread. And if this does not help, cauterize [the artery].
If these wounds are small and simple, the treatment is easy: And you should apply this powder which will seal before the wound closes.
The method of preparing the powder is as follows: Take frankincense, one part; Dragon's blood, two parts; Grind the mixture finely and sprinkle it onto the wound, then bind it tightly until it adheres well and joins with all its blood.
And then tie it securely, leaving it without being untied unless it swells. For medicine is not removed until it is ripe.
"Sometimes this is also done with quicklime alone when incense and dragon's blood are not available, but before the air touches the wound."
And if the wound has moved, especially during summer, do not put this powder on it;
but apply some digestive oils or poultices made of barley flour and honey mixed with water until it weeps; then treat with other treatments until it is healed.
And if bone fragments come with the wound and it is small, remove them with fine forceps;
and I will tell you later about head fractures.
"of the wound on the neck"
"If a wound comes to the neck and it is simple, there is no difference between that and one on the head, except if the nerve of the neck or an artery is cut."
If it is the nerves, there is no other remedy than to leave it alone and not put anything constricting on it, for it harms the nerves and makes them retreat; and do not apply anything cold to the wound, because the substance of the nerves is cold and their continuation is with the brain, which is the highest member.
But let the medicine be warm, like hot water washed in soft water and mixed with rose oil, and cabbage washed likewise in soft water, and other moist fomentations according to this manner, and moist poultices.
"And if the wound is large, then stitch it up and bind it with bandages, then treat it until it heals."
And if wounds are deep and the boil is raised and full of pus, pierce it lower down.
and if an artery is cut, and blood flows copiously, ligate it, and tie it off, and cauterize it if necessary.
and if the spine of the neck is cut, or the heart, and the blood vessels are preserved through which the flesh receives nourishment, then press the heart against the spine of the neck, and do not touch the neck but reset it according to its natural shape. and then bind it tightly, and leave it for a few days, then treat it with poultices until it is healed.
And if the wound has gone into the bone, scrape it out. And if there are fragments of bone, burn them all away if you can, and those that you cannot have burned, let the wound fester until it is evacuated and its discharge tied off.
And if the wound is fresh, powder it with the powder I mentioned. And if there are bones in the wound and it has a fistula, then treat it as described in its chapter
If it's a wound from a lance or knife and it's deep, observe if any wind comes out of the wound as the patient breathes. then know that the wound is mortal;
and if it's not deep but fresh with blood throughout, do not apply the powder at first or bind it too tightly, lest the blood return inward and reach the heart, killing the patient; but apply an attractive ointment and bind it twice a day;
and if you have no ointment, put some old cotton in the wound to draw out moisture and make the patient sleep on the wound for three days, or four, or more. So that there will be no spasm nor harmful trembling of the heart's breath. And when you see these good signs, know that the wound is saved. Then treat with compresses and other remedies until it is healed.
And if it cannot heal nor close, know that there is a fistula present;
If the treatment is carried out as it should be. And if the wound is from a cut made by a sword or knife, and it is simple, whether on the front or back, then treat what is visible; If it is large, sew it up;
And if it is small, apply powder to it. And if it is pressed against the bone and has cut off pieces, then cleanse the wound and treat any exposed flesh. And if they are not exposed, let the wound fester so that the extraction will be easier.
And for other wounds on other limbs, the judgment is as we have said.
rupture of the abdomen
Abdominal dropsy can be large, moderate, or small;
And sometimes a large wound allows the intestines or the nerve of the intestines to protrude;
And the stitch is more difficult, sometimes a small wound is worse than a large one because if one sets it too point by point, the intestines are not set properly.
Therefore, because the intestines swell immediately when they feel cold and shrink more tightly, it is better to move the wound a little so that one can reposition the intestines in their place rather than elsewhere.
And know that an abdominal hernia occurs in four ways:
The first two stitches occur in the abdominal stitch, and two other common stitches are found in other wounds of the body.
And moreover, they are more suitable for the abdominal stitch, and I will explain each one and make it clear.
I say that when the wound is small, and there is nothing of the intestine sticking out, and there is little to reset, this is done in one of two ways: Or because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestines are swollen with cold.
And when it is cold, heat it in such a way: Wet a sponge or clean cloth in only warm water, or cook in boiling water with cumin and cypripedium and spikenard, and wring out the intestines until the swelling is gone;
and sometimes this restrictive wine, and it is believed that [with] a sole [fish], to draw out the swelling.
And when you see the swelling departing, then mix the intestines with water or decocted aloe and mallows, for by this the entrance is eased somewhat;
and if it still cannot enter, then make a small cut in the wound with the instrument used to cauterize hemorrhoids;
And the first treatment is believed to be that which makes the cut, and no one should cut there without great necessity;
And this is the tool for splitting [it].
If it does not cut within the curve and outwards, see here the shape: And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestines stick out, then carefully put them back according to their natural shape into their proper place if you can, for this is important.
When the wound is wide and it is located below the belly, you should make the patient lie on their back, and put their legs higher than their head. And if it is located below the belly, place the head and chest higher than the lower parts; also, if the rupture of the belly is in one of the two parts, make sure that the wounded part is higher than the other.
And thus it should be arranged like this in large and medium-sized wounds.
In small wounds, place what you have prepared, then use one hand gently to pull the whole wound with your fingers and bring together the lips.
And this is the common method of suturing: take one or more needles according to the quantity of the width of the wound, then leave two spans from the beginning of the wound, and insert a needle with strong thread. and pierce the two heads of the skin with the two heads of the sinew, which is beneath the skin inside, until you make it pierced from that part, and bring together the two heads of the sinew in a group of four;
then tie a doubled thread around the needle at both ends, then bring together the two heads of the wound evenly, and then leave two spaces apart, and insert another needle;
then tie the thread knot as you did with the first needle, and continue to do so according to how many needles you need until all of the wound is bound;
and let the needles be medium-sized, between thin and thick, for thin needles cut all of the flesh, and very thick ones cannot enter well; So that they must be medium-sized.
and it is not necessary to push the needles too deep into the flesh and skin, lest they cut and open the wound before it can be closed;
And then cut off the points of needles so they do not pierce the patient while sleeping, and place bandages or cloths on the points of needles to keep them in place until the wound is healed.
And this method of sewing with needles is more useful for small wounds, as it requires only one or two needles.
The second sewing method is common, and it involves bringing together the two edges of skin and the two edges of flesh with one needle using medium-strength thread.
And once you have pierced all three edges with the needle, pull it back towards where you started, like sewing cloth.
And space each stitch about the thickness of a small finger.
This sewing method serves well, and I once sewed a wound that one man had in his belly, which was caused by a knife cut over a palm's length, and guts were protruding two palms' length, and the wound was within the belly.
I reset the intestine afterwards when he had been feverish for 24 hours, and the wound healed up to 15 days, which I dressed, and it was healthy.
And the doctors had judged him to die, but it was a miracle;
and I did not cure him with an ointment, for I was in a place where none were found, nor any medicine; and twice daily I put clean cotton on the wound and washed it with honey water until it was healed.
I will tell you the two proper ways to stitch:
Take the needle and pass it from the outer part to the inner;
when it has pierced the heart directly, then lay the head of the cobbler's awl or cost where you inserted the needle, and make it pierce from the inner part to the outer;
And the purpose of this stitch is that you sew like a furrier sews furs, leaving the awl on one side once and taking it up again on the other, until the stitching is complete.
The second method of suturing, which Galen describes precisely, is as follows: some people join the two parts naturally and apply one end of the thread to the other in this manner.
Stick a needle into the nearby Chief Dou Mirach tendon and pierce it alone; leave both ends of the thread out. Then turn the needle and pierce it from the outer part to the inner one, at both ends of the thread;
Then pierce each one again from the outer part to the inner one in two other Chief Dou Mirach tendons that are located on the other side;
And this is the most correct and common method of suturing.
Galen also says that one should suture the abdomen with two needles, each having thread;
And one should insert one needle from one side and the other from the other, in the manner of those who sew hides;
And know that when the ulcer is within the belly, the wound is harder to heal than from other places of the belly.
The judgment of the wound is like the judgment of other wounds:
and it is that when you find the fresh wound with all its blood, before the air has moved it, then reset the intestines and the skin.
then place on the powder surrounding the flesh, and if the air has moved it, then place some ointment that is available, so that the wound closes. and tie up the stitches, and let the edges of the incision and the middle close up; then treat the wound as you would any other, until it is healed.
And if you do not have medicines, then place cotton wool on it as soon as it begins to close up, and move it twice a day until it is healed.
For in many cases where wounds are simple, there is no need for any other medicine besides this;
And if you doubt that the wound does not communicate with the main limbs, then it is necessary to wet light linen in warm rose oil or rose-colored oil, and place it around the angles and beneath the armpits.
And if he feels pain or corruption in the bowels, and this happens often, then black wine suppositories are beneficial, especially if the corruption reaches the intestines.
And pierce it within, knowing that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small one.
The gut called 'jejunum' cannot heal when injured due to the thinness of its veins and the delicacy of its entire structure, as well as its closeness to the nerves.
And if the herb jumps out of the wound, then replace it immediately like the intestine while it is still fresh;
And if it is old and has turned green or black, then tie the place that is black so that no blood flows there, for there are veins and arteries.
Then cut what is between the tie, and place the two heads hanging down from the part below the wound up to its front for facilitating extraction when the herb falls out and the wound opens.
of the rupture of the bowel
When the intestines are torn and the wound is small, it can sometimes be restored in some people, for I saw that one man was wounded in the belly by a lance;
and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and it became inflamed and turned into a fistula, from which the digestion and wind escaped;
I applied treatment according to what I knew, and did not cease until he was healed, with the wound soundly closed.
And when I saw it heal, I feared that the patient might be suffering in his belly; but there was no harm done, and he remained in better condition, eating and drinking.
And some experts said that when the intestine has a small wound, it should be tied up in this manner: Take large leeches, then gather the edges of the wound together, and when the leech has opened its mouth, place it on both lips so that it sucks them.
And then he cuts off the head, and this holds so that it cannot be untied; then he adds another tremor afterwards in the same manner as before until the wound is completely closed. And closes the wound.
These stones can enter the intestines without causing harm to the patient; and the intestines can be tied together with a fine thread cut from the intestines of an animal in this manner:
Take the head of this gut thread that is very skinned, and then tie to its head a thin twisted linen thread; then place the thread into the needle, and sew up the gut, and reset it in place.
And this method of suturing tremors is not outside the scope of trust and hope
And if the wound is large and wide, especially when it is in one of the large intestines, then there is no skill or health that can help except for delicacy.
of fistula wherever it may be Know this: every wound or abscess, when it opens up, is universally called a 'fistula', and similarly when it is cut open and swells back.
And a fistula is, according to truth, broken and hard, white, where one does not feel pain, and it is also called like the feathers of a bird;
and sometimes in clear water, and at other times thick; sometimes small, and at other times ample;
And I have spoken of it in the division of wounds, that any wound which is not clean and has no flesh, only appears by one of the eight causes: that is to say, through the smallness of blood or body; or because of its evil nature; or because there is hard flesh inside and on the lips, which does not allow flesh to form; or if there is too much water; or if the place is putrid, and the matter is of poor quality; or if the medicine is not good in its care; or because corruption is of a pestilent nature; or because the property in the region is slow to digest and heal, and is naturally inflamed. Where there are veins or bones
And I have already shown all these causes, signs, and medicinal treatments in this division.
"Now I must tell you about the treatment for a fistula that is done through manual labor."
Know that a fistula can occur in all parts of the body; For there are fistulas that come from the great veins, and arteries, and nerves, or from the face, intestine, bladder, ribs, spine of the back, or any joint of the hands or feet; And there are some that come from the property of the principal member, and similar places.
And all fistulas of this kind are difficult to heal, and only labor and ignorance are responsible for them;
And if there is any fistula that does not reach the place I have mentioned, and you are confident about its cure, and you recognize it, then take a tent of brass or iron, and apply it to the fistula;
and if the fistula is twisted, search for it with a subtle tent of lead, because lead bends more easily around its twistiness;
If the fistula has many openings and you cannot examine it well by touch, then apply a clyster through one of the openings because moisture passes quickly from one opening to another, and this will cleanse it.
Then search for bleeding as much as you can, so that you know if there is bone or nerve, and how deep it goes. Ask the patient carefully about the pain they feel when you press your hand on it, and where they feel it.
And when you truly know where it is, and if it is far from a joint, or nerve, or artery or vein, or in any of the places I have told you about, then cut according to what I have told you, and remove the broken bone and rotted flesh that is inside.
Then treat it until it is healed. And if the fistula is very deep in its proper place, you must cut as deeply as possible, then put moistened lint soaked in hot water into medicine into it, up to the head of the fistula, so that the medicine can corrode the excess flesh left at the bottom.
And then I apply hot poultices of clean flesh until it is healed;
If not healed by this, cauterize it as we have said, and if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, cut it out.
If vein or nerve does not trouble you in the principal members, as we have said;
And if the bone is exposed and there is corruption and blackness, scrape it until all corruption is removed, then treat with hot poultices of clean flesh until it is healed;
And if not healed, return as before, knowing that you have not yet reached the end:
So uncover and search until you reach the bottom, remove all corruption, then replace it in its proper place;
And if thus healed, that is well. If not, know that the corruption is too deep for you to reach; So there is no other remedy than to leave it to nature.
And if there is a small broken bone, and you can grasp it with pliers, then extract it using the appropriate instrument; but if there are many bones, then remove them all, leaving none behind.
And if moisture opposes you, and there is no mistake or fear, cut away the moisture and flesh, and free the bones.
And if you cannot remove them within an hour, place something irritating to cause rot on the wound and leave it until the spot around the bones is rotted away, then the bones will come out more easily.
And if it's a large bone, such as one in the leg or thigh, then remove only the corruption until all the blackness is gone, then close the wound.
And if there is much corruption and it reaches almost to the bone. Then it must be cut all the way down to the corruption, and then cured until it is sound.
And I will tell you of a fistula that happened to a man in his leg, so that you may take it as an example and aid in your work.
The young man was about 30 years old, who had pain in his leg from an internal cause such that matter came to the leg and it became swollen with a large abscess, without any apparent reason to open it.
Yet the doctors in their foolishness cut so much upon it that the abscess opened, and they dug out much matter, and it became a fistula, and many passages formed that continually emitted wind and moisture from the body.
And many doctors tried to treat it for about two years, but none of them were skilled in the art of hands, until I was called and saw his leg and the medicines they used, and what flowed through the passages with great force. And the young man's body became red, and he had a yellowish hue.
I pitched a tent in one of these holes, then searched all the holes, and found that one came against another from all parts of the leg.
I then hurried, and cut into one of the holes until I uncovered a part of the bone, which was found rotten and pierced; and the corruption had reached the bone inside.
I saw what appeared to me of the rotten bone, and thought that there was no other corruption besides that which I removed;
And began to dress the wound with healing medicines for a long time, but it would not heal;
And then started again, and uncovered the bone as before, and found that the corruption had continued into the bone itself, which I scraped out, and then closed up the wound. But still it did not heal until I cut around a palm's width of the bone and scraped it clean down to its marrow, then dressed it with medicines. And it quickly became healed and sound, but the patient's weakness could not endure much more, and fear of death made me stop. For the evacuation of blood occurred often, but he was entirely cured, and in place of the bone there grew hard flesh, and it was well disposed and had no harm nor opposite in any way, neither going nor coming.
And if a bone is broken anywhere in the body, it must be set in this manner: Take linen, and bind it around the head of the exposed bone, and command someone to stretch it upwards; and place another larger linen bandage over the first one and bind it above the flesh that is over the bone; then stretch the head so that you can pull out the corrupted flesh below and expose the flesh on the spot where you want the bone to be.
and place a splint or a board underneath the bone to move away the corrupted flesh;
This must be done until one can see and feel all of the corruption, then it should be done again.
And if the bone is corrupted but not exposed, and the corruption is in the middle or in one part, then expose all of the flesh;
then place a splint underneath and stretch from one end of the corruption to the other, with the bandage being as long as the corruption is wide, as we have said;
And if corruption is at the joint, cut the corrupted joint, even if it contains bone on the other side;
And if corruption is in the continuity of two joints, there is no other choice but to cut.
And if corruption is at the wrist of the hand or at the ankle, that is very serious indeed; nevertheless you must investigate what caused this corruption. And clean it in every way you can, but be careful not to harm any veins or nerves;
And know that the incising tools and saws used to cut these bones are many, depending on the arrangement of the bones, their appearance from outside, their thickness and fineness, their length and shortness, and their hardness; And therefore one must prepare each type of tool for its corresponding task.
And know that the work will show you which tool you need to use, according to your knowledge of this art and the signs of diseases. If you consider the instrument with which you have need according to what is fitting.
The head rots either from internal causes or from external ones;
And when you have treated that corruption with medicines but they do not help, then it is necessary to cut off that limb up to the point where the corruption reaches so that the patient escapes from death or from the greater harm of losing the limb.
And the sign is that the limb turns black as if burned by fire, and after the blackening, the corruption spreads from limb to limb, spreading throughout the body;
So hasten to cut it off; and if it is due to the bite of some venomous beasts like a sea scorpion or snake etc., then cut at the root of the two limbs, but do not let it come as far as the hand.
And if it reaches the hand, then cut it off at the joint so that the corruption does not reach the arm;
And if it happens to the arm, cut at the elbow.
And if it passes the elbow, then death will occur, and no amount of medicine can save them due to the quantity of its poison.
And likewise when corrosion comes upon the foot: If it happens at the first joint, then cut after the next joint
And if it reaches the foot, then cut off the whole foot. And if it goes up into the leg, then cut at the knee joint.
And if it is above the knee, there is no other option but to let the patient die.
And the method of cutting off or cauterizing a limb is as follows: you should tie it above and below with ropes, extend one servant downwards from one of the ties and another upwards from the other tie, then cut away the flesh between the two ties using a wide knife until the bone is exposed.
Then cut or cauterize it and place a linen cloth on each side so that the cautery does not touch the healthy flesh, causing further injury or an abscess to the patient.
And if bleeding occurs while you are operating, cauterize the area promptly using powders that constrain blood.
then return to your treatment until it is completed, then bind the wounded limb with an appropriate bandage and care for it until it is healed;
And I will tell you what happened to one in great need:
a blackness appeared on him as if burnt by fire, and this corruption first came upon his big toe of the foot, spreading to consume the whole foot;
And when the man saw the corruption, he hastily cut off his foot and was healed;
And long afterward the corruption came upon the second toe of his hand, and he came to me, and I applied things that bounce back after cleansing his body, but the corrosion could not stop;
And he asked me to cut off his hand, which I refused, for I hoped to repel the matter. And I also feared that if I cut his hand off, he would die, for the power of man was weak.
And he became utterly despairing and returned to his land and hurried to have his hand healed, and he recovered.
Only this story is told for the sake of those who might otherwise act differently when there is need.
No boil ever appears on tender flesh and remains so long that it collects a great mass of pus; And then it bursts open and oozes out, leaving the spot empty like an emptied vessel. And the skin on top is as delicate as the finest cloth and does not reach down to bone or nerve; such a disease is called 'clean' and is not called 'fistula';
But if it extends so far that it reaches down to bone and depth, then it is called 'fistula'.
And you must cut that skin all around, even if it is delicate, just like cutting a piece of cloth. And do not be concerned about its decay.
If you suspect that the skin is rotting but the decay is not deep and the skin is thick with flesh, then perform a cleansing enema like this:
Examine whether the breast is large and the belly that is emitting a foul odor; then administer an Egyptian-style cleansing enema made like this: Take asafoetida, oil, and lead, in equal amounts, and cook them in a vessel over the fire until the medicine turns red and becomes as thick as honey;
And then take some of this according to your need, dilute it in water and honey, and administer the cleansing enema to the breast, closing the opening tightly; Leave the medicine inside for two hours, then remove it by squeezing.
Do this many times until the breast is softened, and the pus is removed.
and sometimes it is irrigated with water of ashes when this medicine is not present; take ashes of vinewood and pour water on them, then strain it, and use it for irrigation until you know that the breast is well cleaned.
and if the patient cannot tolerate it, nor the Egyptian medicine nor the water of ashes, then irrigate with water and honey mixed together with a little powdered lead. or you may irrigate with a mixture of honey and wine, for honey has the property to cleanse and wash, and wine makes the blood airy.
And when you have done this and are confident that the breast is well cleaned, then irrigate with something that causes flesh to form there; take prepared tragacanth and mix it with rose oil in wine.
When you use clysters of certain medications and ointments, about which I have spoken when treating ointments;
And if the opening to the chest is small and the tube of the clyster cannot enter, then enlarge it slightly with an iron tool, and place a wick of Egyptian ointment or basilicon ointment inside until it is widened;
And if the wound is too wide, then you should only close it enough so that the clyster can enter, and if the opening that drips below is above, then cut it at or lower than its level.
And if you cannot cover the chest below as you wish, then arrange it in such a way that the wound extends to its lowest level; for when the wound is deep, do not let flesh grow inside and if you cannot cover the chest below as you wish That the bow runs lightly downwards; leave nothing of the bow.
That the bow runs lightly downwards; leave nothing of the bow. And take medicines that consolidate to put on the wound, and press onto the linen cloth that covers all the wound Then push firmly against the opening of the wound with a cloth about one finger wide; press gently onto another cloth according to the size of the wound and place it on the wound to alleviate pressure from the bowels. Do not remove the outer cloth except once every few days.
And that which is on the opening of the wound, often remove it to remove the bowels, and know what comes from the bowels: whether it's venomous or little or much, or digested, or undigested.
And take care if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not; when your medicine has been applied in this manner, observe how it covers the wound opening, so you know that the chest is already healthy, and recovery approaches.
And then relieve it in the morning, or on the third day, and when you dress the wound, change to another cloth, and renew the ointment.
And if subtle poisons come after a long time, do not despair of health, for healing approaches.
For there are people whose wounds take too long to heal with flesh, and others that do the opposite;
And if undigested food suddenly jumps from the stomach after many days, know that the stomach has not emptied.
And if the stomach is slow to empty and feels distant, apply drying medicines that are moist in substance but dry in power, such as diaphoretic plaster, for it contains much vitriol, which is the last medicine.
Take diaphoretic plaster, and they make it with rose oil, and raise it with old wine equal in substance.
Then cook it and use it
And if you cannot find diaphoretic plaster, or make it yourself better, take myrrh and aloe and frankincense, grind them, and powder them onto the honey while it is on the fire
And then wrap it in a cloth, and stretch it over the chest, and sometimes administer an ointment made from long pepper and celestial lily roots, which is also like wheat flour and centory. And in the use of simples or composites: Grind them into powder, mix it with the honey I mentioned, and apply it as needed.
And if the wound is prolonged and not healed by this treatment, know that the corruption has gone deep and is pressing on the bone, or on hard members, or on ligaments. If it's a fistula cure, as we have mentioned earlier
A panaric is an abscess that develops under the nail of the little finger of the hand or foot, or sometimes in other toes.
And when it is neglected as it ages, an abscess forms and spreads, eating away and digging down until it reaches the root of the nail, sometimes even destroying the entire nail.
And corrosion reaches to the bone, causing foul-smelling pain; the thighs are two broad ones, and the color is yellow.
If the treatment we have described does not help, then you must cut away with iron all the excess that remains of the nail, and afterwards cauterize the wound. The cautery is very helpful if the bone is sound, and the nail is healthy
And if the nail presses on the flesh and begins to prick and suppurate, you should put the edge of a knife beneath the nail that is pricking the flesh, lift it up, scrape off that delicate flesh lightly, and apply burning and corrosive medicines to the remaining flesh to remove everything. Then treat with ointments until it is healed
And if the corruption reaches the bone, scrape it off and cauterize with fire, for as long as corrupt bone remains there, it will not heal
And if you see the bone beginning to decay, scrape it off immediately as described above, then treat until it is healed
And if it is severe and painful, you should first cauterize it
Then cut the nail of the big toe on an angle across, and ensure that the cut does not reach the flesh underneath the nail, as the patient would feel great pain.
And if it does, then place something on it that soothes.
Some people are born with the second joint [toe] completely fleshy, and sometimes there is cartilage where there should be bone, and occasionally there is a nail, and some are born at the root of the joint, or their origin is in certain bones.
He who is born with any knot of the thumb cannot move it, and he who is born at the joint of the thumb can sometimes move it.
The cut on one that is fleshy will be easy in this manner: Cut it at its root with a wide spatu
He who is born at the root of the joint is difficult to cure Hold it while cutting.
In those born with a knot on the back of the tendon, first carefully cut around the flesh down to the bone, then cut the bone at an appropriate angle, and then clean it until it is sound.
The dislocations that come together at both sides come from birth, or from the welding of a wound, or from burning by fire, or similar things.
You must cut that union so that the thumbs return to their natural forms Then place between two wet cloths or bandages soaked in rose oil so they do not join together Or you can place between two pieces of thin lead until the joint is well set as it should be.
If dislocations come to any of his limbs with the palm, cut that fusion appropriately
Veins are large vessels wrapped around, full of melancholic excesses, which come from many members of the body;
and this happens more often in legs of those who walk and work and carry things than in others.
Therefore you must administer to him some times a purge of bile, and then cleanse him with the holy water.
The cure by fire is done in two ways: One way is to cut them off, and draw out the black blood with a feather; And the other way is that you open the vein and draw all of it out.
The cutting is done in this manner: First, rinse the leg with very hot water until the thick blood becomes subtilized, then press the leg of the patient from above the hip down to below the knee joint;
Then cut the vein in one, two or three places with a wide cut, then lift it up and draw out the black blood by hand from one end to the other until as much blood comes out as the patient can tolerate;
And then the ointment, and instruct him to smear himself with meat juices mixed with black colophony;
and resume the evacuation and cleaning when the veins are full, harmful to the patient.
The raising of him is done in this manner: Raise the leg of the patient, if there are many hairs, then place him in a bath, and raise the leg with warm water until it becomes red and the veins swell;
And if you have no bath, heat him by the fire, and then cut near the vein at the long part of the knee joint, or in the part below the ankle;
then open the skin with an awl, and scrape the vein from each side until it appears when touched.
And one sees it red and black, and when it enters the skin it looks like a white thread;
then place the probe beneath until it lifts the vein from the skin, and then lightly prick with an awl, then cut in another place three inches beyond.
Then scrape off the skin over the vein until it appears, then raise it with tweezers, as you have done before, and attach it to another clamp, as you did first;
Then cut another incision, or several if needed, then raise it and cut at the two ends of the foot, then drag and raise it up to the second incision.
Then extract it inch by inch until it all comes out, then cut it off.
And if you cannot drag and raise it, then insert a needle with strong doubled thread into it, tie it and pull it out, place it under the skin, and turn your hand back and forth until it all comes out And make sure not to cut it, for if it cuts, you cannot pull or raise it, causing harm to the patient
And once you have extracted all of it, place on the wound a wool pad soaked in vinegar and rose oil And heal until he is sound.
And if the vein is contracted and twisted and coiled together, and it is not straight, as we have said, then you must cut it crookedly, but do not cut it completely. And draw it out as we have said before.
The shape of the iron with which one cuts a vein is curved, and does not cut deep, so that it does not cut into the vein;
And has a large curve, for if it were thin it would cut the vein, but let it be thick as we have said, and here is its shape:
This vein enters into the legs, in hot parts where no herbs or trees grow, and on dry land without moisture;
And sometimes it occurs in places other than the legs, and this happens due to rot that comes beneath the skin, like how worms and snakes enter between the skin and flesh.
And the sign of the beginning of this vein is that there is a very great inflammation in the leg, then the place changes, and the vein begins to protrude forth, like the root of a plant.
When the head opens, you must wrap a piece of cloth around it, from one and a half to two spans long, tie it, and let the cloth hang on the leg. And every time blood flows out, wrap the cloth around the iron and tie it.
And if it is too long, cut off a part of it, wrap up the remainder, and do not cut near its root, so that all of it may be completely removed. for if you cut it, it will retreat into the flesh, causing an abscess and rot in the area, and bad illness;
Therefore, it must be treated little by little until the top, and nothing should remain on the body;
And sometimes this vein appears when treated from 6 to 8 palms long, or even up to 10 palms. A man once came to me whose was 10 palms long. When you cut it, insert a probe into the hole and pierce it all the way to the bottom so that everything comes out;
And let the matter inside be emptied, and apply medicines at the site to prevent rotting for several days, then treat it as you would an abscess.
And sometimes this vein has many branches, especially when it appears at the ankle or foot joint, and there are many holes from which blood flows;
Therefore, treat him as we have said previously.
Worms that are born between skin and flesh In our land this disease is called 'cattle disease'; it often affects oxen, and it is caused by a small worm that grows between skin and flesh. It moves throughout the body, ascending and descending, felt distinctly as it moves from limb to limb, leaving behind sores when it departs.
and is caused by corruption of certain bodily humors, such as worms, serpents, leeches, and roundworms in the belly;
and there is doubt about its severity, for when it reaches the head and enters the eye, it may cause blindness. This happens frequently.
When you see one being treated or bled, one can only be sure that it is happening when the worm moves:
Therefore, tie the spot above and below with a strong, tight bandage, then cut into it and bleed it. If the worm is deeply embedded in the flesh and you cannot find it, cauterize the wound with fire until it dies.
And the greatest harm that it causes is that it tears the eye, as we have said.
If you see it coming near the eye's head, press down on the eyebrow strongly and then cut above it with fire.
And the patient should use bodily cleansing with dissolving medicinal solvents to remove harmful humors, and beware of putrid foods causing corruption.
from the pain that comes from windiness This disease is called in our land 'vackir,' and it is a pain that comes into some limbs, which then moves from limb to limb.
And I saw what I tell you. I was called to see a woman who was ill, and she uncovered her arm for me, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of her arm.
And shortly after that, it swelled up to her shoulder like living silver moving from one place to another.
The pain then left that spot and settled in her shoulder. Afterwards, it quickly spread throughout her body until it reached her other arm.
Then she told me that she was always turning around her body as I saw her.
"I wondered greatly how the member could move about so from limb to limb, for I had never seen this illness behave in such a way." Yet nevertheless, I had often seen many who seemed to want to move their limbs from one place to another, but I had never seen this in the woman.
and I thought that it was because the woman had a dry body and exposed veins, which is why that constraint appeared
but they do not appear according to this reason in those who are delicate, having moist bodies and concealed veins.
And when you see this illness being treated and the patient feels that pain which we have described, then quickly place the hand above and below, and then strike with a knife until that constrained wind emerges from its place. and cauterize the spot;
And if you cannot see it with your eyes, then treat those that expel winds, such as fetid pills and pills of serpentine, etc.
The arrows are diverse, according to their likenesses and according to the places on the body where they enter.
The varieties of them are such that there are those with large points, small ones, hairy ones, and smooth ones. And there are some with two angles, others with lengths, and still others where there are fragments;
Those which fall upon any limb fall in two ways: Either they fall onto a principal member such as the brain, heart, liver, lung, kidney, intestines, bladder, and similar organs. When one falls upon any place on these members, the signs of death that I will tell you about appear: You must then be aware of extracting this arrow, as many deaths follow from various situations. And if these signs do not appear to you and the arrow is not deeply embedded, then draw it out and treat the wound.
The signs of an arrow striking the brain and piercing bone include: when the eye socket on top of the head jumps out, there is darkness and heaviness and restlessness in the eyes, redness of the whites of the eyes and inflammation of the tongue, spasms and confusion of understanding, and vomiting bile. And perhaps without cause, it runs from the nostrils or ears; And perhaps suddenly loses speech and voice; And moist white matter like flesh spurts from the wound, and it also appears as bruised flesh.
If these signs appear to you, then take care of the case, and remove the arrow if it is not embedded.
The signs of an arrow striking the heart are that it is near the left breast, and it feels as if it were struck into something hard, not empty; And perhaps the arrow moves like a bird, black blood comes forth, and coldness and cold sweat come on, followed by fainting; Then know for certain that the man is dead.
And the sign of a splinter that has lodged in the lung is when without any foam coming from the wound, phlegm rises up to the throat, and the patient changes color, sighs loudly, and seeks cool air.
And if the arrow strikes the covering of the belly, it is near the lower ribs; and it causes great pain and sorrow and sighing; and all the members of the shoulders move.
And if the splinter falls into the stomach, perhaps some undigested food will come out of the wound.
And if the splinter falls into the belly and no wind comes out through the intestines, then there is no hope for a cure or for removal of the splinter.
And if the arrow strikes the bladder, urine spurts forth and there is fever, and the patient feels great pain; Know that wounds are deadly.
The other members such as the face and neck and throat and shoulders and arms and back and thighs and legs and similar limbs are spared according to various conditions. When the splinter is in a nerve or an artery and it is not venomous, as happened to me once which I will tell you about so that you may do likewise.
It happened at home to one struck by an arrow in the root of the nose: I tried it, and drew it out on the other side under the fat of the ear, without causing any harm.
And I drew out an arrow that had fallen into the fat of the eye under the skin, and the arrow was stuck, and I could only reach its point towards the wood, and it was as large as a Turkish bow, all iron light without ears;
The game was healed, and no bad outcome occurred.
And drew an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and it was an Arab arrow with ears:
I cut the barbs, and carefully extracted it, and the Christian was healed.
And drew out an arrow at home that had fallen into the belly, thinking he would die;
And after he had passed 30 days, his condition did not change. I cut upon the arrow, extracted it, burned it with fire, and there was no bad outcome.
And if you see a man into whom an arrow has fallen on his back, and the wound has closed over;
and the arrow remained inside him, without changing its natural position or causing harm to any of his natural functions.
And if you see another man into whom an arrow fell in his face, and the wound closed over; and it remained there without causing him great pain;
And many others like this.
And an arrow was extracted from the neck of one of the king's men-at-arms, into whom it had fallen and which was slightly inclined towards the right side; and the arrow was completely buried.
I was called for to treat him three days after it had fallen. I found the wound very narrow.
I sought her with all my subtlety, yet I did not feel her at all; and he felt pain and discomfort beneath his right ear.
I thought it was from the point of the arrow I applied a plaster with atractive and digestive ingredients because the wound did not inflame; and then the head of the arrow appeared.
and then the head of the arrow appeared. I applied the plaster again the next day, and the wound closed up again, and the patient remained like that for a long time until he felt the arrowhead on the inside of his nose.
and he told me so. I applied a caustic medicine to the wound for many days until it was opened up and I probed it and felt the tip of the arrowhead sticking out.
then by applying this medicine on the opening of the wound, the head of the arrow became visibly apparent;
and it was more than four months later that the wound opened up enough for me to insert forceps and pull on either side of the arrowhead, but I could not remove it;
Therefore I did not cease to refine and devise ways of tools until I obtained good pliers one day according to the form that will come at the end of this chapter, so that I could pull it and heal the wound.
And the physicians judged that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored: I then restored it, and the wound was healed, and the patient became entirely healthy.
I have told you about the quality of extracting certain arrows, so that you can base your treatment on what I have not mentioned, for books cannot cover everything.
But wise masters compare even small things, and find new works and new tools when things are present or lacking according to the descent of strange things that happen in this art.
I say that arrows exit from the limbs where they are stuck in two ways: either through the place where they enter, or through another part.
And the one that jumps out where it enters is an arrow entering flesh, and sometimes jumps out now.
And if it does not jump out now, leave it until the flesh around it can be cut away, and then the dislocation should be reduced.
And if it is stuck in the bone and cannot come out, leave it thus for a few days and move it each day.
And then if it jumps out; but if not, carefully cut around the whole joint until the place is widened, and then pull it.
And if the arrowhead has gone in deep so that one cannot see it, search for it carefully along its entire track; and if you feel it, then draw it out with some suitable instrument;
and if you cannot because of the narrowness of the wound and the depth of the arrowhead, even though there is no bone, nerve, or vein involved, then widen the wound until it is large enough;
and draw out the arrowhead if you can; and if there are barbs on it that prevent its removal, then cut away the flesh stuck into both parts of the wound until you can remove the arrowhead by breaking or bending its barbs;
And take care not to break the arrowhead as you draw it out.
"And if you cannot pull it out all at once, leave it until the flesh around has rotted away, and then pull it out; for extraction will be easier." And if bleeding is heavy and causes concern, then follow what we have said about treatment in its chapter;
And guard against cutting into nerve or vein, and devise some way by which you might gently pull out the arrow without danger, either quickly or slowly, firmly or carefully;
And place the patient in the same position they were when the arrow struck him, for this is the greatest help there is, and if you cannot, then place them according to the signs shown to you.
An arrow that comes from another side, where some part of it is visible or the skin is swollen there, may be felt around about:
Then cut until forceps can grasp it and then extract it. If one shoots now.
"And if it is held in the bone, rotate your hand around until it enters the bone and widen the bone, then pull it out."
And if it cannot come out, leave it for now and resume the extraction later until it comes out:
And if the shaft of the arrow is there, burn all the shaft;
And if the shaft falls off and you see that cauterizing is necessary, then apply the heated instrument such that the tip of the arrow enters into the heat of the instrument;
And then apply fire, and if the arrow is struck, insert the pointed instrument inside to facilitate extraction.
And if the arrowhead is embedded, you must cut all around where the venom is, if possible, then treat the wound as it should be.
If the arrow falls into the thigh or belly or bladder or side and it is near, you can reach it with your hand; if you do.
and beware not to touch the vein or nerve; then extract it and stitch the wound if necessary And treat it until it is healed.
"The shape of the tweezers used to remove arrows resembles a bird's beak, and here is the illustration:"
There are many ways for this: Large, medium, and small, according to the size of the arrow.
The shape of the arrow's feathers is like those of a bird, to attach at the tip of the arrowhead, as shown here:
There are 31 veins from which one bleeds, among which there are sixteen at the head, namely The two temporal arteries located behind the ears, called the "doubles 'herb'"; and the two arteries visible in the two temples and two veins located at the inner corners of the eyes, called "aspirates"; the vein located in the forehead And the vein which is at the head of the nose. And the two jugular veins on the neck; and the two veins above the mouth's lips, which are called 'augueric'. And two veins under the tongue.
The commonly known veins in each arm are five:
The first is the cephalic vein, which lies on the right side and is called 'vein of the head' by laypeople; The second is called 'fast', it's composed of the cephalic and the basilica veins, and laypeople call it 'vein of the heart'; And the basilica vein lies on the left side, which laypeople call 'vein of the belly', it's above the flexor muscles and is the one visibly seen in the elbow pit.
And the salvation vein lies between the little finger and ring finger with two branches;
And in the leg and foot there are three veins: The first is beneath the curvature of the pouch on the left side, and the second is at the ankle on the right side; And the vein called 'nesse', which is in the ankle of the other side;
and in the other leg there are three veins beneath them.
The discharge from veins that are near the ears helps with old cataracts and migraines.
And the qualities of the discharge are such that you should raise the patient's head and rub the area where the veins are with a rough cloth; then instruct the patient to turn their neck towards a vise until the two veins appear behind the ears in two dependent locations on the head: then grasp them with your thumb and index finger where you feel the pulse beneath your fingers, and squeeze gently;
then take the lancet and insert it beneath the vein until it reaches the bone, then lift your hand upstream along the vein, cut through skin and vein twice with a single stroke, and let blood flow out until you see it;
Then stretch and bind it until it is healed;
And I have already spoken of incision and cautery in the first book.
The healing of the two arteries that are in the two temples is beneficial for migraines, both acute and chronic, and for customary ophthalmia, and for watery tears flowing from the eyes.
And the qualities of this healing are as I have said: and that the patient holds his neck so that both veins appear clearly. And feel the pulse under your thumb, and then press firmly
then lift the heart upwards towards the vein on your index finger, place the lancet underneath it, and raise the vein upwards to cut it, just as you have done with the other two veins, and let the blood flow according to your need.
Then release the patient, place your hand on the vein for an hour, then apply cotton and then bind it tightly and leave it until it is healed.
And we have spoken of their dislocations and extractions at the beginning of this book.
The bleeding from the frontal vein is just as useful as that from the temporal vein for treating ancient face pains and headaches.
And its quality is such that the patient twists their neck so much that the veins appear. Then take the tool called 'fosseur', of which here is the form:
And place the point on the vein and press with your hand or something else, allowing blood to flow out according to the amount you desire. Then release the patient's neck and tie the vein until it stops bleeding, at most once with a wide flame.
Nevertheless, care must be taken that the bandage is not too tight. And bind diagonally, for the bone is nearby and the bandage may break if it is too thin.
The bleeding from the two veins that are in the temples helps with eye pain, and with headache, redness, earache, and face diseases.
And the quality of their injury is such that the patient strains their neck by twisting it in some direction, as mentioned before;
Then the wound, and if the wound is transverse, a bit long and wide due to the flame, for there is no flesh. And if the flame is subtle, it may sometimes break;
Then let blood flow until you need to, and then bind with cotton, binding it well.
Wounds from a vein near the nose are good for agues, and violent fevers, and facial diseases, like migraines and redness that comes to the face, especially when it is chronic;
And the quality of the wound is such that the patient strains their neck, then holds their nose with your left hand, and takes a subtle flame that is long, and sticks it into the space between the two nostrils, for the vein does not open well there, and blood will now begin to flow;
And do not go too deep at all; let blood flow according to your need, then bind it overnight, for it is quickly restored.
The urine of two goats helps with the extraction of splinters and the beginning of measles, and aids many illnesses, including leprosy, corrosion, and hernias.
And the properties of urine are such that the patient holds their neck under both [goats], as we have said;
And let the master stand on the head of the patient, and the patient sit on a seat; then open the vein a little widely, then let blood flow temperately, as much as is necessary;
then perform the other half on the other vein; then untie the bandage, and press gently around both veins so that the patient does not faint; And leave it until morning, when the wound is healed.
Of the washing of limbs The bloodletting of the veins above the lips helps with colds in the mouth, gum decay, cracked lips, and the nose and around it.
And the quality of the treatment is to make the patient sit before you, and hold their neck as I said; Then turn the lip up, and look at two veins, one on the right lip and one on the left, which are recognizable by their black color and the small black veins around them:
So cut both of them, and if you do not recognize them or are uncertain, then cut the largest one on each side. Do the same for the two veins that are above and below, as this is the same method.
Of the washing under the tongue The treatment of the veins under the tongue aids after treating the cephalic vein, for strained throat and diseases of the eye and mouth.
And the quality of the treatment is that the patient sits facing you in sunlight, lifts their tongue up, and looks for a black vein under each side.
Health then both (joints), and do not go too deep, for underneath are the arteries.
The veins of the arm that are commonly treated are done so in two ways:
Either by pricking with a wide-bladed lancet or by incising with a sharp olive-shaped blade, known as an "anesil"; And are large and sharp according to the width and narrowness of the veins. The shape of the round flame is very well-known, and it is wide as you see:"
It is necessary for opening the scalp veins that are full of visible thick blood, which contain thick and turbid blood; And this is the shape of the olive-shaped blade:
"And it is more subtly pointed and is for cauterizing the subtle veins where there is subtle citrine blood."
The bloodletting from the basilic vein, which is one of these veins, helps those who are ill in the chest, throat, neck, and belly;
And it is necessary for the bloodletter to perform the bloodletting correctly, and to beware of the artery that lies underneath. And if he strikes the artery and bleeding begins, he must stop it as I have said; And the flame must not be piercing, but cutting like a knife.
And if the basilic does not open visibly, you must remove it and replace it with another; or you want any vein from it, or you sinew in place of it the vein within the arm: it opens visibly; And cut with the flame like a knife, as we have said.
And if you wish to know the location of the sinew, then before you remove the arm, you must touch the location until you feel the pulse; then mark the location beforehand, and then tie the arm, and cut the vein with the flame like a knife; And be sure not to wound the artery when you see the location swollen, for it is of the artery: avoid this then.
And if you see urine-like fluid coming out on top, and the blood is red and subtle, know that it is blood from the artery: Hasten yourself then, and place your thumb firmly downwards; once you have done so, remove your thumb if blood oozes out, as this often happens. Tie the arm tightly, leave it thus, and do not let the patient move it
and be in fear; do not move it until it is healed.
But if the blood does not ooze out and you faint, and no physician is present; then cut the artery if it opens, for the head withdraws. and stop the bleeding
Take a piece of fig bark, cut it open, and take half of it and tie it securely until the next day
if the bleeding stops, that's good If not, then treat it with powders that stop bleeding, as we have mentioned
And the stainings are not considered serious in many cases due to the small size of the wound and the strength of the arm.
The washing of the vein in mid-air helps by drawing blood from above the head and below the body; for it is composed of basilisk and celandine, as we have said
And it is necessary for the surgeon to warn him about the nerve that lies underneath, and if he cuts too deep, and finds the nerve, and inflames it, then the limb may be disabled.
And this nerve is often exposed, but in some men it remains hidden due to its fineness; therefore, you should heal it with the surgical hook before cutting. And flee from the nerve as much as possible.
"And if there is a vein between the two nerves, split it lengthwise."
The cauterization of the temporal artery helps by drawing blood away from the head and assisting with eye problems.
And it is necessary to cauterize with the olive-shaped flame or the myrtle-shaped flame, for this is the safest of all veins, as there are no nerves or arteries underneath. Nevertheless, one should seek the easiest place and not hesitate to try again if one fails at first. And sometimes the area may swell in some people when one fails at first, but it is of no concern.
"The quality of cauterization depends on your skill."
The first thing you must know about health is that health is maintained foremost to preserve health and to avoid future illnesses.
And health should be practiced in one of the three veins which are located on the arm: namely, the cephalic, basilic, and median cubital. And bloodletting should be performed at the start of Lent, during autumn and winter after meals, when signs ofpletion appear.
Bloodletting should be done on the first or third day, two or three hours after noon.
Bloodletting administered for illnesses has no fixed time, but when necessary it should be done at any hour or time of day.
Children should not be bled until they are fourteen years old, nor women except during the fourth month after childbirth up to the seventh day. "Nor should one cauterize the elderly who have passed sixty years of age."
And when someone wishes to undergo bloodletting in any manner, they must first cleanse the bowels with a gentle enema if there is much retained feces, so that the veins do not draw harmful impurities from the bowels into the main limbs.
He who is overly salty from foods, or drunkards, even if they are feverish, cannot be cured.
And if one desires to be cured after a bout of colic, vomiting, diarrhea, menstrual flow, labor pains, sleeplessness and fasting, or any loss of strength due to injury or illness.
Then refine the humors by eating and drinking appropriately, if you have that power;
Then enter a bath if nothing prevents it, to refine the blood and heal the vein around the third rib, as we have said.
And guard against work, overeating, lust, and similar things that day
And be at rest and joyful, with the healer standing higher than the patient being healed. Then rub the arms twice or thrice, then loosen the belt in the middle, for when it is too tight or short, blood cannot flow properly.
And then he rubs the joint with his hands until the veins swell, which can be felt.
He then moistens the burning forceps with a drop of old oil, places his left-hand thumb on that vein below the joint where he wishes to cauterize, ensuring that the vein is not empty or collapsed before striking.
For there are veins that flee like strings when cauterized, and some are so full of windiness that when the burning forceps is placed upon them, they withdraw at once and cannot be opened. And if he opens the vein, then the wound will be too narrow, so the cauterizer must be wise in such matters.
And if the vein opens on the first attempt, that's good; But if not, he should begin again a little below or above that joint, if the joint is not swollen.
And if the place is swollen, and the patient is afraid, let it rest for one or two days, and do not bind the arm. perhaps abscesses will form there
Do not put him in a bath, then continue the treatment if he wishes
And if the hole is small, or blood flows thinly and you doubt whether it bleeds enough, then insert in that same hole all at once directly
And do this quickly before the area becomes swollen. for often it happens that wounds are small.
If you see the area swollen, do not continue the treatment and put on a little oil-lees, for it lightens the body of blood and is gentle in this place the lees of oil.
And administer oil-lees in each treatment of veins that you treat, to stop the flow of blood.
And this same occurs with the head of the shoulder joint, when it is put back in its place so subtly lets the blood flow and disperses it when it is too thick.
And if a large abscess forms, which often happens, especially when the vein is not properly cauterized at the time of opening it and the incision is small, then hurry and apply a warm, moist sponge made from water and silk for about an hour.
and you must do this after the flow of blood from the vein has stopped, and if it remains in its place for a few days without any blackness or greenness, then there is no harm. And if you see this, apply some aloe or myrrh mixed with juice of calamint, balm, or something similar.
And often an abscess and swelling appear at the site of cauterization
Therefore, place your hand on it, and if you find that the spot is soft to the touch when pressed, then this appearance is bad. Thereupon, take care not to place anything on what we have said, for by chance it may cut the artery.
But use dry linen bandages to toughen the area, then treat with other remedies until it is healed.
"And draw from each according to the quantity of its virtue and the color of the blood."
For if the blood is black, let it flow out until it becomes red; and if you see it thick, let it flow until it thins. And if it is too hot, let it cool down.
It is necessary for one who is full and bloated, and needs bloodletting, to make the incision larger, so that the flow of blood is wide.
And for one who is weak, do the opposite; it is necessary to bleed frequently and carefully, cutting across rather than pricking.
This method of bleeding prevents loss of blood and damage to nerves, and is better than long or wide incisions.
And to one whose body fails at digestion, it is necessary to give soft bread in juice of pomegranates. If he is overheated, then draw blood three or four times. And if he has a cold complexion, let him eat before digestion soft bread in musk syrup, or in syrup of aromatic honey with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chickpeas, and fragrant syrup.
And if he faints after losing much blood, then he must drink broth of meat and fragrant subtle syrup, and use the other things that we have mentioned in the division or chapter on syncope for vein evacuation.
"And if he wishes to empty one arm and bleed elsewhere another time, when he is weakened by much bleeding, it is necessary that he bleed little by little, according to the quantity of his continued strength."
"And whoever wishes to empty one arm after the first bleeding, and has a strong body, should bleed again 24 hours after the first bleeding or after the ninth hour."
"And whoever wishes to bleed elsewhere should bleed on the second or third day."
But he has much blood within his body which is already overheated, and causes fever; Therefore it is necessary to draw out a large quantity [of blood], and to widen the incision until it flows freely. Then when you have prepared all the conditions for digestion, and place your hand on the pulse while it digests, take care that the patient does not come in place of the pus, for this happens many times when the digester is careless;
And do not allow the hand to untie the bandages too quickly, nor let blood flow a second time when the incision is closed; press firmly upon it. If he is bent, let him straighten his arm quickly, for this would be bad.
but let it be until the second time he recovers; or else prick with the tip of fire until the frozen blood inside the vein comes out, then put some lint soaked in water on it and press lightly
"And if the vein is swollen, let it be and do not compress it until the swelling has subsided."
"And if there is need to draw blood a second time, then bleed in the same vein or in another vein or in the other arm."
"The veins of the arm are bled instead of the cephalic vein because they are composed [of many small veins]."
And the way to heal is for the patient to put their hand in warm water until the joints are red
then bind it moderately so that the vein appears well; then cauterize now across, not too wide nor too long
and let the prick be large; and cauterize well near the joint of the hand; and if blood cannot come out, then put the hand back in warm water and let enough blood run into the water
and if it is in summer, do not put the hand back in hot water, because one puts it more in winter than in summer
And the blood of this vein is safer than all others, for there are neither arteries nor nerves.
The blood from the vein on the right hand's palm is beneficial for all liver diseases, and this is how it should be done:
Stretch out the hand, and place it in warm water until the vein swells enough to be visible. And if the vein is crossed, and you cut along its entire length without hesitating, there will be no harm done.
And do not cut too deep, for nerves lie beneath all veins devoid of flesh. Then place the hand back in warm water if the blood is coagulated in the wound and cannot flow out.
"And once you have removed as much blood as necessary, then place oil and lint on it to seal it quickly, and do the same for each wound."
"The urine from the left hand is good for treating mousse disease, and do everything as I have told you regarding the right hand."
The balm of the phoenix is beneficial for all diseases that are below the body, such as diseases of the womb, and retention of menses, and disease of the loins, and of the thighs and old legs, and similar diseases.
The quality of this blood is such that when the patient places their foot in warm water and rubs it onto the vein until it disappears, they should tie above the ankle joint. This vein is located at the ankle, and many nerves pass over it higher up on the foot.
Saw through then the bone where thicker it is, or at the ankle joint, whichever you prefer.
And if you saw through it above the foot, then beware of the nerves that are beneath, and saw it across as in cutting a stick.
and let the flame be oblique
"And if blood cannot flow out, then immerse the foot in water and allow the vein to empty well."
And if the sawing fails on the first attempt, then begin again a little higher up, for the place is salted.
Do not fear damaging the nerve, as we have said, and do likewise to the shinbone of the other leg equally.
"The scar of the sciatic vein is at the outer ankle, and its urine is beneficial for treating hip pain when it's due to hot blood."
And the qualities of sawing it are that the patient enters into a bath, and is held above the ankle joint with four twists, for otherwise the vein will not open.
and if it opens, then saw through in all ways you can, and crossing It is better that you cut it off, for the place is dry, and it is very responsive to many people.
It is better that you cut it off, for the place is dry, and it is very responsive to many people. And if you don't find it, then take any vein of hers that opens on her thigh towards the small toe, and beware of the nerves.
and draw out as much blood as you see fit, then untie the bandage, and place cotton over it and tie it tightly. she is now healed.
Cupping glasses are made of horn, or earthenware, or glass;
And cupping (ventosation) is done in two ways: either by striking and drawing blood, or without striking.
And this cupping that is done without striking has two methods: either it is with fire throughout, or without fire;
And cupping that is done by striking and bloodletting is performed on fourteen parts of the body, one of which is entirely on top of the head; and another is in the neck; And two others are on both sides of the neck; And the cupping glass under the chin; And the bloodletting cups of the two shoulders; and the bloodletting cup on the knees; And the bloodletting cups between the two arms; And the bloodletting cups of the two legs; And the bloodletting cups of the two ankles;
And bloodletting does not draw blood except from the small veins that are dispersed throughout the flesh, and therefore it does not weaken at all, unlike bloodletting from a vein; And it should not be applied, neither by fire nor without fire, in any disease that comes from excess, until the whole body is emptied.
And if it becomes necessary to perform bloodletting due to illness or custom, we will apply it once at the beginning and once at the end of each month.
for there are those who, when they need bloodletting, have a heavy head;
And some find excess and redness in their face, and in their head, and neck, and darkness before the eyes;
And such ones who find a drop of blood in their mouth, and have an inflamed tongue, and spew blood; And there are also those who dream, and see in their veins blood and wounds and death and similar things.
And when we observe these signs, especially during the month of May, we order cupping to be performed after three hours of the day."
The sweat of the forehead aids in relieving the heat that comes to the eyes, and it is not necessary for this to occur after all of the body has been evacuated.
And this sweating is in place of the sweat from the forehead, and it is not necessary for those who are of cold temperament to use it, or those with a cough, as this causes them great harm.
And therefore, old people should not use it, nor those who have cold diseases in their heads.
And those who often cauterize themselves become forgetful, so it is necessary to place the cupping jar a little further down to avoid forgetfulness."
Sweating in the neck is equivalent to sweat from the head and back, and it is beneficial for tightness of the chest, splitting of the channel of the lung, coughing, andpletion.
And one must apply heat gently, for if it is applied too forcefully, it could cause injury to the stomach or heart.
And wind evacuations from the ribs of the neck are useful for headaches and eyestrain, migraine, strangury, and toothache pain, and they are in place of a purge.
And you must instruct the surgeon not to compress the artery nor cause blood flow during cutting.
And evacuations below the chin are useful for mouth diseases and gum decay, and similar mouth ailments. And they serve as substitutes for purging of both lips.
Cupping on the shoulders is beneficial for illnesses caused by heat andpletion."
And evacuations on the ribs are as useful as three veins in the arm, because they draw blood from these large veins.
Instruct the surgeon not to proceed too deep, for the spot is devoid of flesh and lies beneath nerves and arteries.
The cupping glass that is placed on the buttocks is useful for hemorrhoids and illnesses below; it is necessary that the cupping glass be large and made of brass, so that it may draw well. and by chance, if it were thin, it would break; And it makes large wounds.
Leg cupping glasses heal openly because they draw blood from the whole body and are useful for old pains in the back, sciatica, and the bladder; they also reset dislocations.
and are placed on the two thighs and the two ankles; moreover, they weaken the body after prolonged use and cause dizziness in many conditions.
The method of placing the cupping glass is to place it first empty and suck temperately; then place it quickly and move it evenly without stopping until you see the area turn red and inflamed and appear the redness of blood.
Then burn it, and remove the cupping glasses, and take care with the arrangement of the body, for there are some who have thin flesh, and clear pores. If it is necessary to strike only once, then wide and somewhat deep cuts must be made; and suck gently.
And if the blood is thick, then one must strike twice: The first time to refine the path of the thick blood.
And if the blood is very dense, then one must strike a third time;
And when we wish to draw out only a little blood, once will suffice. And if we wish for much blood, then we repeat often.
And if the blood is dense, strike deeply, and stop when the heart has been suddenly pierced. This applies to those with thick skin and hard flesh who have narrow pores: you must anoint the places for cupping glasses with permeating and dissolving oil. If it is in place, with violet oil, or sweet almond oil, or oil of pumpkin seed.
And if it is in joint, with mustard oil, or lily oil, or chamomile oil, or similar.
And if the swelling is large and cold, then take bitter almond oil, or balm oil, or aniseed oil, and similar ones.
And if one whose flesh is tender and has wide pores is treated, there should be no point of oil applied, but it should be washed afterwards with rosewater, or cold water, or mulberry water, or cucurbit water, or porcelain water, or similar.
And those who are very moist should rise using myrtle water, sumac water, and similar things.
And those who have large excesses should rise from old wine, or water of the sun, or decoction of anise or chamomile, or others similar.
And one must not use a cupping glass before the bath nor in the bath, but after the bath for an hour or two;
And do not sleep after cupping, and it is necessary that he warm himself when he must be cupped and when he has been cupped.
And beware those who are being treated have hot temperaments, and if the blood is too thick and inflamed. then they should take cold things like pomegranates, endive, lettuce with garlic, and similar foods. And eat pork meat, castrated ram meat, and moist foods.
And eat pork meat, castrated ram meat, and moist foods. And those who have cold complexions should take syrup of honey and moderate aromatic wine, which is between old and new, and eat roast pork and roast pork meat and small birds and pigeons.
And on the day when he evacuates, he should drink more than he eats;
And some people should be given treacle or muscat three times before evacuation, or afterwards, to strengthen the main members. And let the blood be subtly drawn, but those who are hot should not drink it.
The cups that are placed without wounding are those placed on the liver, womb, gout, belly, face, back and thigh, for these members do not tolerate being wounded above them, and they are only used to draw blood from member to member, as we place them on the breasts when a woman is in labor.
To remove the viscosity in the limb, as we place cupping glasses on the abdomen and cheek to reduce the limb;
and relieves pain when there is a stone or gallstone, as it can attractively remove by its power through suction the stone, or dislodge the stone from its place;
and likewise it does when placed on the liver and spleen when there is retained wind, and these cupping glasses are administered empty to suck only; and sometimes they are administered with fire together, and sometimes filled with hot water, as in diseases of the lungs, and in this manner one fills the cupping glass with hot water alone, or with water in which suitable herbs have been cooked.
The form of administering the cupping glass with fire is as follows:
And let it be two fingers wide and half a palm deep, and have around the middle a small hole, like that for a needle, made of brass, soft before use so that it does not wound the patient when placed on the limb;
And it should have in its midst a crossbeam of bronze or iron, to place an enclosed candle upon, and they (the candles) should be both large and small according to the illnesses and the ease of those who use them.
For the cupping glasses of children are different from those of the elderly, and for the thin they are different from those for the fat ones.
And one should thus place this cupping glass upon the limb:
Insert the candle made of wax or linen, and place it within the cupping glass across the crossbeam that is inside the cupping glass, so that the flame is at the bottom of the cupping glass where it cannot burn the patient;
And then place it upon the limb, and ensure that the opening we spoke of is above, so that when you want to, steam can escape, and one removes the cupping glass;
And again insert the linen wick as before, and keep relighting it often if necessary.
Therefore in the cupping glass prepared for pleurisy with sharp pain, it has no crossbeam or opening; and it is only heated when filled with water, then placed upon the limb.
And this is its shape:
Suction cups cannot be applied except in limbs where one cannot place them due to their smallness, such as lips and gums, and similar places; and in areas devoid of flesh, such as the knees or nose, and other similar places;
And its usefulness is that when you find suction cups that are clean and bright with no signs of use, then take them;
and place them in warm water until they are swollen and have nothing inside. And then disinfect the vein and suction cup, then rub the limb until it is red, and place the cups on.
And when they are full and dropping, if it is a place where one can put a suction cup, then put one on, for this is very useful afterward.
If not, then lift the limb gently, and then with water, very well, and then squeeze it.
And if the wound heals too quickly after bleeding, then soak a linen cloth in cold water and place it on top until the blood congeals.
And if the blood is multiplied, apply ground vitriol or gauls ( oak galls ), or similar substances until it coagulates.
Or you can place half a handful of peeled beans on the wound and leave them there until they adhere to the wound; it will now stop bleeding.
And if you need more, take other veins.
And if the veins do not want to take blood, rub fresh blood on the wound and stick a needle into it until blood flows out; then apply the cloths so that they adhere once they sense the blood.
And when you see them full, powder some alum and salt ground together or ashes on top of them; they will now clot.
"Here begins the book of fractures" This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and is a remedy for fractures and dislocations.
Know, dear son, that foolish physicians scorn this chapter because they have never seen any of the old books nor read any letters concerning it.
And for this reason, knowledge is scarce in our land, for I found none of it.
And I know nothing except through the knowledge of ancient books, which I have studied so much that I have learned the knowledge, and through experience, and through my life's practice.
I have described for you in this chapter what is contained therein, and I have summarized it at the end, and I have clearly shown the shapes of the instruments that are arranged, as I have done in these two chapters before.
"It is therefore necessary that we say in the prologue of this book the sums of words and chapters where the wise puts his understanding, and remains on the truth, so that those who are skilled know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others."
I say that when fracture or dislocation or torsion or crushing occurs in anyone, you should hasten to bandage the patient on both sides, except if there is anything preventing it entirely, such as weakness of body, or infancy, or old age. or if the time is not very hot, or too cold;
And drink cold drinks, that is to say, cold foods, and bird meat and hare meat, and do not drink wine, nor eat fatty meats, and do not fill oneself too much with foods that fill the veins with blood, until you doubt a hot abscess, or an expansion of matter in the limb.
If the patient returns to their first good governance which they have used.
"And when the broken bone begins to heal, it is necessary that you feed the sick person with foods that promote growth and viscosity, such as cooked wheat in water, rice, eggs, fish, milk, wine, and similar things." "For with this nourishment muscles are rebuilt more quickly and the fracture heals sooner."
And know that the bones of the elderly and infirm cannot be properly reset or mended according to their natural state due to the weakness of the limbs, nor those that are too tender, such as the bones of young children.
But if there is no cure, reset and bind with thick bandages the broken bone tightly until it heals as before. And do not let any point of its work remain undone, for this reason they must be nourished with plenty of meat, as we have said.
"And know that fractures are diverse in many ways."
"For the fracture of the head is different from the fracture of the arm or the leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all the ways that fractures can occur." "For there are fractures that go to the bone and others that do not affect the bone, such as cutting off the tip of a quill for writing."
"For there are fractures that go to the bone and others that do not affect the bone, such as cutting off the tip of a quill for writing." "And there is fracture with wound, and fracture with just a small crack."
And each manner has its own tool and proper instrument for restoration, according to what the memory brings back into place.
A break in the bone is recognized by the twisted appearance of the limb, and it can be clearly felt by touch when pressed with the hand.
And if there is no twisting or sound on touching, nor does the patient feel great pain, then there is no break present.
But it may well have curvature, or cracking, or minor fracture. "So do not move the limb by hand, but apply the medicines that are mentioned below and then gently immobilize it."
And know that the break which goes into the air, and consists of two disjointed parts, must be set evenly before a swelling comes.
and if a swelling soon comes, let it remain for some days until the swelling is pacified;
then set it evenly with the movement you can easily and gently make, for know that the restoration of this one is easier than those which have pieces;
Then bind it as it must be done afterwards.
And if in the bone there are pieces broken, stretch them out with two parts, whether it is hand or foot, or with your hand if it is a small member, or with two cords, or with one cord and your hand;
and set the limb according to its natural shape, so that when the parts of the broken member are dislocated, you should reset them all with all your strength in their places with the movement you can make, and ensure that through your work no injury or pain comes to the patient.
And join the two heads of the bones according to the best forms.
And feel it well with your hand if it seems not to be properly set:
If you raise it nicely and do not pull it too hard or press too much, as those who bring about heat and contraction to the limb through their practice of cautery, as we have often seen:
And when the limb is set, instruct the patient well not to move it, neither while awake nor asleep, nor turning nor in any other manner; and ensure that the limb is so secured that it feels no pain. For if it feels any pain, then it is not set properly, and you must place it in such a position that it feels no pain;
and ensure that the limb is so secured that it feels no pain. For if it feels any pain, then it is not set properly, and you must place it in such a position that it feels no pain; And make sure it is placed correctly, so that there are no twists when it is restored.
The qualities of the broken limb are according to what I tell you.
"Know that broken limbs are diverse in size, length and shape."
Because there are small limbs, such as arms and fingers and similar ones: therefore, soft and fine linen cloths should be used to wrap them. And those that are large, such as thigh and leg
should be wrapped in a wide and firm bandage, for the wide bandage encases the entire large limb evenly, and presses it equally on all sides so that there is no gap.
then wrap it around with light pads, three or four times according to the limb, and tighten your hand slightly on all the bandage, then go above the break and tighten less so that the break can move away from the break a little.
and slowly loosen the bandage bit by bit until you grasp most of the healthy part, then take another bandage and wrap it around again on the broken limb.
then return to the part below the break and tighten it moderately, not too tightly nor too loosely, as we have said in the first binding above;
Then place between the limbs wads of linen or rags, so that it is entirely even; then bind everything above with bandages, and then place well-made dressings on top, if there is no abscess or swelling.
And if there is swelling or an abscess, then place something that cools and draws out the heat of the abscess, and reduces swelling, leaving it thus for several days;
Then press down on your dressings, using something about half the width of a large cane, properly trimmed, or wooden battens used for stakes, or palm ribs, and they should be shaped like this:
But the dressing placed on the fracture must be a little thicker and wider than the others.
And it should also be as long as is necessary for the limb, whether small or large; Then press down on the dressings just as you did with the first binding, then tie above it evenly, just as in the first binding over the fracture. Further above is narrower; suddenly less.
And it is necessary that the threads be medium-sized, neither too thick nor too thin, and made of soft linen;
For if the threads are thick, as I have seen in the works of foolish people who make their sutures from twisted linen ropes, and this is a great error, because the suture cannot be even if it is too fine, and it should not have less than two spaces between each stitch.
And if the patient is wounded by the edges of the stitches after they were placed in the healthy places, then put pieces of linen or wool gauze underneath them so that they do not become inflamed.
When the wound is accompanied by a fracture and the bone is broken, I will describe its treatment hereafter.
And know that it is not advisable to stitch all the broken limbs on the first day. But when the limb is large, you should not put in stitches before after 5 or 7 days, or more according to your sureness of the heat of the abscess;
And here you will find the method of ancient plasters for restoring fractures, dislocations, and twists:
And take the flour that sticks to the walls of the mill, and mix it with plenty of eggs, and this mixture, neither too thin nor too thick, use it for setting fractures in various positions, especially for women and young children, because it is not too hot nor too cold.
Another method of plaster restoring breaks, dislocations, and twists: Take incense and ladanum and mullen and asafetida and gum arabic and magnesia, nine parts. myrrh and aloe, five parts. aloes, seven parts. And grind it into powder, then mix with egg yolk If the constitution of the man is hot, use this plaster, for it is of good composition, and quickly restores broken bones, and benefits many people.
Another method of plaster that is beneficial for twists: Take magnesia and malva (mallow), nine parts each. myrrh and aloe, seven parts each. acacia, six parts bolus armeniac (arsenic trioxide), ten parts, grind well and mix with vinegar or egg yolk, then administer.
Another method of plaster for joints and bones out of their places, and alleviates the pain that ensues, and prevents bone growth and breaking: Take new linen, wetting it with hot water and oil, then apply to the affected area.
This plaster does not restore but is good for soothing a hot boil and properly removes pains.
Another way of setting broken bones: Take dried fig leaves and common mallow leaves, grind them together to make a poultice.
Another method of plaster for the restoration of bone fractures and to soften the remains of an abscess. Take equal parts of the following:
Grind them together and mix with wine. If the limb is inflamed, mix it instead with coriander water or plain water, and apply it.
Another stronger plaster for when a hard abscess comes to restore the limb. Take equal parts of the following: Grind them together and mix with saltwater, fresh water, or wine according to the warmth of the limb and its restfulness.
Hippocrates says in his book that one should only apply on the broken limb for restoration a cerate made of wax and oil, nothing else more. He says it should be neither too soft nor too hard.
And it seems that Galen agrees that one should apply on the broken limb for restoration dry things somewhat warm, such as myrrh and aloe and frankincense and similar things, as we have said.
Another way for poultices that are good for wounds and pain: Take an equal amount of mullein flowers, chicken feathers or human hair, and valerian root. Grind them together to make a poultice.
And then after dislocating it a little later, take care if the patient feels no pain, nor has the bone moved from its place. unless it remains dislocated for many days. And if pain or itching comes on, without rest or swelling, then act quickly and dislocate it again, removing the obstacle immediately.
and take light cloth and a damp sea sponge, dip it in water, and lift it to the spot until the itching ceases and the pain is eased. then let the limb rest for an hour, then put on dry linen, dampened with water or rose oil, and bind it tightly until you are sure of having produced a warm abscess.
and let the inflammation of the limb rest, and once the pain is gone, then begin the gentle binding again, with a little more pressure this time, but not as strong as before. and continue thus until it heals.
And if you see that the swelling is hot and red and painful and swollen are all gone, and you need plaster and binding again, then begin again gently, just as you did at first.
And if there comes to the limb none of what we have said, then do not dislocate it except after three days or four or five or seven. And sometimes leave it for twenty days, as is seen, until the fracture heals and the union of flesh approaches.
Then tighten more than before, and let the flesh grow thick, as I have said earlier;
And if you see that the place dries out more than necessary, know that no healing will come from it. Then apply warm water compresses all the times you dislocate it, and this should be done every third day, and loosen the bandage a little.
Thus healing of the limb is accelerated, and swiftly corrected what foolish doctors do, who reset the limb incorrectly:
This is evil, and such work is fearful, and I see nothing else but doubt and working correctly.
Many kinds of fractures there are, and various shapes, and their causes are distinct;
For there are fractures caused by the blow of a sword, and the collarbone breaks the entire bone up to the shoulder blade which is beneath the bone, like an axe or log; And therefore this type of fracture is called "haiche.
When the sword strikes the bone from above without piercing it, this type of fracture is called "absolute.
And in these two fractures the wound may be large or small.
"And if there is percussion that strikes in, or cuts into, the collarbone of stone, or from falling onto stone, or other similar ones."
"And if there is a persistent fracture, approaching close to the membrane that is under the bone or over it, and this wound is large or small."
Also there is a fracture where the wound enters the bone so subtly like a hair, and the split is small; therefore this fracture is called "capillary.
And if the wound is made by striking with a stone or falling or similar cause, and pushes in the piece of bone downwards, causing the place to be raised like a roofer striking slates on a roof; If the stone enters within the kidneys.
And this happens more often to those who have moist bones in their heads, such as children's heads;
and it occurs with all types of fracture where small pieces are dislodged like stars; I will speak about it in its proper place.
"And we know all kinds of fractures by their retraction upon them, and detection through probing, and by the corrupt flesh that is upon them."
The capillary appearance is known by this: when the bone is uncovered and rubbed on top, then the fracture opens black.
In the treatment of a fracture, beware of accidents to the patient. And if you see no evil accident such as vomiting of bile and loss of consciousness and extension and paleness and intermittent fever and eyes coming out black and red and other signs in various conditions, then it cannot heal without doubt
And if you do not see any astonishing accident and hope for a cure, then begin the treatment.
And when the wounded person first comes to you, if it is in wintertime, then remove the bone before the fourteenth day after the injury.
And if it is in summertime, hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, before the flesh under the bone becomes corrupted and the accidents that we have spoken of occur.
And if the fracture of the bone extends to the membrane that covers the brain, then you must cut into the broken part like this:
And take the patient's head and uncover the bone in all possible ways, and do so gently according to the shape of the wound; if blood flow or a hot abscess occurs when uncovering the bone, help as necessary; then fill the place with wool moistened with rose oil. And let the wound rest until the hot abscess is appeased, and ensure that there is no further bleeding; Then begin to remove around the bone; this can be done in two ways:
One manner is thus: you cut narrowly and straight ahead, and this is the form:
And then he makes another incision larger than the first one.
And another manner is thus: you have many cuts of diverse shapes, some narrow and pointed, others wide and made of soft iron.
and work lightly so as not to wound the head.
And if the bone is hard and strong, you must encircle it with a drill before administering cuts with awls, ensuring they do not pierce too deep and go beyond the bone's soft part; above the point there should be a margin or circle that prevents the point from protruding beyond the bone.
and you must have many such awls so that each comes into its proper place on the edge of the bone, thus allowing you to have awls for all kinds of bones.
And this is the form of the three manners of awls:
The qualities for drilling around a broken bone are that you place the drill on the bone and turn it with your hands until you know the bone is drilled through.
Then move the cautery elsewhere a little later, and do so all around; then cut with the scalpel the space of bone that is between the pores, doing this more subtly and gently than you can, so that you draw out the bone to your hand, or to any of the tools that you have such as tongs, forceps.
And ensure that you do not touch the brain or the spinal cord.
And when you have pierced and drawn out the bone, then you must reset the fragment that remains of the bone with another tool resembling a scalpel, but it must be thinner and more subtle than the other scalpel;
And if any small bones or scales remain, remove them lightly with one of your tools. Then dress the wound with bandages and ointments as we have said.
And another method of work is that which Galien speaks of, which is more cautious; and tie it very tightly, that is his order. Firstly you must uncover a part of the bone where the fracture appears open, so that when you have uncovered this part, you will place underneath the head of this lens-shaped chisel, its shape is shown here:
And do not cut on one side only; the bone is sharp on both sides so that the cut is towards the bone;
then strike with a small hammer so that you gently tap the bone all around; and be careful of the tissue underneath;
If it is adherent to the bone, remove it gently, for one can do so safely without harm or fear.
And if the fracture of the bone does not reach the tissue and the bone is only cut on top with small pieces remaining, then remove these roughnesses using a fine file that you should have in various quantities to prepare each area according to the work and shape of the fracture.
Then use coarse files first, followed by finer ones until it is smooth enough.
For each of the other capillary incisions and subtle fractures, you must bring about closure according to its direction;
And this is not something easily answered by one who has devoted his study to this art.
And if the sinew is exposed, you must take one cloth of linen according to the size of the wound, wet it in rose oil, and place it on the wound; then take another cloth doubled over twice or thrice, wet it in wine and rose oil, and place it on top of the first cloth; And do this more gently than you can, so as not to strain the sinew, then apply the other ligature on top and do not pull too hard until it touches the wound only.
And leave it thus for one or two days until the abscess is reduced, then untie it and apply medications such as lily roots, walnut flour, frankincense powder, and aristologus, and similar things;
Grind these ingredients into a powder, apply it to the wound, and repeatedly apply warm remedies without biting;
And ensure that the wound is always clean, leaving no ointment on it or allowing flies to gather on it, for when flies congregate on the brain cloth, they will corrupt and inflame it, causing great harm to the patient;
For when one places something corrosive on the sinew, it will necrose above. Therefore, beware if any bad accident happens to the patient, as we have said, that it is doubtful without doubt.
And if blackness appears on the outside due to the medication applied, which has such virtue, then you must take one part honey and three parts rose oil and mix it with one cloth, and place it on. Then treat him in various ways until he is healed.
Know that sometimes both parts of the kneecap above are broken, or just one by itself, for these are two bones;
and the one below is cartilage and does not break, except when struck from behind or twisted, after which it heals.
And if one of the two parts is broken, you must place your little finger or middle finger on the hole of the kneecap and push the break evenly with your index finger from behind until the kneecap returns to its natural shape. And do this gently, ensuring that the patient does not feel pain because of your action.
And if the break is in the upper part of the shoulder and the arm cannot be moved into place, you should put it against the head of a slightly thick stick.
And if the fracture is of two parts, then repair it thus, and hasten to restore on the first day, if you can.
But if not, after the seventh or tenth day, when the inflammation is subdued, then wrap the head of the newly broken bones with linen cloths.
Or you bind the other part separately, if there is a fracture there And let the bandages be so thick that they fill up the hollows of the newly broken bones.
And some restorers say one must soften the tents with butter, and change each day. It does not seem good to me that this is right; rather, they should be moistened in a mixture of egg yolk and mill dust Then leave the bandage on until the bone is solidified and the cartilage hardened.
And sometimes feathers from a goose are used instead of bandages, and a soft cloth around them; if the break holds and the patient suffers less. Do as you see fit
And if swelling comes to the shoulder while you are working on it, put cerote or cotton moistened in rose oil or a little diacodium upon it.
And if an abscess does not appear, then apply a plaster made of sesame flour and incense powder, mixed with egg yolk; then apply light compresses, but do not tie it tightly.
And if the fracture is small and broken into many pieces, then extract it with appropriate tools, then sew up the break and treat with wound healing plasters and ointments as appropriate.
And if there is no wound inside it, then cure it with tenting, and apply splints of lead until it is healed.
When the jawbone is fractured underneath and there is no wound on the outside, and the break is only on one side with no other fragments inside, it can be easily recognized.
It is necessary, if the fracture is on the right side, that you put your two index fingers into the patient's mouth; and if the fracture is on the left jawbone, put your right hand's two index fingers into the mouth and gently push the fracture in place with the other hand, applying equal pressure.
And if the jawbone fracture is offset by two parts, you must provide traction on both sides to ensure that it is aligned evenly.
And if movements of the teeth occur, or a fracture, then tie them with a thread of gold or silver or silk, then place over the broken jaw a dressing, and place over that a double bandage. And place on the bandage a well-made large compress or an equal length and width piece of leather according to the jawbone, tying it at the mouth where you can reach, and instruct the patient to rest and eat soft foods.
And if you see that the figure has changed, then untie it on the third day, and then reposition what was shifted. And place a plaster over it made from flour ground with abundance of egg or barley meal, after removing the dressing.
And place a light linen over it, and if the plaster dries and there is no change in the patient's condition, leave it until it heals. Many times it is healed within three weeks.
And if swelling occurs, use the treatments we have mentioned many times before.
And if there is both fracture and wound together, check whether any piece of bone has been broken off. If the bone fragments are very small, suitable tools are necessary for this.
And if the wound is narrow, widen it with fire according to your needs.
After removing all the fragments, if there is no more remaining, sew up the wound if it is large and apply healing plasters until it is healed.
The arm breaks often in front of the shoulder, and the fracture occurs in three ways:
Either it is broken and dislocated at two places with fragments, which is the easiest to reset;
Or there is fracture with wound.
And the procedure for fractures without wounds is: have two assistants so that one can hold the arm which feels the fracture. and the other extends the neck towards the part;
then place the fracture evenly on your two hands so that its shape is correct with no deformity or displacement.
And if you need to extend further, place under the patient's shoulder a round roll of cloth or wool, whose size suits your needs; And they raise and straighten the arm, holding the spear steady with your hand so as to set the fracture evenly, as it should be.
"And if you cannot draw the head of the arm forward because it is too deep, then the patient must lie flat on his back and place under the shoulder a medium ear-pad, and push the shoulder backward until the bone of the fracture rises."
Then align the fracture with your two fingers, and if you find it displaced, then you must cut upon it;
and carefully draw the fragments together, and if the bone cannot join due to any obstruction, then cut one of the incisions that you have made; but make sure this instrument is placed underneath the arm, for fear of cutting the sinews.
and it should resemble a spoon and not be raised, and be as wide as necessary according to the size of the bone and the power of the work;
and it should have two heads, as you see, one wide and the other narrow, like the shape of the wound that you made when you drew together the bones;
And when you are sure that there is a hot abscess, cut the wound, and if the opening is small or you doubt whether there is heat in the abscess, cover the wound with lint and bandages according to its size.
"And if hot swelling comes, wet a piece of linen in rose oil and hyssop and wine, and put it on."
The binding of the bone, when it is without wounds and cuts, is that you put on the bone the plaster made of mill dust and egg white, and place light dressings on top, and put a splint under the limb if necessary. Then take a very wide bandage, about a palm's width, then place the doubled cloth on top of the dressings and plaster. Then take a narrow strip of linen about three fingers wide and long, and wrap it around that bandage so that the ends of the bandage hang down. And place the strip on the break, and wrap the bandage around the neck, under the healthy limb, and under the injured limb. And tighten each part, and when you see that the bandage holds the break securely, and you can clearly see that the strip does not move over the broken bone, then wrap it again every day, and when the ligatures loosen, then tighten it.
And make the patient lie on his back, placing a small pillow under his shoulder while he sleeps to lift the shoulder joint upwards; So ease the breakage of the collarbone by lifting the shoulder, tying the arm to the neck if necessary, and not untie it until twenty days have passed, unless some misfortune occurs;
Then restart the treatment, if you see that it is necessary, and hold and leave it thus until it is healed;
And it will be restored within twenty-eight days for most people, though it may take less time for some men.
"Regarding the fracture of the shoulder"
It can happen that the broken or dislocated shoulder does not return to its proper place, and cannot be put back into place except by touch;
So arrange it according to the shape of the break, and reset it according to its natural form in every way that you can;
Then place on the spot powder from a millstone mixed with plenty of egg whites and light lint, and cover it with a double cloth; Then place over it a wide and thin bandage, slightly wider than the shoulder. If there are any hairs underneath the bandage on some part of the shoulder, then fill that area with linen wads so that the bandage lies evenly.
And then fasten it firmly with a large bandage all around so that the bandage does not move from its place. Check the dressing each day.
And every time he moves, tighten it again and ensure that the bandage remains evenly placed if it has shifted from its position. Have the patient lie on their side.
And the shoulder will be restored in 20 days or in 25.
And when these days are completed, then untie it, but be careful, for it is not bone that easily goes out of joint again.
"And if a piece of bone sticks out in front and not under the heart, then cut it off, and do what we have said regarding the fracture of the arm to appease hot inflammation."
"Regarding the fracture of the wrist"
Sometimes the flesh is broken in half, but this happens rarely; But it often breaks at the joint.
And when it is broken in the middle, it declines downward and the patient feels great pain, faints, falls down, and sometimes vomits blood. The horse's jaw opens at the broken bone and they can be felt well.
And the restoration is done by having the patient lie often on their back. Place a cushion between their shoulders, then press their shoulders together and bring the ribs of the two sides gently towards each other with your hands, carefully arranging them so that the bones are properly aligned.
Then place compresses and bandages on the fine salt siphon, or another light wood, wrap it in a cloth, and lay it upon the broken bone so that it does not move. And bind the tie firmly behind, and tighten gradually, and check each hour to ensure it is secure, and if it loosens, then tighten.
And if it becomes necessary to untie it, due to corrosion or itching that occurs at the site, or pain or an abscess, then hurry and untie it, remove the compress, and apply remedies as needed.
Then reset the compress, and tighten it until it is secure.
"Regarding the fracture of the ribs"
Know that a break of the ribs occurs only in large places after the back, and at the head inside, and they bend only because they are smooth. And one feels it well during examination.
And the treatment is that you align the break as it should be. Then apply a splint and bind it with a bandage if necessary.
And if the break of the ribs inclines towards the inside, then the patient feels very great pain and sharpness, also like pleurisy, because the bone pierces the lung; and it hurts like pricks, and suddenly he vomits much blood, which is of great seriousness; the ancients have spent much effort on this.
"And there are those who say that one should administer foods that inflate the belly to push the fracture outward."
"But we do not do this, lest boils come if they have not already done so." "And if it comes to this, then heal it."
And some say that one should put cupping glasses on the spot to suck strongly, which seems reasonable; still, there is doubt that the cupping glass will draw out the excesses to the place due to its weak attraction.
"And some said that one should cover the joint with moist wool soaked in hot oil, and apply bandages between the ribs to make the binding even. Then it should be treated with the cure for pleurisy, meat, and medicines."
And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot bear due to the bone piercing the lung, and there is doubt for the patient, then one must cut upon the spot of the broken rib, and put an instrument underneath to guard the wound.
and then one must cut the bone and draw it out gently, and afterwards sew up the two lips of the wound if it is large, and dress the wound with emplasters until it is healed.
And if a boil suddenly comes, then put warm woolen cloths soaked in rose oil on it, and place them on the spot;
And treat the boil's location with what is appropriate for boils, and let it lie continuously on the affected side until it heals.
And also to the spine of the back.
And if this happens to someone and you want to know whether he will recover or not, take note if his hands are softened, swollen, and numb, and he cannot move or extend them. When you prick them with a needle, he should not feel it.
Know that it is mortal in many ways. If he moves his hands and feels well when they are pressed or pricked, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and that the patient will recover if care is applied.
And if such a thing happens to the spine of the back, and you want to know whether it is healed or not, take care if the feet are softened, and if the limbs have accidents that are beyond control, and wind and gas are expelled without volition;
and when it is placed on its belly, expulsion occurs without volition. And when he lies on his back wanting to mount [a horse], then he cannot. Such things are deadly: So do not labor in its treatment.
And if this accident does not happen to them, then the matter is lighter.
And the treatment is that if there is a hot boil, you should apply rose oil or egg yolk oil to the spine until it is soothed;
Then apply one of the comforting and drying emplastes, tie it with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest. And let him not sleep on that part where he feels pain until he is healed.
And if any bone dislocates, then cover the heart with it. Remove the bone, then approximate the two lips of the wound if it is large with one stitch, then dress it with ointment around the flesh until it heals.
And if the joint of the bone is broken, which is called the 'cow's knee', then place your left hand's clenched fist into it and align it with your other hand with all your strength, then apply the emplaste and splint if necessary.
Then bind it, and if there is any dislocated bone, set it back in place, remove the bone, and dress the wound until it heals.
of the fracture of the thighbone
It can happen that the hipbone is broken, and if this happens, there will be a little lessening of movement in the head. And cut with length, inclining towards the partition, causing pain to the patient at that place, prickling, and swelling where it breaks.
And the reduction is thus: stretch your hand upwards until you are above the break; and know which part is broken and its shape;
If the break is only at the top, then set that break even with it being in its natural shape.
And if the break is long or slopes inward, make the patient lie on their stomach so that you can easily see and treat the fracture. And once you have set it even, then place a splint on top, then place a wooden or bone wedge on it and hold the break so that it does not move;
and tie beneath the ribs until the binding is even. And tell the patient to sleep on their healthy side or on their back.
And if a hot abscess comes, do not touch it until the hot abscess has subsided, and then place what we have mentioned above; and then return to the reduction, holding it as necessary if there is no bad complication.
of the fracture of the shoulder blade
The shoulder blade is what lies between the elbow and the head of the shoulder. If it is broken, then it should be reset according to one of these two methods:
of which one method is that you take a wooden splint, thick with groats, shaped like this:
And tie the two heads with two bands, and fasten them upwards; then have the patient sit on a seat;
then place the broken arm on the splint until it reaches the axilla, and is held in a concave wooden support; then hang something heavy from it, or have the minister press it downwards;
then the physician should bring the break level with his hands together until the break returns to its proper position.
And the other manner is that one supports the patient on his hatchet-blade, and he holds his hand to his neck, then orders two assistants: one takes what is above the break in his hands, and the other takes below at one link, and each extends to its part.
And if you see that the extraction is too strong, then restrain the sinews beneath the fracture, and above it, and extend each of the helpers to their part.
And if the break is near the head of the shoulder, then you should put one band under the axilla and the other towards the elbow, under the break;
And if the fracture is towards the cost side, then one must gently place the splint without effort, until the fracture is level on the site and on the cost.
Then set the fracture evenly as it should be, and bind it, so that no swelling may come.
And if swelling comes quickly, do not bind it until seven days have passed; then place damp linen soaked in hot oil rose, until the swelling is eased.
Then bind it, and the way to bind is thus: place the bandage on the fracture, then bring the arm close to the shoulder, and put your hand on the shoulder or on the breast.
And place the bandage, and bind it on the shoulder and on the arm, so that the arm is in line with the stars, unless something prevents it or if the bone has moved.
And if you doubt that the bone does not move, then use stars; place a larger and stronger star on the fracture, with two spaces between each star, and let each star be so large that it passes three fingers beyond the fracture on either side.
Then press on the joints, as I said at the beginning of this chapter about fractures.
And if you see the settling of the joints and their restriction, as we have said, when you reset the broken limb, and if you doubt that the hot abscess will heal, let it be until the seventh day, as we have said.
Then examine each site every three days to ensure that no itching or swelling occurs where the bandage was placed, so that the limb does not suffer injury due to being too tight. If the dislocation, as we have said.
And if no such accidents occur, then do not remove the bandage until after three days or more, and have the patient sleep on their back with their hands on their stomach.
And place a flat pillow filled with even wool under the shoulder, and watch every hour of the day or night to ensure that the position of the broken limb does not change or the bandage become loose.
If the patient is cured through medical knowledge, then give them the food that we have mentioned previously, but grind it first. And when they begin to recover, it should be coarse.
It is customary for the shoulder and leg to be reset after 40 days; Then, one should untie it and apply baths and ointment medications to bring it back into place.
And if the strapping is tight and swollen, it should remain tied for forty days or two months.
Chapter on the fracture of the arm
The arm is composed of two bones called the "two fosciles," one of which is small and extends to the elbow joint;
and the other is large and is located underneath, towards the little finger;
Sometimes only the large bone breaks, or sometimes only the small one, and sometimes both together.
When the small bone is broken, restoration is easy, and healing occurs quickly;
But when the large one is broken, healing is difficult, and it causes more pain than when both are broken together.
If only the small bone is broken, it should be gently extended and set straight.
And if it's the large dislocation, then it must be pulled out more strongly;
And stretch it out on the cushion; raise your hand pouch higher than the others and lower the little toe; let the patient lie across themselves with the cushion in front of them raised up so they don't suffer any discomfort;
Then extend the minister's arm beneath the patient's hand or elbow, and another minister at the other side above.
Then the surgeon should set it straight according to its best form.
And if there are any fragments in the break, then put each one back into its proper place; and if there is any excess that cannot be grasped with your fingers, then press upon it lightly as we have said earlier.
And if it is with breaking open a wound, I have spoken of this in a separate chapter; So take the treatment.
And if in the beginning of healing, large abscesses appear, then apply a cloth made from rose oil and white wax that is not too hard nor too soft. and tie the cloth on gently until the large abscess is soothed.
Then remove the wax and apply a poultice made from mill flour powder with abundant egg whites; then place bandages on it, making sure that the bandage for breaking open is stronger and somewhat wider than the others;
And know that he must have six lines drawn on the arm in various positions: Whether the break is in one bone or two;
And tighten more above the fracture than elsewhere, and always lessen while setting it apart, as I said at the beginning of the chapter; And let the bandages that are on the fracture be soft and moist, not hard or harsh.
And let the bandages that are on the fracture be soft and moist, not hard or harsh. And let the thread used for binding be of linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
And reward the limb and the bandage after some days. And if any bad accident occurs to the limb, such as itching that comes upon the limb, then you must rinse the limb with warm water until that itch is appeased;
and let the limb rest without being too tight.
And then commence the stretching, and if the ligaments are softened and the bone dislocated, and suchlike things, so treat it.
And beware that the nourishment cannot reach the limb because it is too tight; if so, then loosen it slightly and leave it thus for a few days until the nourishment arrives, then tighten again.
And if none of these things that we have said come to the patient, then do not release it until 20 days have passed.
Or if around it swells up later, then he places his hands on his neck and keeps them even; he guards against movement and dislocation, and sleeps on his back;
Know that this dislocation is restored in thirty days or thirty-five, and sometimes in twenty, according to the mixtures and temperaments of the humors.
Of the breaking of the hand
This is because on the back of the hand and in both hands there are few breaks, but rather many dislocations.
And when the fingers of the hand are broken or bent, then the patient should sit crossed-legged, sitting upright and straight before him.
Then place his hand on an extended cloth, and the ministers extend the broken bones, aligning them properly until they are well joined;
And apply the emplaster and bandages, if there is no inflammation; then place a splint according to the size of the affected area; and wrap it in one linen cloth.
And if the dislocation is around the wrist, make a splint of cloth and instruct the patient to bind it tightly to their broken wrist; then wrap it with a long cloth strip, and let the splint be of soft wood about as large as the palm of the hand, binding it securely.
And if the fracture is on the outside edge, then it is necessary to place a splint above and another below in the palm so that the hand is open and straight, then wrap it all around the hand, and secure the tie between the two sides.
And if the fracture comes to any of us on the hip, if it is dislocated, then set it even, as it ought. And hold it with the sole of your foot, and if you see fit, place a small upright splint to raise the fracture, and do not move it.
And if the fracture is in another toe, such as the big toe or one of the others, then set it even and bind it with the sound toe that comes after. Or you can tie them all together, whichever seems best, or place an upright splint on it, as for a dislocation of the hip.
And beware in the restoration and arrangement of hot abscesses, and treat those who come there, as I have said.
The thighbone is often broken, which can be clearly seen when it turns forward or backward.
And the restoration is done by tying something above and below the fracture. And the patient lies on his face, then each attendant stretches out their bandage evenly on their side.
And this is when the fracture is within the bone.
And if the dislocation is close to the root of the thigh, then let one ligament be towards the point and the other ligament below the dislocation.
And also if it is close to the knee, then let the bandage be near the knee, and extend it downward;
Then let the physician align the bone with both hands until it is in its natural position, and then apply the splint, and if an abscess does not form there.
And if there is a hot abscess, let it cool first, then return to your work and treatment; The bandage is made in this manner.
You must wrap the fracture with one or two hard bandages doubled, and remove any excess material. Then twist the leg so that the heel comes to the root of the thigh. Insert a long thread between the hip and the leg below the knee, bringing the ends of the thread upwards;
then wrap the leg and hip with the bandage again, place supports on both sides of the fracture, and put one support on the bone of the leg;
Then fill the empty space between the leg and thigh with soft cloth to make the tension even; then begin binding tightly three or four turns above the break. And as you go higher up from the break, decrease the tension gradually.
Then take both ends of the thread you have placed between the leg and thigh, and tie three knots that are above; then return below to the top of the thread until you reach the foot.
And tighten it so that it does not move from its place; then leave it thus until there is no inflammation or swelling or other similar condition. And if any of these occurs, untie it and address what has come as we have said many times before.
And if there are pieces of bone that prick out, they must be removed if possible. And if it is not possible, then the place should be split open and infection pulled out And the treatment, as we have said, until he is healed.
And sometimes the hip is broken in this way when one places splints on it, such as in the shoulder or arm;
However, the patient does not limp after restoration done in this manner.
And know that the thighbone takes about one month to heal, give or take a few days depending on individual constitutions.
You know that in the cruciate ligament of the knee there is rarely a break, but it often stretches.
And if it breaks, it is only a fissure or hole, and this happens in all wounds, and even without wounds, which everyone knows.
And the restoration is when one places what is round on both sides, until it moves together as much as possible;
then place the splint, and if necessary, place a round bandage on it and tighten it as needed, then review all the arrangements we have said for other fractures, such as treating heat and similar injuries; then apply to each injury what is necessary until he is healed.
Regarding bone fractures of the leg
Know that in the leg there are two bones, one of which is rightly called 'mustelz', and the other 'foscile';
And all other fractures happen similarly to those in the arm, and therefore restoration is done similarly to that of the arm, and the work is all one. And if both bones are broken together, then the leg turns all around.
And if the delicate bone is broken, so turn [it] forward.
And if the large bone is broken, great pain is felt, and it is clearly seen. And twisted underneath.
Then apply traction, align it evenly, and bind the splints evenly.
But nonetheless, if the break is ugly with many fragments, then traction should be lighter and gentler. And align it according to your ability.
When you have completed your work, then take two smooth bands of wood that encircle the leg on both sides and are as long as the leg from below the knee down.
Then wrap one bandage above and another below, tie them in the middle, so that the leg cannot bend to the right or left at this joint, which is good.
And some apply splints the length of the leg made of wood, and place the leg to prevent movement, particularly if there is a wound at the break.
And move each day the leg to see if there is any heat or other accident. If the treatment continues until he is healthy.
About the fracture of bones in the foot
In the ankle there is no fracture, but sometimes a bone in the foot is broken and in two pieces, and there occurs only quassure in various positions.
And if it happens that the bones of the foot are broken and you see these bones rising above each other, then place this patient's foot on the ground as if he wants to walk, and then put your foot on his where the bones are raised, and press down until they return to their places;
then place the splint and bandages on it, and put under the foot of the patient a small board with two legs, then bind the foot firmly, and wrap cloths around it, and other things that you may need.
And when three or four days have passed, then untie the bandage, for you will find the bones even, whether they are broken or dislocated.
And if there are any bones of the hand broken, restore them, just as we have said for the bones of the hand; then place on the broken bone a splint according to the length of the bone, and a bit wider, then put under the foot that board which I mentioned earlier, and bind it firmly;
And if there are two or three, or more [hairs] that need breaking, then place an adhesive bandage on each one according to its amount, wrapped in a piece of linen cloth, and secure the wound with a pad beneath the foot. And let it be placed on top of the wound's head, away from the belly of the foot, so that it may adhere well.
And remember not to forget the other things I have mentioned regarding other fractures. and treat each injury as it deserves.
About the fracture of the bone of the thumb
When a woman's hipbone is broken, have her sit down and lean towards the back part, being held there from behind.
Then fill the woman's hip joint with cotton, adding as much as one stone's weight,
Then lower the woman and raise her back little by little until the cotton begins to rise towards the hip joint, causing the bone to return with the weight of one stone.
And when she wishes to urinate, remove the cotton, and when she has urinated, replace it, and do so for about seven days. Then the fracture will be restored, and if you see that it is so, take a bladder of a sheep, tie a tube to its opening, and pour the entire contents into the wound. Then blow forcefully into the tube until the bladder is fully inflated inside. The wound will then heal.
Then fill it with cotton, and leave it thus for several days until it is healed.
And when the bone of the hand of a man or woman is broken, restore it as we have said for the thighbone.
But these nearby fractures are not hidden from those who study and practice this art, and may my book be understood.
For a fracture indicates many ways to correctly reset it: So listen to them now.
In the thighbone, when it is broken, take a goose's feather and insert it into the bone. Then wrap bandages around it, and let it rest for three days or more, and it will heal quickly.
About fracture with wound
He who has a fracture with a wound, even if it is large, such as the bone of the thigh or the arm or similar, must be healed now, so that the healing that we have mentioned proves it.
And if the wound heals, then rinse it with vitriol, if you don't have anything else, then begin to restore the fracture in that same hour or day, if no inflammation occurs.
And if inflammation occurs, then leave the restoration until the ninth day, until the inflammation is appeased, and do not touch it on the third or fourth day, for you would bring bad accidents upon it.
And if the broken bone is appearing above the exposed heart, then it must be put in place lightly with your hands, with slight traction.
And if the extension is not suitable for placing evenly in your hands, then straighten it with this iron tool that is seven or eight fingers long, and its width should match the size of the wound. And so it is necessary for the physician to have three or four of them ready, depending on what he needs in each case of fracture treatment.
And it should be round and slightly thick so that it does not bend under pressure during your procedure, and it should be pointed at the front and thickest in the middle, like this:
And it is called "palainche," for which reason the curved head of the bone must be placed on the visible end of the bone. And push it in once, until it returns, and let them lie evenly opposite each other. And if the fracture is slight and tools cannot grasp the bone well, then you must cut off the head of the bone until tools can seize it.
And if you cannot reset the bone as we have said, then cut with an appropriate tool, such as a scalpel or knife, to your ability;
Then remove that which remains on the bone roughly and in small shavings.
And when the bone is reset but the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural place.
Once it is back in its place, then wet a cloth with black staunching wine and cleanse it properly if it is inflamed; and do not apply any ointment or other substance containing oil to the wound, lest putrefaction and corruption arise therein.
Then apply dressings once the bone has been reset, leave the wound uncovered, and cut away the surrounding skin according to the size of the wound, taking care that the wound is not constricted by the dressing.
And many foolish physicians have done this and thereby brought death or corruption upon their patients. And let the bandaging be softer and more gentle than other dressings.
And if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that some misfortune will come of it, as we have said, and you find pain at its location, then do not put on bandages. But wrap it around instead, with hard cloths, and tie them securely.
And when you see after one or two days an opening of the wound, then remove what you had put on it previously, and apply healing salve to it, such as tetrapharmaceutical salve and similar ones.
You must wash the limb twice a day, in the morning and evening, until it is solid and healed.
The limb should be placed in such a way that the wound drains easily.
And if many days pass and the wound does not heal but continues to suppurate, know that there are small bone fragments present, for which reason you should cleanse the wound with tincture and remove all these unwanted fragments that cause pain.
And if a fistula appears at the location, or another manner of corruption, then it is necessary that you treat it according to what is said in its chapter above.
And when the bone is broken and exposed on the limb, such as the thighbone or shoulder blade, and other similar large limbs, do not pull it out, for many times death ensues, but let it be until it rots.
Perhaps it will fall off by itself after 20 or 30 days, then treat the wound if you can.
And if you cannot, then leave it alone.
Many times afterwards the health of the broken part is questioned, especially when it is near the joint, and it is unpleasant to see the deformity of the limb. And perhaps the limb cannot perform its natural tasks.
Take care then if the bone is fresh: If the administrator applies medicines that are astringent, such as aloes, incense, and myrrh, and sarcocolle, acacia, and similar others, thus you should take any of these things, or all together, and mix them with an astringent wine or with egg white or with egg yolk; and apply it to the wound in bandages, pressing it down tightly, and do not remove it for many days;
and apply it to the wound in bandages, pressing it down tightly, and do not remove it for many days; then remove it, and start again with another one until the dislocation has been reduced;
or you can press on a well-made splint; for the property of wood is such that it draws out all the swellings from the limbs;
and if the dislocation has already become hard like stone, and it is necessary to remove it, cut on top of it, and remove the excess; or you can scrape it away with any sharp instrument until it is removed, and then treat it until it has healed.
about the limb that is weak after healing
When bone fracture is restored, but afterwards the limb remains weak and slender, this occurs for many reasons: One reason is that it was bound too tightly, and was not bound as it should have been; Or because there were too many bindings, and the limb could not receive nourishment; Or due to excessive bandaging; Or because of excessive movements, not at the right time. Or because it lacks blood in its body, so it is weak.
And the treatment for this is to feed the patient and make their body supple until their blood becomes abundant within them; and apply fomentations, give them joy and ease.
Then place pitch on the limb so that the pitch attracts great nourishment to it, and apply warm water bandages often until the nourishment reaches the limb; and return it to its natural shape.
The limb twisted after recovery When the limb is twisted after restoration, and the broken bone opens up, and the form of the limb is ugly, nevertheless it does not lose its natural function:
If you do not believe the foolish ones who say one must break the limb anew, and many foolish physicians have done this in our land
and these deeds are blameworthy, causing great harm, and sometimes death
Nevertheless, if the dislocations and contusions are fresh, they should be rinsed with hot water, or softening herbs should be cooked on them, such as vinca leaves, roots, and mallow
And apply a softening poultice, such as well-made diacelion, and take the mollificating ointment of vinca, and mix it with goose grease or sesame oil, and apply the poultice on
Or you take fat figs, crush them with fennel seeds, and similar remedies that soften bone setting.
And sometimes dislocation occurs due to continuous and prolonged rubbing with moist hands. And move the limb each hour.
And if the distortions are old and hardened like stone, it is necessary to remove them with an iron instrument; they should be cut down to the bone with a fine, light scalpel And apply bandages and care to the treatment.
Dislocations are when a joint leaves its place, so that it cannot move, and the limb is misshapen, and the sufferer feels great pain and great injury.
When dislocation comes to anyone, they should try to reduce it immediately.
If one delays, the area swells, and if it is barely reset.
Therefore, one should not move it until the swelling has subsided: Often brings about spasms and other pains;
However, when this happens, make the patient sweat, then leave him until the inflammation is reduced.
Then raise the limb with warm water and oil, then gently reset it, and treat each joint as they come into their proper place.
And I have ordered the chapters of the dislocations from head to foot.
It happens sometimes that the jaws are dislocated outward, and the dislocation of both is in two ways: Either they are a little bony out of their place, or softened a little; Or they are completely dislocated and hang down towards the chest, causing saliva to flow from the mouth so that he cannot hold it in nor close his mouth, and it envelops his tongue with speech.
When dislocation is slight, it returns spontaneously in most cases.
And if it is whole and complete, then you must reset it quickly, and do not delay.
And in such a manner that the assistants hold the patient's head still, and the physician places his little finger of one hand at the root of the jaw dislocation within the mouth, if the dislocation is on the right side; and the other two fingers of the hands be spread apart to place it evenly;
and instruct the patient to soften his jaws and move them in all directions. And the physician places it back until it returns to its proper place
And if resetting is difficult, especially if both jaws are dislocated together, then apply warm water and oil, until they reset easily;
do not delay in resetting them, as we have said.
And when they are reset evenly, and the patient can close his mouth without difficulty, then apply warm, moist cloths made of oil, rose wax, and honey, and lightly bind it with soft linens.
And let the patient sleep on their back, with their shoulders between two pillows so that they do not move to the right or left, nor try to mix things up, but instead take light food until the pain has subsided and the jawbones are healed.
And then let them chew what they want lightly, and do not strain to open their mouth for eating and drinking, until the jawbone is completely healed and sound.
And if both jaws cannot be put back in place within an hour and are not returned to their proper positions, then fever and chills may occur, sometimes with diarrhea and occasionally vomiting of clear bile
And when you see these signs, know that it is a loss. and many times the person for whom this happens dies within nine days.
The dislocation cannot be dislocated from the inner side of the cheekbone nor from the breastbone; sometimes it is dislocated backward and can be felt quite well
And the treatment is that the patient should lie often on their back and extend their arms; and then press firmly with your hand's palm on it, and it will return.
then place the bandage and tie it tightly
and the shoulder that is towards the back cannot dislocate If not, and if it dislocates any time, then reset it to its place, as we have said.
Then place the splint and bandage, and secure it, commanding the patient to rest until they are healed.
And thus similarly is the head of the shoulder reset when it is dislocated from its place.
Chapter on the dislocation of the shoulder
Know that the shoulder can be dislocated in only three ways:
one of which is that it dislocates at the part of the socket below; and the second is at the part towards the arm; and sometimes it dislocates above, which happens rarely.
and the shoulder does not dislocate behind or inside for the nerves.
And often it dislocates below towards the socket, especially in those who have little flesh, as it moves suddenly.
In those who have enough flesh, it moves barely and returns barely.
And sometimes there occurs a blow or fall which causes the shoulder to swell with a hot hematoma and the person believes that it is dislocated because of this
You must therefore test it until you are certain of it and then begin the treatment.
And dislocation is recognized when it is down towards the thighbone, and there is a difference between the affected shoulder and the healthy one, which you will find clearly different. and you will find a hollow at the top of the shoulder and below the thighbone you will touch the top of the shoulder as if it were an egg. and the patient cannot bring their hand to their neck nor move in any way
Also, if it is dislocated upwards, it is not hidden, for you will find it clearly upon touching.
This type of dislocation cannot be reduced except when it is new or if the child is the patient
And the method is for the practitioner to lift the patient's hand upwards, then place their fingers beneath the thighbone and forcefully raise the joint upwards into its proper place The servant raises the hand, extends it upwards, then places it beneath so that it comes quickly.
And if it does not come as we have said within a few days afterward, then the patient must be bathed in warm water; and let the servant apply gently softening and soothing ointment, such as a decoction of celery, fennel, and melilot in water, and it should be applied;
then have the patient lie on their back, and place underneath the armpit a cloth of even thickness, not too soft nor too hard; then let the physician put their heel upon the cloth, lift the virtuous shoulder gently, and draw out the hand of the patient.
And another servant should hold the head of the patient so that it does not move downwards; When that shoulder returns perfectly aligned, then reset it according to this method:
and ensure that a man larger than the patient is present; And let it be right across from the ribcage, and place your shoulder beneath the patient's elbow, then lift the elbow upwards so that the patient hangs down. Another minister pulls the patient's hand down towards their belly. And if the patient is too light, hang something heavy with him, and the dislocation will return now.
And it is reset in another manner as well:
And this one involves sticking a long, dry stick into the ground, onto which the head should be placed level with the fist, neither too thick nor too thin; then place it under the patient, but gently so they do not feel any pressure, and let them stand on the long stick.
Then extend their arm downwards on the other side, and the dislocation will quickly return to its place.
But if it still does not want to return after all these things we have said, then perform this treatment: Take a stick two arms long and four fingers wide, with a rounded end for easy insertion deep under the elbow.
Then place upon the head of the patient a cloth moistened with water so that the wood does not burn the patient; then place it under the pillow of the patient.
And stretch his arm along the wood's length, and tie the joint to the wood, and bind the arm at the hand's head; then place the arm on the edge of a wide beam, with the hand hanging down below, and let the body hang freely on the other side. The joint is ready now.
And when it has returned into its proper place, however this may have happened, then you must place a bandage of wool beneath the socket, sprinkle the whole shoulder and surrounding area with powdered mallow leaves mixed with incense and egg-white, then draw the bandage tight beneath the arm and tie the ends securely around the emplastrum; fasten the hand to its collarbone and let it remain in this position
And it is necessary that he consume little food, so that the limb may be rested; for it will heal more quickly.
Then eat again after five or seven days, and move around. And if it is firm but not softened, then it is healed.
And if the joint is out of place due to moisture that has come there, or for another reason, you must administer cauteries through three holes, as it is shown before in the chapter on cauteries.
And if you do all this, and after seven days it still does not stay in place and the arm cannot be raised above, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is cut or stretched or softened. And know that the joint will never again be fixed in its place.
The dislocation which is towards the hip, and breasts, or behind, if it occurs due to forceful movement of hands, and another ligature should be administered;
And treat until it is healed.
And if after the healing there is stiffness in the limb and difficulty in movement, then let the patient exercise many times until that stiffness is alleviated and returns to its original condition.
of dislocation of the neck
Know that the shoulder joint is easily dislocated and can readily become dislocated again;
And if it has been dislocated from all sides, especially front and back, the dislocation is not hidden because it can be seen clearly and felt easily; And it becomes dislocated according to each position. And when you join the sick limb with the sound one, you can then see it clearly. For the joint is dislocated and cannot bend the arm nor touch the shoulder at all
Therefore you must reset it before an abscess forms there, for if an abscess had already formed, it would be difficult to reset.
And sometimes it cannot be fully reset altogether, especially when it is behind; So it is worse than other dislocations and causes greater pain, and sometimes death occurs.
And restoration occurs when it is such that one can reset it, by extending his hand with both of yours. And let his arms be extended, and the hands of the doctor according to the count be placed around, above and below, and push the joint towards his fingers together, or at the root of his palm, until it returns to its place.
And if the dislocation is on the front, it can be reduced by doubling the hand onto itself and pressing the root of the palm against the dislocated neck.
And if it does not want to return to its place, then apply strong traction;
and two ministers should extend the arm, and two other ministers should hold it so that it does not move during the extension;
then twist the arm in both directions, then wrap a long and wide folded cloth around it;
and when the doctor has joined the joint with his hand, then anoint it with some oil to soften the joint, then push the joint strongly until it returns;
and when it is in place, then put dry compresses with egg yolk on it, press it strongly, and wrap the arm around the patient's neck, leaving it for a few days before removing it.
And if the joint is firm in its place, then loosen it, and let it be.
And if you see that the joint is not properly aligned, then recommence the emplacement and loosen the ligature, and leave it thus for several days until it is firmly in place. Then loosen it.
And if there is great heat after the resetting of the joint, and it moves, then bathe it and rub it gently, and press until it is soothed. Or you put a greasy wool cloth on the joint, then leave it for a day and a night, then remove it, and let it enter into the bath. And when it sweats, rub the joint moderately, then put the wool cloth back on, and then enter the bath; And thus do it two or three times until it is healed.
And if you see [that the joint is still not healed], then put on a hot moist cloth made with butter, and bind it tightly.
If it returns to its state
Dislocation of the hand
The dislocated joint of the hand returns, and the return is easier than with other joints. Nevertheless, it must be reset quickly to its place, in the very same opening that it was dislocated, before the place becomes inflamed or an abscess forms.
And the resetting is done by placing the dislocated hand on a table, extending the hand of the assistant, and the physician pressing down evenly until it returns.
Nevertheless, you must ensure that it is properly in place; Then the patient places the back of their hand on a table at full extension and reset. And if the dislocation is at the back of the hand, then the patient places the back of their hand on the table, and the physician places his hand upon that appearance of the joint.
If it returns now, that is good. If not, then apply soothing emplasters to alleviate heat and swelling, and leave it thus without restarting the procedure.
And if he cannot endure it, and you are unable to place it in its proper position even after several days, then the joint remains dislocated.
And let no harm come to the patient from this cautery until the hand is weakened, and it can grasp nothing. Then know that the nerve is cut or the artery.
If there is no other means to burn by fire near the case, then perhaps nothing else will help.
"And when the hand is in its place, put on the dressing that we have said, then bind it and leave it for five days, then untie it and let it remain thus."
"And if he cannot move it well, and there is some stiffness, then make him warm water compresses, and rub him until he is free."
"on the dislocation of the fingers of the hand"
Sometimes both sides of the hand are dislocated, sometimes at the back of the palm or the front.
Then straighten the hand and push the dislocation into your pouch until it returns, then hold the head of the hand and bend it towards the side where it was dislocated.
And leave it for two days, then put it even on that day;
and bind it tightly as we have said, both during the day and night, and when moving it, and re-bind it tightly.
And do this frequently until it is tight, and do the same if it is dislocated on the front of the hand, doing as you have done here until it is healed.
And likewise does he, when it is dislocated elsewhere.
"on the dislocation of the shoulder blade of the back"
When the sciatica of the back or neck is dislocated, or if there are many dislocations, there is no treatment, for the patient hastens his death.
And the sign is that evacuations happen involuntarily, and he cannot control them. Often some limb becomes limp, either both thighs or both arms.
And often the backbone moves in four parts;
That which moves at the back is called "gilbositez":
The treatment for this is that you should examine whether the gilbositez came from childhood: If there is no cure or healing of it at all.
And that which comes from falls, blows, or similar things; the old masters describe various ways of treating it with grand words, but there is no great benefit in all of them.
But I have abbreviated it according to my intention and made tools in various forms.
I say that in the gilbositez which comes at the front of the chest, there is no healing.
And also that which comes directly into both sides; and one can only cure those properly that come to the back, as I say.
And it is necessary for the patient to lie on their back evenly on a level surface, with restraint underneath them so they do not become bruised.
Then plant one stake firmly at the head of the bed and another at the feet, and tie a rope around the patient's thighs, another at the hips, knees, and ankles.
And two assistants hold the ropes, one at the head and the other at the feet, between the two stakes
and let them be securely tied, with the stake firmly planted as we have said, and the physician place their palms firmly on the spine until it returns.
And if it does not return with this treatment, take a board three fingers wide and place it under the shoulder blade while the patient is lying on their side, then insert the end of the board under the shoulder blade and place the middle of the board on the spine. and the physician places their feet on the other end of the board and presses firmly until it returns to its proper place
And if you see one, do it to the joint that turns towards the hand. And you shall place two splints at the head of the patient's injured arm, and two others towards the feet; let there be a space of one palm length between each splint above and below.
And let each splint have one hole where the joint is located, so that they are securely placed on the ground without moving.
And between each pair of splints there should be one turning splint on which the joint turns, and this turning splint should have two small splints, each a palm length long, to turn the joint.
And then tie the bandage that is among the splints around the joint towards the head, and the other bandage around the feet at the other joint; each assistant should turn their respective joint throughout the binding process, and the master shall keep the bandage even as we have described.
And when it is aligned, then place a drying plaster with plenty of egg, and then the bandages, and then the hot iron of a tablet of three fingers in length, which should press on the location of the gibbosity and the healthy part of the spine, then tie it with a linen, as we have said, and let the patient use subtle nourishment until they are healed.
And if anything happens at the end of the healing process, then it is necessary to administer softening and soothing medicines along with the hot iron that we mentioned earlier; And sometimes one administers a piece of lead, and sometimes the appearance comes in the lower spine of the back, and it is believed to be dislocation. And it is the bone that appears, therefore one must not presume anything about it: For fear of bringing death upon oneself.
Know that in the joints of the hip and the joints of the shoulder only dislocation occurs, not like other joints;
And the hip joint is dislocated according to four parts: Within and without, and before and behind.
And further within others, and mostly dislocated before and behind.
And the sign of its dislocation within is that when the sick leg is joined with the healthy one, it appears longer, and the sick knee opens wider than the healthy one, and the sick person cannot bend their knee by the fire; And the place near it is swollen with a hot boil because the head of the thigh comes there.
And the sign of one that comes on the outside is that it is opposite to those that have come before
And the sign of that which occurs in front is that they stretch their leg well according to its length; Nevertheless, they cannot bend the knee without pain; and if one tries to make them walk, they cannot go forward, and they retain their urine, and the anus swells, and when they walk, they limp on their heel.
And the sign of one that happens behind is that he cannot straighten or bend his knee, and his leg is twisted compared to the other one, and the angle is softened, and the hip joint is located beneath the ribs.
The treatment for this type of dislocation is that if the dislocation is ancient, and it remains in its position, there is no remedy; And presumption must not be there.
And in the case where dislocation is fresh, and there are four types of dislocation, you should hasten to put the joint back in place, extend it inside and outside, and move it to the right and left. Perhaps it will return, and no other treatment is needed.
And if it does not return in this manner, you must then seize a strong assistant, and hold the leg firmly with both hands, or have one person tie it above the knee. and another assistant extends their hand in such a way that they place their hands under the buttocks, then grasp it with a soft bandage on the hip. And another ties the head of the bandage;
and they both pull up and down at once, so that the patient is lifted off the ground all at once, and remains hanging.
This method of stretching applies to all four types of hip dislocation, and if the dislocation has returned to its proper position as we have said, then that is good.
If this does not happen, then treat it in the same way.
When dislocation is on the right side, you must place the patient on their sound cheek, then put a sling on the root of the thigh, and the spot that is below the angle, then stretch the sling upwards towards the angle, and towards the front.
Then take other assistants by his arms, embrace the great length of the dislocated thigh, and extend it strongly forward: And it will now return to its proper place;
This method is easier than others for reduction.
And if you cannot secure it in this way that we have described, then you must bind the two feet of the patient together with a soft strong rope on both heels and both knees, and let the dislocated leg extend about two fingers more than the other
Then hang it over the top of a stick, and let it hang freely from the ground for two arm-lengths
Then command one minister to embrace the top of the thigh, and let another minister hang with the patient, embracing the thigh strongly for the joint will now return quickly.
And when dislocation occurs at the hip joint, let the patient lie down in the manner we described for those with gibbousness; then apply traction to the limb above the injured leg properly, and also above the foot.
Then place two reeds: one at the head, another at the feet; then insert one reed between the thighs of the patient in this manner; And place moistened cloths around to prevent burning of the patient; then extend each assistant towards him, and the surgeon shall set his hand equally upon the dislocation.
If it returns, it is good.
If not, place a board on top and press down as we have described in the case of gibosity; let the patient lie on their healthy side.
And when dislocation is anterior, the injured leg must be extended hastily, as I have said; Then let the surgeon place his foot on the outer side of the injured leg and press with the other hand, then extend it down towards the knee.
And if dislocation is at the hip joint, it is not necessary to extend the patient downwards or lift him up; rather, he should remain as if the hip were dislocated backwards, as we have described for childbirth on both hips. And it should be placed on its face, and the bandage extended as we have said before, and one should press upon the joint against the table; And it will be set when the patient extends their legs, and they will be even; Then join the thighs together, place the splint, and bind it with a bandage so that the hip does not move; And let him rest for three or four days, then remove it, and place the splint on top;
If you see that they are even, then bind it again as before, and leave it for three days;
Then remove it, and let the patient go gently until the limb is comfortable.
"Of dislocation of the knee"
The knee is dislocated in three ways: That is to say, inward, outward, and backward;
And it does not dislocate forward.
And the sign is that you tell the patient to bend their leg towards their thigh, and if it does not bend easily, know that it is dislocated;
And the restoration of all these is that you make the patient sit up straight, and extend his leg if possible, and place your back against his face, and put his foot on your feet.
Then grasp his knee with your palms, draw it between your thighs, then bend both sides of the knee forcefully; And another assistant extends his foot until the knee returns to its place; and the sign that it is correctly reset is that he can move his leg easily against his thigh.
Then apply the plaster and bind the leg to the thigh tightly with bandages for three or four days, then release.
And do not let the patient walk until the limb is strengthened.
And if the limb isn't straight, then extend it firmly as we have said in the treatment of the thigh until it is aligned
"Of dislocation of the heel"
"The heel can sometimes be dislocated and sometimes completely dislocated, both inward and outward."
And the sign of this is that the ankle is swollen and sticks out on the side where it was dislocated:
The reset will be easy, and one should easily extend the arm at its hands when it is only shaken.
And when it is dislocated entirely, then you must make the patient sit up straight, and tie one leg of the attendants firmly above the ankle.
Then pull the foot towards you with your right hand, then with your left twice, then lift it up and gently place the foot back in its original position.
Do this twice, as we have said, pulling and pushing the foot.
If it returns to its proper place, that is good.
But if not, start again, for it will dislocate again.
And if it cannot be returned in this way, then make the patient lie on their back on the ground, and firmly plant a pole in the earth between their thighs, tying cloths around so that the patient is not injured.
Then have the attendants hold the thigh, and another attendant stretch out the foot at the patient's hands or feet so that it is held in place. Then each attendant stretches out equally, and the pole should always be between the patient's thighs to hold the patient steady when lifting them.
Then let the physician set the dislocation evenly with his hands, and another assistant grasp the healthy leg below, and the dislocation will return quickly.
And when it is in place, apply the plaster and dressings, press firmly, and bind the foot to the leg; beware the nerves that are above the ankle behind, so the bandage is not too tight.
Then let it rest for two or three days, and if the binding loosens, then press harder;
Then untie on the third or fourth day, and forbid the patient from walking for four days. And if they walk before this time, it is not certain that it will not dislocate again.
"And if inflammation occurs afterwards, you must calm it as we have said elsewhere until it is healed."
"of the fingers" "When the fingers are dislocated, they should be gently extended without force, and this is an easy matter."
And if the dislocation is in any of the joints at the back of the foot, then make the patient sit on a flat surface or on two boards laid straight, and place your foot over what opens from these joints; then press firmly with your foot until it returns.
And when it is aligned, and there appears nothing, then place under the sole of the foot a board at two inches, then press firmly, and leave for three days, then release. And let him rest until he is healed.
"of wound and dislocation together"
When wound comes with dislocation, and one wishes to restore it, often the patient dies:
Do not be overly confident in treating it if you are not skilled in the art and have not practiced it for a long time, nor should you be hasty rather than merciful.
Use cooling remedies at the beginning to calm heat, and leave the patient in God's hands if you see no hope of recovery. And when you see hope, reset the limb now before the hot abscess arrives.
When the limb is in place, apply cooling remedies for the hot abscess, and dress the wound with drying ointments as necessary.
And if with the dislocation there is fracture, and small bones dislocated, then set them, and do as we have said in simple diseases;
And keep yourself from the path of fear, as I have said, for you will move according to your Creator, and for the sake of your knowledge and body.
