Oh, my dearest son, I have completed this book which is the last of the medical science together with its fulfillment, and I have brought it to an end through its explanations and declarations. And it came upon me to envision that I would complete it with this treatise which is part of the work of hands, namely 'surgery'.
And because the work of hands is much neglected in our region and has been entirely suppressed everywhere, the science has therefore perished and its strength lies only in the small descriptions found in books which the hands have moved. And from this has come error and vanity, and intentions are closed off and the science is ignored.
Now it seems to me that I wish to revive her along with the arrangement of this treatise according to the way of exposition, declaration and abbreviation. and I will bring together the shapes of the fire irons for cauterization and other instruments of the work with the arrangement of their declaration and preparation as is necessary.
And because no good masters of hands are found in our time, the art of medicine is neglected. And therefore, whoever engages in this must rise to the science of anatomy, as Galen says, so that they know the judgment of members, their forms and conjunctions and separations, and have knowledge of bones and nerves and muscles and the number of joints, and how they move and remain at rest, and where their exit points are located.
And therefore Hippocrates said that the name with the name is much, but with the work it is little. and especially in the art of medicine.
We tell you at the beginning of this book that anyone who is not knowledgeable about the things said before should be careful not to fall into error and kill people.
Thus have many wished in vain for these who meddle with this science but are abandoned without skill or experience.
For I saw a foolish physician who cut an abscess of scrofula on the neck of a woman and cut the arteries in the neck; Therefore so much blood flowed out that the woman fell dead in his hands.
And another physician who removed a stone from a man's eye, the stone being large. So he took with him a piece of the bladder, and the man died within three days.
And I had already been called for to remove it, and saw the condition of the sick man and the size of the stone, and knew well that if they tried to cut into him he would die.
And saw another physician who treated our duke whose leg was broken; and with the break there was a wound,
and the physician, full of ignorance, held the break upon the wound like stars with great force, and did not leave any bandage on the wound, leaving it thus until the end.
And he commanded that it should not be unbound,
and so it remained until the leg was entirely swollen, and the foot went to ruin.
I was called to go to him, and I hurried to come unbind the leg; and when I had unbound it, he felt at peace and did not feel any pain.
But all the pathways of corruption were already confirmed in the member, and it could not be healed;
And corruption did not cease to spread through the limb until the entire limb was lost.
And I saw another doctor who burst an inflamed aposteme and then set it on fire through the wickedness of his ignorance.
For a chancre, when it is free from melancholic humor, should not be touched with iron unless it is in such a place that all that is corrupted can be entirely removed.
And therefore, dear son, you must know that the work of hands is divided into two parts: that is to say, surgery where there is danger in many situations;
I will show in each place of this book where there is fear and danger.
Therefore it is necessary that you guard yourself so that foolish physicians cannot speak ill of you.
So take up your weapons with confidence, and undertake your patients lightly and firmly, and use the best way so that through God's grace you may come to salvation and be praised;
and leave fearsome illnesses to those skilled in difficult cases;
And remove your weapons from what causes you doubt, and have faith in yourself so that you may come from this world to the other of glory.
Galen says in some of his admonitions: Do not undertake the treatment of a serious illness unless you are summoned as a wise physician.
I have composed this treatise according to three chapters.
The first chapter is about fire cauteries and medicinal cauteries, arranged from the head to the feet.
And about the shapes of instruments, and the iron implements of cautery, and all that is necessary in the work.
The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and about cups and wounds, and about the extraction of arrows, and similar matters;
And it is arranged with the shapes of instruments.
The third chapter is about reducing dislocations and twists, and similar matters;
And it is arranged from the head to the feet, with the shapes of instruments.
Before we begin discussing the work, it is necessary for me to describe the quality of each temperament and its benefit or harm.
I say that the qualities of the patient and his harm are the longest speech and most subtle knowledge, and secret responses;
And about this spoke most of the wise men, and they agreed upon it.
And few are their words sufficient to me, for I dread length.
I say that cautery universally helps any complexion where there is matter, whether it be one of two complexions: That is to know, hot complexion without matter, and dry complexion without matter.
In a complexion that is both hot and dry with matter, some say that cautery is great help; And others said the opposite: That cautery is not good for diseases that come from heat and dryness. For the nature of fire is hot, and should not be used to treat hot illnesses with heat, nor with dryness;
And he who said the opposite said that cautery greatly helps hot and dry diseases that occur in men's bodies. For when you compare the body and moisture of man to the temperament of fire, you find that the body is cold.
And I agree with this statement. Because I have found it to be true through experience.
And in any case, do not meddle with fire cautery except he who has experienced it, and knows through long use the chapter of cauteries, and the diversity of complexions of men, and their dispositions and the causes of their diseases, and the occurrences and the space of time.
Of other constitutions we have no fear, especially in cold and moist diseases. And all physicians agreed upon the use of cautery.
Know this, son: cautery along with fire is one of the secrets of cure and has greater benefit than cauterizing with burning medicines.
For fire is simple and does not harm any other member if it is applied to the one being cauterized, except for those that are named otherwise.
Hot medications travel from limb to limb by dilation and cause severe illnesses there. And sometimes they kill the patient.
Fire, due to its heat and goodness of substance, does not harm unless there is excessiveness.
And these things I have found by experience and the length of service and study that I have devoted to this art, based on the truth of things;
And therefore I apologize for the length of my speech, as I do not wish to deprive you of the secret that is hidden in fire and its qualities of operation, how it expels diseases from the body, as philosophers say when demonstrating. Take this into your thoughts.
"And know, son, that they agreed upon when cauteries ought to be performed, and chose priests."
I say that cautery is beneficial at all times because the harm that comes from it is mitigated by its aid; And especially, if a cautery is necessary for urgent pains that cannot wait until greater harm comes to the limb.
And never think, dear son, as foolish doctors do; For a disease healed by cautery has no relapse; and that is what they say;
and that is what they say; but it is not so as they believe, because cauteries are not medicines that change complexion and dry up the humors causing pain; they are worth more than medicines for their speed of effect and power of operation.
And sometimes a disease comes upon a patient according to his complexion, the location of the disease, and its strength;
and excesses gather within him due to the consumption of foods and similar things, unless cauteries are applied where there is little excess or moisture, such as dental cauteries for pain, and similar treatments, from which such pain does not return; But this happens rarely.
And many people do not understand why cauteries are called the tail of medicine, which is true;
But they do not believe that cauteries are worth anything after medicine, but their intentions are false, and cauteries are called the tail of medicine because when we administer methods of cure in any disease and they do not work, then we apply cautery, which is effective.
"So it is clear that cauteries are the last resort of medicine, but not according to the intentions of foolish physicians."
The ancients said that cauteries of gold are milder than those of iron, and they said this for the quality of gold and its preciousness.
And they said that the place of cautery does not cause putrefaction, but this is not true because I have tried it and found that in some people, it is true.
And cauteries of gold are milder than those of iron, as they said. Furthermore, when you heat a tool of gold, you do not know how hot it is just by its golden color, and it cools down quickly.
And if it is heated too much; If they put it on the fire; Thus there is enough impediment.
"Now I have arranged this chapter from beginning to end so that it may be easier to find."
"This cautery is beneficial for moistness and coldness on the head, and there are two kinds of it that are made because of an illness called 'sodicity' and because of many humors descending from the head to the eyes and ears, and for excessive sleepiness, toothache, sore throat, and especially all diseases that come from coldness such as paralysis, sciatica, apoplexy, and similar illnesses."
The shape of this cautery is such that the patient should be purged by a laxative drink for three or four nights, depending on their strength, age, and constitution. And then make him/her vomit at his/her head.
Then have him sit cross-legged between your hands, and place his hands on his chest;
Afterward, place the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his two eyes; And where your middle fingers meet, apply pressure and then heat the cautery called 'olivary', of which this is the shape: Place it on the marked spot, and move downwards while gently pressing your hand in a circular motion. Then lift your hand gently, and check if you see bone protruding slightly; And if you do not see it, then recommence the cautery until you see the bone as I have told you.
Then take some wool, and put in softened cotton inside it, and place on the wound for three days;
then place a soft linen cloth soaked in butter on top; And leave it on until the inflammation has subsided; Then treat the wound with the ointment called 'tetrafarmacon' until it is healed.
And the ancients said that the longer a wound remains open, the more it purges itself; Therefore, change dressings often.
"And some of these people say that one should leave the cautery on until part of the bone is burned, and then remove what has been burned from the bone and heal it."
And others say that one should leave the cautery on long enough and press hard enough to abrade as much bone as a thread used by women in their spindles, so that the humors may be expelled more freely;
and the wound should be left open for a prolonged period; then it should be dressed and bandaged.
And these two methods of cauteries do not seem to me to be entirely good, except perhaps in some men where there is an appearance of fear;
and it seems to me that I should leave this to him;
for the head is weakened by prolonged, natural solutions as we have shown in other members;
And even when the head of a patient is naturally weak, the first type of cautery seems safer and gentler to me, and it is this one that I now use together.
When the head suffers from chronic pain that lasts a long time, the patient should use ointments and pills called 'cochiae', and also remedies for the head, oils, and plasters. And even if one performs the cautery we mentioned earlier, it is not helpful. Be wary if the patient's head is strong in nature and is not too cold; Then cauterize it with that cautery we mentioned earlier, but a little less intense. Afterwards make a cautery on each horn of the head up to the bone as we have said before, and make one cautery at the place called "vessels"; And that is the place where you apply cupping glasses; And raise your hand so that you do not see until reaching the bone: The patient feels much greater pain with this cautery than with others; I will speak about it elsewhere.
And the cauteries on the horns must be more subtle than those used for cauterizing the middle of the head, and this is the reason:
"about the cautery of the head" When sudden pain comes to a part of the head and extends to the eye, and the head is purged by moistifying medicines, and all the other treatments that I have mentioned in the section on diseases are applied, but none of it helps. Then apply cauteries in two ways: namely with hot medicine and fire.
The cautery with hot medicine is done by taking an almond and removing its skin, crushing it into a paste, applying it to both temples where the pain is felt, then making an incision in the temple so that you can place the almond paste under the skin.
And when it is reset, then let it rest and hold it steady thus for twelve hours. Then release it and draw out the pain with garlic juice, leaving the wound thus for two or three days; then apply a piece of cotton soaked in butter until it can be pulled out.
After applying the salve until it heals;
And if you see that some medicines burning are needed, then treat them according to what I have written in the twelfth treatise on burning medicines.
The fire cautery should be applied in this manner. Heat the iron from which this shape is made:
And it is called "closed" because its head is shaped like a hood with one small bend in the middle.
and place it on the painful spot; then hold your hand and gently rotate the fire until half of the blade of the heart-shaped end is heated.
Then lift your hand so that the artery does not burn; it is underneath, and much blood flows abundantly.
Afterwards, apply cotton moistened with oil, placing it on the spot for three days. Then I place moistened cotton in butter, and then treat the wound with ointment until it is clean.
And if you wish to cauterize this hemorrhoid with the cautery called "cultellare," on its tip only, beware of touching the artery in this hemorrhoid that is not ancient.
of ulcer
When treating hemorrhoids as mentioned earlier in the chapter on divisions of diseases, and it is not improving, and you see that the previously mentioned cauteries of medicine and iron do not help, then you must heat the cautery called "cultellare" until it becomes white.
And seize upon the wound a line half the length of two fingers, and remove your hand once, ensuring that you do not touch the artery or reach the bone.
And beware of the mandible that moves when chewing, and ensure that you only touch what moves, so that there is no spasming for the patient. Also beware of bloodletting from the artery when it is cut, or if cutting causes great fear, especially for someone who is not skilled or experienced in this matter. And let the work remain unfinished.
But I will tell you how to stop bleeding when an artery is cut, and I will show you where it appears in this book.
And if these cauteries do not help the disease, and the patient is suffering, then cauterize it near the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it heals.
And if you see this, administer the cautery that we mentioned in the chapter on extracting an artery, with a cautery that has two blades. And these cauteries are better and more helpful than those.
For pain in the ears due to coldness
When cold pain comes to the ear, and one has opened there medications dissolving and other treatments that we have said in the division, and the pain does not cease, then heat this cautery which is called "point," of which here is the form:
Then puncture all around the affected ear, or around both ears if the pain is in both, and move away a bit from the root of the ear, then mark the spot where you will begin. And make ten punctures around each ear.
Then treat it until it heals.
of the torture of the mouth
Only tortures which move with a flow of blood ought to be treated by cauterization.
And do not perform cauterizations on similar conditions that come from dryness and spasm of the nerves.
When treating this condition of torturous movement with blood flow, and it is not effective through hydrides and purgations of the head and gargarisms, then you must cauterize the patient with three cauteries: one at the root of the ear, another a little behind the temple, and the third at the junction of the two lips;
and place the cautery on the healthy appearing part, and make a cautery incision above the ear slightly below its horn, and another one on the temple about the length of a pea; And leave the cautery in place until half of the coal is burned.
This is the form of the cautery:
And it is similar to the knife we have placed before, but it is somewhat more refined, and the knives should be slightly thicker.
After treating the place as I said earlier, until it is clean.
When apoplexy is old and you treat it as we have said, but there is no improvement, and the patient has no fever, then apply four cauteries: Two on the two horns of the head, and one in the middle of the head, and one where it is called 'vessels' as we have said earlier, and the last cautery on the mouth of the stomach.
And they should be treated as we have said earlier.
of litharge
For this disease, give the patient large ointments and pills to cleanse the brain.
Then raise the head of the patient entirely, and place on the occiput the plaster of mustard that is written about in the treatise on plasters.
And this is the method of cautery: If you do as I have said.
If he is healthy thus, it is good. And if he is not [healthy], apply three cauteries on him from the head down to the neck, placing each two fingers' breadth apart.
And treat it as you would others; and if you see them joining together, and the patient is suffering, apply one cautery in the middle. And if necessary, apply two more on the two horns, and treat until it is healthy.
And let the cautery that is called 'olivary' be like I have said before.
It is necessary that the head be cleansed of hairs and of what we have mentioned before
After raising the patient's head, apply a cautery to it and to each horn, one behind and three on the spine of the neck;
And if you need more, and the body is moist and the patient is suffering, and the illness is severe, apply four cauteries on the spine of the back. And let him wait until the thickest hair has burned away; then raise your hand. After the cure, once it is healed, use the cautery called 'olivare', which we have mentioned before.
of epilepsy
The epilithic should only apply fire cautery to those who are phlegmatic. First, one must modify the brain with herbs and other treatments that we have mentioned in previous sections when the patient is large and able to tolerate medical treatment.
And if it's a child who cannot tolerate this, perform a gargle and chewing motion with softened foods often to cleanse the throat.
Then place the king's head in the middle, and perform the cautery as we have said before, and cauterize the vessel and each horn. And if the patient is strong and patient, perform cauteries as I have said for those with paralysis and weakness of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, using an olive-shaped cautery as I have described.
If the patient is a child, one should apply a single subtle cautery according to this manner:
When the excesses or corrupted moisture are caused by melancholy and produce thick phlegm, then apply as many cauteries as we have described for those with paralysis.
And if the excess is inclined towards melancholy and the body of the patient is moist due to melancholy, then give them something to drink that cleanses the brain according to what is written earlier in this section.
Then place the head of the patient king; Then make a linen towel well-woven like a circle, and place it on the head.
And the patient should sit cross-legged, being held firmly in all places;
Afterwards, present the linen, and use old sheep butter. And warm it gently over fire so that the dough can bear being dipped into it. Then empty the circle from within around the head and let it cool.
And do this to the patient once each week with another good regimen until they are healed.
Or if you wish to cauterize wounds by making several pricks all over the cautery.
This method of cautery moistens the brain increasingly;
And then place cotton dampened in butter and goose grease on top.
Here begins a chapter on the eye. When it first comes to the eyes as described in the division by signs I've mentioned, then begin and give the patient something purifying the head, keeping away all moistures, and make them sweat or take many baths fasting.
Then he commands him to lay back his head and makes a cautery on the head, making two cauteries on the two temples if the descent of the eye is in both eyes together, or one cautery if it is in one eye.
Then cut all the veins and arteries that are below the heart with each cautery, making the cautery long according to the width of the temple.
And beware of excessive bleeding, and if you see too much blood coming out, stop it with such power as you have.
And I will teach you about the extraction of arteries and the incision of cauterization, how you should stretch it;
and sometimes one makes a cautery or hot iron underneath the two hind legs.
and it is seen that they are due to cold, humid surplus, then one makes the cautery I mentioned at the beginning of the eyebrow descending towards the eyes: Make a cautery on the head, and two cauteries on each temple, and two cauteries or hot irons underneath the two hind legs. And if more is needed, then cauterize it profusely above the eyebrow at each small cautery.
When you treat him according to what we have said in the section on division, and it does not help, then give the patient three nights of decoction of leeches. After the king, burn with the iron where the olive oil cautery is made. And make two cauteries with the cautery called "clavilis" on both sides, a little below the eyebrows.
Be careful not to touch the artery.
And this is the shape of the cautery called "clavilis":
When paper made from oil is softened by illness or moisture, then cauterize it with this cautery called "olivary". of which this is the shape
And if you see fit, make two cauteries on both sides as long as the eyebrows are.
And do not remove your hand until one-third of the paper has burned according to the method I have described.
Regarding the eyelashes that touch the eye Sometimes the eyelashes turn inward and prick the eye, in which case cauteries are made in two ways: Namely, either by fire or by burning medicine.
For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
When they grow and are even, then put the patient on your knee; After that, draw on the paper of the eyes a figure like the mirror of Myrtle, and let it be the beginning of the sign near the hairs;
Then put a ball of cotton soaked in egg white and powdered myrtle on the eye, then heat the cautery, which is shaped like this:
Then cauterize along the figure you have drawn, little by little many times, until the skin is burned at that spot;
And the sign of the health of the work is when you see the paper retreat, and the hairs stand up at the point of the eye;
Then raise your hand, and leave it thus for three days, then put cotton soaked in butter until the burn is healed; Afterwards, treat with ointment until it is healed.
And if afterwards the hairs grow back, and the paper becomes softened, then begin the cautery on that same spot again, just as you did at first;
And if the hairs are lacking, cauterize them until the skin returns to its natural level, and is even, and the hairs do not prick the eye.
And for the burning medical cautery, instruct the patient to let their hairs grow long and even. Then make a template of parchment in the shape of a bay leaf.
Then take equal parts (1 drachm each) of French soap and live coal ash, grind them together thoroughly; And make it quickly, so that it does not cool. Then spread the mixture onto your template in the shape of a bay leaf, and place it on the skin near the eyes; If the patient needs treatment for one eye only, work on that one; if both eyes are affected, treat them both. And place a moistened cotton ball under the eye.
And hold the patient's head steady in your hand. Place your two fingers on the medication and press gently. Move them every time the patient feels a burning sensation, as they will feel it like fire.
When you have done this for some time, then remove the medicine with your fingers. And when the biting has passed, then lift the hot iron and see if the paper lifts as well, as it would have done by constraint of fire or by incision. And if so, then it is good.
However, if not, then apply more of the medicine to the spot where it has not opened, so that your work is even, and your eyes sharp.
Then place softened cotton in butter until the heart's fire is extinguished; afterwards, dress the wound with ointment called 'dyafenis' and others, until it is clean.
And if you must guard your work carefully, so that no medicine falls into the eyes.
And if the paper becomes soft afterwards and the hairs prick in the oil, then recommence the medicine on that spot softened by the paper properly, just as you did before. after which dress it until it is healed
And this is the form of the poultice for the eye:
And know that men's eyes differ in size and smallness, and according to this are your constraints.
and the direct path should not be blocked for one who studies this art.
Here is the treatment for fistula by cauterization:
When you treat a fistula as we have said in our divisions of diseases, but your treatment does not help,
Instruct the patient to put their head in your hand; And have his servant hold his head between your hands so that it does not move or turn its head;
Then put moistened cotton in egg white or in juice of purslane on the eye;
Then heat the cautery which is shaped like this:
And pointed at the head like the shape of a pigeon's feather, so that the cautery is sharp;
If you wish, it should be pointed from one end to the other, and if you wish, it should also be like a tent;
However, the one that is pointed is better for your work.
Then press on the fistula if it is open, and remove the pus, and dry it; And if it is closed, open it, and draw fire from the bowels
Afterwards put the hot cauterizing iron on it, and keep your hand on the cautery at the side of the eye nearest the nose, so that your hand does not go mad. And place the cautery in the fat of the eye, and burn it.
If you come to the beginning of the cautery down to the bone, that would be good. If not, then apply the cautery again once more, and do so a second time if necessary, and leave it on for three days.
Then put on cotton moistened in butter, and continue the drying salve treatment until it is healed. If forty days pass without healing, apply a corrosive ointment until the bone is exposed And follow the king's recipe according to what comes afterwards in his chapter.
And there is another manner of cautery for fistulas that some of the ancients mentioned. Understand that this is about a fistula, and find its location Then insert into the opening gently this thin thing: here is the form And they do to the quantity of three-fifths of a penny. And hold your hand firmly over the wound, so that the patient does not move his nose at all, lest the molten lead flow into his eye;
And it is necessary to put on the eye of the patient moistened cotton wool in an egg shell or in water;
The lead, if applied correctly, heals the site of the fistula, and the sinew by miraculous healing.
And if the fistula is healed by the cautery that we have mentioned, it is good. If not, then one must administer a probe to the nose and bring the fistula back to its proper place in the body of the nose.
"for cracks in lips" Many times cracks occur on lips which are called "hairs", especially on children's lips.
When you treat these cracks which we have mentioned in the divisions, and the treatment does not help, then heat up a small cautery scalpel according to this shape:
And quickly pour it into those cracks until it reaches the source;
Then dress the site with wax until it is healed.
When an abscess forms at the root of the throat or in the eye, or on the palate, or at the roots of the teeth, it becomes rotten and round, is inflamed, and turns into a fistula; and you treat it as we have said with incisions, but it does not help at all; Then you must apply the cautery according to the size of the fistula; After the wound or opening of the fistula, keep your hand there until the hot iron reaches its bottom, and at the back of it.
And do this once or twice after the treatment that we have mentioned in treatments, until it is healed.
And if it is cured thus, that is good. And if not, then you must expose the site and remove the rotted bone, according to what you find in its chapter.
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicine but it is not effective, then place the patient's head in your hand; Afterwards heat the cautery whose shape will be described below so that you can put a band around the tooth;
and quickly place the hot cautery inside and hold your hand there until the patient feels heat reaching the root of the tooth.
Afterwards, remove your hand and continue using the cautery as you wish;
Afterward, let the patient fill their mouth with salted water, and hold it for an hour with rich force.
And thus the moving tooth is made firm, and the softened gum constrained, and corrupt moisture dried.
of toothache
If toothache comes from coldness, where there is coldness or wind, and medicines do not help, then it is necessary to use cautery in two ways: And cautery with butter and cautery with fire.
Cautery with butter is done thus: take fresh butter and put it on an iron or brass spoon; Then take cotton, wrap it around the tip of a tent (i.e., make it into a small cone), dip it in melted butter, and quickly place it on the aching tooth; hold it until it cools.
And repeat this often until its effectiveness reaches the root of the tooth. Then, if you want to use cold butter and cotton, dip it in cold butter, place it on the aching tooth, and hold an iron heated over fire close enough for its heat to reach the bottom of the tooth without touching it.
The fire cauteries are of such kind that you should take one made of iron or brass, and it should be thick enough so that the fire does not reach the patient's mouth.
After heating the cautery, of which the form will come later, place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery cools down;
Do this often, for the pain will be relieved that same day or the next.
And it is necessary that the patient fill their mouth with good butter at the time of this cautery, and then apply the hot iron;
And this is the form of the cautery:
And perform a cautery on whichever head you wish, according to your ability.
And this is the form of the cautery iron:
scrofula When the scrophules are of phlegm and cold moisture, and do not yield to digestion by medicines, then heat the hair cautery of which the form comes later, and it should have two openings for the smoke to exit from the other side.
Place the hot cautery on the abscess once or twice until it reaches the base of the abscess.
And if the abscess is small, place the cautery according to its size, and leave it on for three days. Place moist cotton soaked in butter until the burning sensation is gone.
Afterward, treat with ointments and bandages until it is healed.
When moisture prevails over the channels of the lungs, especially when it arises from a cold constitution, then the patient should be made to cough up phlegm first with solvent medications.
Afterward, apply a cautery at the root of the throat, and be careful not to go too high up towards the throat, and only singe it a little.
Afterward, apply another cautery at the junction of the neck and head of the spine, using the cautery called 'clavile' as shown above.
And heal the joint as we have said before until it is whole.
And when all diseases of the lung are from cold dampness, and the patient has no fever or cough, and the disease is chronic, then apply two cauteries to the fleshy part near the wound. And place the second cautery between the breasts, between the two breasts;
And let the cauteries be of the type called 'clavile,' according to the shape described above.
If you see it, apply a cautery at its tip, that is called 'pointe,' of which the shape is described above in the disease of the ears.
And let there be up to thirty points, or however many around it.
Afterward heal the place according to what is said before, and let the cautery be of three rows according to this form:
And because these cauteries are lighter, perform them in three places.
of the displacement of the shoulder joint
When the shoulder blade is dislocated due to moisture and is put back in place but cannot remain there and returns and dislocates again with even a small movement, as we have experienced it, then you must first reduce the dislocation. Then have the patient lie on their back and side; then lift the heart that is inside the titillation with the fingers of your left hand;
And if the joint is dislocated within, then heat the cautery that has two branches, the form of which is thus:
And cauterize the lung until it pierces to the side, and bring the figure of the cautery together with four cauteries;
And therefore cauterization is done with the cautery that has three rows, so that the figures of cauterization are six;
and the nerves are arranged according to the fineness of a thread, and it is the form of the cautery that has three rows:
And sometimes it is joined onto this one nerve, so there are eight cauteries.
Afterwards place on the cautery pieces of broken porridge with salt; afterward let the patient rest and do not move the limbs for a long time until they are well comforted.
And if it is dislocated above, which rarely happens, then make a cautery on the thick part of the cautery clavile, or many cauteries pricking.
For the joint is closed, and the moisture is removed, and the patient is sound.
When coldness and much moisture come to the stomach so that they alter its nature, and catarrh is multiplied in it, and usual methods of treatment do not help, then the patient must be turned onto his back, extend his legs and arms. Then apply three cauteries to the lower part of the breastbone with the quantity of two fingers' width at each cautery on the upper end, and two cauteries outside the two ribs so that the figure of the cauteries forms a triangle with equal distance between them so they do not join together when they discharge pus;
And let the cautery burn so deeply that it reaches the two parts of the heart, and let the shape of the cauteries be according to this form without addition:
And if you see cauterization with a large cautery in the stomach according to this form;
And whoever fears this cautery, cauterize by pricking and pressing on the stomach one point according to the quantity that you see fit; Then cauterize with the entire cautery called 'the point'.
After the treatment that we have discussed previously, let it be without wound.
When pain comes from coldness and moisture and excessive windiness in the liver, so that it is greatly altered from its natural composition by excesses; and if the patient is treated with what we have said in division [treatment] and it does not help him, then the patient must be made to vomit. And place three cauteries according to this form and figure and quantity on the liver, avoiding the hypochondria, where the ribs of the chest come.
And let there be space between each cautery equal to two fingers. And the cauteries on the long parts of the body should not have too much pressure applied from your hand throughout the cautery.
And only burn half of the skin, and let the patient lie down on their right side.
And if they cannot do this, then they should lie down, extend their legs, and raise their arms.
And if it is your wish, then cauterize these cauteries with the scalpel if you are skilled and wise in this art; but be careful not to burn all of the skin, as you would dry out the whole body. And let it not come close to the eye, for the skin is very delicate there, and you will see this clearly.
When there is an abscess on the liver, and you wish to know whether it is in the flesh of the liver or in the omentum: If it's within the flesh, the patient feels pain but not too intense.
And if it is under the skin, extreme pain is felt.
Then when this treatment fails according to doctors, the patient must be placed on their head.
And then press down on the spot where the abscess is, and then heat the cautery which resembles a ray, of which here is the shape: Then cauterize with the cautery until the flesh is burned, and let it come to a boil until all the matter comes out.
After that, according to the cure of the roots until it's healed.
And only those who have studied medicine extensively for a long time should use this cautery, and through whom many of these diseases have been cured at least once.
Therefore he can boldly act, nevertheless it seems to me that it is better to leave it alone.
Regarding the cautery for pleurisy
The ancients said that for pleurisy, cauteries made from the roots of aristologus should be used in this manner: Take a long root of aristologus, as large as you can find and dry, and also thick and long like your two fingers; And grind it in oil, and take it to the fire, and cauterize with the cautery between the navel and the neck, and make two small cauteries a little lower in the part that is below the beard.
And two cauteries between the fifth rib and the sixth, inclining slightly behind; And one cautery on the breast, and another above the stomach, and one between the two shoulders, and two on both sides of the breast below the cautery that is between the two shoulders.
And do not press your hand, but open it as if smelling something.
Some ancient authors say that some people used to heat a cautery like a razor and place it between the ribs until it reached the boil. And when it hurts, as we have said regarding the boil on the liver.
But in this case, there is fear that the patient may die now, or a fistula occurs which cannot be healed.
Regarding the mouse
When you treat the disease of the mouse with the methods that we have said in the chapter on treatments, and it does not help, then there are three ways of cautery which are all good:
There is also a method such that you make three or four cauteries, lining them up according to the length of the mouse's body, following the shape of the liver cautery we mentioned earlier.
And do not rush your hand for the entire cautery; let the patient often lie on his back.
And another method of cauterization is to heat the cautery which has two threads, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder.
And lift the heart which is located at the breast, where the edge of the patient's coat comes towards the left; and let the elevation by which you lift the heart be according to the heart, according to the length of the body, and let the cautery be according to the width of the body.
Then put in the two burning threads until the heart is pierced on the other side; then pull out the cautery, and thus there will be four.
And if you wish, cauterize with all of the cautery having three threads.
After the treatment when it has thrown off corruption for a long time, it is better than the other treatments mentioned before.
Cautery should not be used on someone with dropsy except in the manner called "ascites.
When you treat according to the methods that we have said in divisions, and your treatment does not help, then you must make four cauteries around the throat, one on the stomach, one on the liver, and one on the breast, and two behind the back on the spine, and one near the nipple. And let the cautery be held close to the point of the heart.
Afterwards, leave the cautery open for a long time to throw out corruption, and do not neglect the care of the patient after the cautery. And healing would hasten, and both intentions will be together with the help of God.
The shape of the cautery for the belly is the one we have shown before. And that for the back be olive-shaped, according to what has been placed here before.
When the feet are swollen in someone who is dropsical, and are full of yellow water, you must cauterize on the back of the foot between the little toe and the ring finger. And lift your hand with the cautery without turning it.
And do not go too deep in by force, lest you spill out the yellow water, and let the cautery be according to this shape:
Then make two cauteries on each leg at the point of the shinbone. And let the cautery be long, one under the knee in front and the other behind, in the middle of the thigh.
And let cauteries burn unchecked without being treated, until the boil discharges.
After treating other wounds as we have described.
When coldness and moisture cause problems in the stomach, rendering the retaining and digestive powers of the stomach and intestines powerless, so that they cannot be cured by any remedies; And you see the patient suffering greatly and having strong virtues, then perform a great cautery on the stomach according to what is written earlier about the cautery of the stomach. And four small cauteries around the navel like a small key-cautery, and two cauteries on the hips.
And if you see moisture abounding and the patient suffering greatly, then make one cautery on the point of the chin, one cautery on each ear, and two small cauteries on the stomach near the large one; for treatment is helpful when there is good assistance.
Of the treatment of hemorrhoids
When hemorrhoids are in the fundament, one or more, and are old with thick cold moist corrupt humors, and have been treated by division as we have said but there is no improvement, then perform cauteries: Three on the spine of the back, one directly below the shoulder-blades in a triangular pattern, and two below the navel.
If you think his stomach is cold and the flesh not cooked, and you see the face swelling, then apply one large fire cautery on the stomach as mentioned before, another on the liver, and another on the spleen using a pointed cautery. and let the cautery remain for a long time. After treating it, heal it until it is clean.
When you grasp the boil, first heat the cautery that resembles a razor, and then place it completely burning on that grasped boil; And let your hand remain there until the cautery reaches the root of the vein where blood flows.
do this once or twice, and if there are many boils, cauterize each one as we have said; afterwards, treat them with healing ointments until they are healed.
And if you cauterize with a large cautery on boils, it will be more helpful.
If the patient cannot endure incision or opening, which we will discuss in its proper place, then there comes such a disease that can only be cured by cautery.
When a fistula comes to someone and it is inflamed and emits corruption and corrupt moistures, you should prove it with a thin probe entirely throughout its length, and make sure that you know the entire length of the probe.
Then heat the cautery that resembles a razor, and insert it into the fistula according to how much tent is inside it, and recommence with the cautery until the rotted and corrupted flesh is burned, once, or twice, or three times depending on what is needed.
And guard against burning the nerves that are nearby, and large veins.
If the fistula goes into the body of the bladder or intestines, beware of this place; and do not perform cautery except in a fleshy area; consider that it is not passing.
After treating the place until it is clean, and if the wound is healed, and the matter has been removed for a long time, then know that the place is entirely healthy.
And if the matter is not removed, know that the place is putrefied, and the bone is rotting at its core. And thus as one of those things which we will say in their place.
When pain from cold comes to the kidneys, and there is great windiness, and no sign of menstruation appears, then you must perform cautery on the kidneys on either side with the clavicle cautery that we have spoken of before.
And if we cauterize it midway, there will be three cauteries in a row.
Of the bladder And when the bladder is weak and cold due to moisture so that the patient retains urine, then make two cauteries on each side above the bladder where the pubic hairs begin, each cautery being as long as a hazelnut.
And make one cautery behind the back, or two if needed.
And let the cauteries be shaped like a crow's foot according to the shape mentioned above.
When the womb is cold and moist, preventing conception, and the flowers are corrupted with late terminations; And when they do come, there is great pain: Then it is necessary to make three cauteries around the pudendum as we have said regarding the bladder cautery, and two cauteries behind the back.
And let the cauteries be shaped like a crow's foot, as we have said.
When viscous moisture descends to the box of the hip joint, causing it to move from its place, the sign is that one thigh appears longer than the other when measured together.
And the location of the joint's departure is found, so you should cauterize the patient around the hip socket with an iron cautery shaped like a circle, and mark around the socket in front of where it turns, so that the socket lies within the circle.
And let the cauteries be such as those used for cauterizing the stomach.
And if these cauteries are not available, then make three large olive-shaped ones; let the cauteries be as long as all the fingers.
And apply the treatment until it is healed.
Of pain in the hair When pain comes in the hip socket due to coldness and dampness, and despite being treated according to what we have said earlier, the patient is not cured, and the disease is chronic: Then it is necessary for you to purge the patient of thick humors using foul-tasting pills or other similar good pills. After that, perform the cautery;
And there are two ways to perform the cautery: That is, using burning medicines together, or fire cautery.
Fire cautery has many methods, one of which is:
Thus: cauterize over the haunch bone with three triangular cauteries in this shape, and make them deep and wide. Leave a space of two fingers between each cautery; let the cauteries be olive-shaped.
Sometimes, one cauterizes in the middle on top of the haunch bone, resulting in four cauteries arranged like this:
And if you wish to do so, cauterize along the circular line we mentioned earlier for dislocating the haunch;
But do it in such a way that the circle contains the entire haunch, and all the fat around the heart is burned.
And this is the manner that is done in sciatica, when the pain holds in the thigh and does not reach to the leg.
And if it comes down to the thigh and the leg, apply two cauteries where the patient feels the pain, and one cautery above the ankle on the left side.
And let the cautery be made of steel, and let the thickness of the heart be burned.
And if the patient feels that the pain extends down to two fingers from the foot or close by, cauterize there three points or four with the cautery called 'points'. And if more is needed, do likewise.
And if it seems that the pain is below the knee towards the thigh, apply a circular cautery with great care in all your cauteries, ensuring you do not burn too deeply and damage the nerves and large arteries, causing further harm to the patient.
And I myself have seen many who performed a fire cautery on the ankle of the foot, and they left it until the leg became entirely swollen, and the foot likewise, and it was pierced and corrupted throughout. After a stomach remedy that caused death
And if the pain is in both parts together, perform a cautery on one and on the other, according to this manner.
The wise men say in the cautery for the haunch that it should be made of iron and be as thick at the tip as a goose quill or slightly less, and have spaces between each other, with one space equal to the thickness of a barley grain.
And let the tweezers be made of two parts, and also like tongs, with one handle made of iron.
And this is the shape:
And it should be heated until it is all red-hot and glowing, then place it on the box of the sick person's hair, and turn it towards the healthy side;
and cauterize once with one cautery, and leave it for three days; And then make an emplaster of butter, and let the wound remain open for a long time; after treating it with ointment until it is healed.
Albucasis says that we refrain from using this cautery because of its intense heat, and few people use it;
nevertheless, those who can endure it are benefited by good cauteries.
The cautery of burning medicine is this: you should make an instrument with tweezers, into which the edge of the door descends, and it should be made of bronze or iron on one side, long enough for its width, and at the top there are two noses, each with the thickness of a finger between them; And let them be opened wide and above, and join together according to this shape:
Next, place the box of the comb upon the sick person lying on their healthy side, and then press your hand firmly upon the box of the comb; Next, place between the two circles of hot iron, heated in the fire for one hour, and let the patient endure its warmth and burning.
For it finds therein a biting like that of fire;
and when the biting has passed, lift your hand with the instrument and remove the hot comb, leaving it on for three days, and apply butter until the blackness of the scorch is removed; And leave it on for three more days until corruption appears;
And this would be the final aid after treatment with ointments, until he is healed.
And if the pain has spread to the thigh or leg, make one instrument that draws blood according to what you did for the comb.
And this is the method of hot cautery, which I have written about in my treatise on the correction of medicine. Take alkali and live lime, an equal amount of each, grind them together, and put them in a new pot. If there is a small hole there, then let the point of a razor enter it;
If there is a small hole there, then let the point of a razor enter it; and place thereupon another pot well stoppered, and put upon it alkali and warm water, until you have two pots full of the powders which you can easily grasp with your hand;
and leave it thus until hot water and liquid descend into the well-stopped pot, then take all that water and pour it upon hot alkali as before.
And then it will be very hot and ready for use in many medical operations and cauteries of other limbs.
For it performs the work of fire and has other medicines with which one can cauterize the hair well, such as pitch and honey of almonds and hot water with soap, all these things mixed together.
And Galen tells us of a cure where a man was healed from the pain of his hair and sciatic vein, and he praised it greatly, saying that no other treatment was used, and he was healed at once when this cure was performed, as told hereafter.
And thus you should take some fresh and dry verdigris [copper(II) acetate], grind it well with a bit of fat, and apply it on the thigh, knee, and calf where the pain resides, and bind it.
And leave it for three hours until the patient no longer feels the burning sensation.
And then make him enter a bath until his body is a little warmed up, and lay him in bed, and the pain will all go away and he will be healed.
And know that no one should use such cauteries except after evacuating blood from the body.
And Dioscorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with goat's bile, it helps greatly;
And this is how the cautery should be made. Take linen, grease it with old oil, and place it on the depression between the big toe of the foot and the one called the 'fossicle'.
After taking dry goat bile and heating it on fire until it becomes charcoal, you should place it on wool and let it cool.
And repeat this process again until you think by sight that the heat reaches the thigh and the pain ceases.
And this type of cautery is called 'goat's cautery'.
**of the pain in the back**
When pain comes to the back, whether from falling or impact or excessive bleeding, or from similar matter spread coldly, in none of these cases does fire cautery help except for that which comes from the infusing of cold matter.
It is necessary that after the patient has been relieved with fetid pills or similar ones, you perform three rows of cauteries marked with ash on their back where the pain resides, and in each row five or more cauteries according to the strength and amount that the patient can endure.
And let the cautery be made according to the cautery called 'poins';
And if you see, make 3 or 4 cauteries on the median cautery of the shoulder in this form:
Often this disease comes to small children, and the sign of its onset is that they have short breath when they stand up, and fear; And you will find on the lower spine of the back, near the appearance that comes above the other spines.
When you see this and wish to cure it, cauterize with the cautery of a cell according to this shape: So that the cauterizing iron grips evenly each part of the spine.
And if you wish to do so, cauterize around the spine at intervals of two or three lines, with the points close together.
Then cleanse the wound until it is sound according to what we have said, and make sure you do not apply cautery in a place where there is an abscess near a nerve.
de la dolor des jointes
When pains in the joints are caused by moistures that spread throughout each limb of the body, and when pain comes into the feet, which physicians properly call 'podagra,' and when it is caused by coldness and cannot be cured by medications, then it should be treated with cauteries in this manner:
Make many cauteries around the ankle joint, and let the cautery be olive-shaped according to this form:
And if it is necessary to prick the surface of the foot, perform cautery with the cautery called "the point". And if the pains reach the knees and other joints, which happens often, make 3 or 4 cauteries on each knee, olive-shaped on both sides.
And if you need more, then do more, but keep your hand steady until the brand of the heart's blade is burned.
And if the pains descend to the knees and back, then administer the cautery that we have mentioned in this chapter.
And if the pains are in the hands, then make punctures around the fistula two lines away.
And if there remains no pain at the base, then make punctures on each joint and on the hair of the hand;
And if pains reach to the elbows or shoulders, then cauterize each part, and have the patient keep a good regimen and take medicines.
But if you provide good care and purge phlegm, it will be healed with God's help.
When rupture comes to the joints, and the bowels descend to the thighs, and it is recent, then you must ensure that when you see him being treated, he does not eat on that day. And let him use things that relieve the belly, so that the wind descends from his belly;
Then have him sit on his back between your hands, and tell him to pull his ankle until the bowels are restored, and then bind them at your two elbows, and press firmly below the rupture on the bone of the wrist, and that is one sign that should resemble half a circle above the body;
Then heat the cautery of which this is the shape
Until it is white and casts shadows Then reset the intestines to their place. And the minister must hold his hand so that they do not slip backwards.
And open the patient's thighs widely, and place a cushion and a servant beneath them, and another serving the hands that hold him.
Then place the cautery on the sign with all your strength, holding it with your right hand and pushing until you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, then begin again with even greater force until you feel the bone. And be careful that the intestines do not slip out while applying the cautery That you do not burn yourself And that by this the patient does not die or suffer some other harm.
And know that if you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your work is worth nothing.
The cauteries for children should be thin according to their size, and those for large individuals should also be proportionately large.
After three days, treat the wound from the cautery with butter until the burn is healed;
After treating other wounds until they are sound, let the patient lie on their back for 40 days so that the wound is properly healed.
and it is necessary to let his ligatures remain loose for a long time, so that his bowels do not protrude when he gets up from bed.
And after 40 days, when he wants to get up, give him a well-made bandage, and let him wear it for another 40 days.
and have good rest, so that he works little and guards against excessive consumption of drink and food, and against too loud laughing
And if he follows this instruction, he will be entirely healed.
And I shall tell hereafter the treatment of cutting in its chapter.
When wounds come in other bellies and are known, and you see that they do not grow any further, then make a cautery with the cautery rope according to its quantity, and burn one-third of it near the heart after treating according to what we have said
And some of the ancients have said that it should be cauterized with the cautery at three angles according to this form:
But first mark the beginning of the fistula and draw a line along its width above the fistula, and another below it, and then carefully perform the cautery incision.
But the first cautery is lighter and gentler.
of past pain in any limb When pain comes to any limb, either from falling or being struck, and that pain lasts a long time, and medical treatments are ineffective, then it should be cauterized with the cautery called 'point', and the cautery should be applied according to the length of the limb, its smallness, weakness, power, location, and twistings, and the severity of the pain.
If it is without the first cautery, so much the better;
If that name, recommence another cautery on top of it, for such is the custom that it should move to the limb that is nearby; therefore you must make the cauteries until the patient is healed.
Some people are helped sometimes by cautery with great benefit, especially those illnesses that come from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
When you cauterize the wound, take care if the disease is at its beginning, and if it is cured according to what we have said in the division, and does not spread nor remain, and you doubt that corruption will seize the whole patient, then make five cauteries on top of it: One at the nape, and another towards the forehead at the end of the eyebrows; And two on the two horns, and one behind on the little bone;
Hold your hand so that the cautery reaches to the bone, and so that the scabs come out so that the vapors of thick humors can escape;
And cauterize upon the mouse as it is before.
And if the swelling is spread throughout. And if it is clearly perceptible, then you must cauterize it with those cauteries that we have mentioned at the head, and one cautery near to it, and two cauteries upon the spine of the neck, and six cauteries upon the spine of the back, and one large one upon the chest and another near it, and two upon each shoulder. And two upon the ribs, and two upon the breasts of the lungs, and one on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands.
Be careful not to burn the nerves that are situated under the buttocks.
And sometimes one cautery is made upon the bone of the wrist, and another upon the bone of the stomach, and another upon the liver.
Know that the more cauteries you apply, the greater the benefit to the patient.
And know that the patient feels no pain from the cautery as the healthy do, because the body is already completely corrupted.
And it is necessary that the cauteries be large and small according to the members and joints, as you will find them in the various ways of using irons.
After treating the place with flour of doves' feathers mixed with honey, continue treatment until it is healed.
When swelling comes to any limb and is treated with medicines and oils and plasters, but it is not healed, then perform cauteries on the limb according to its size and thickness.
And let the cautery be somewhat deep in the flesh near the heart; then treat with ointments until it is healed.
And sometimes one performs cautery on the hand and foot and back at the exit of the nerve that moves the limb, and thus if the swelling is removed;
but nonetheless let no one meddle therein unless he knows well the limbs and the exits of the moving nerves in the body.
When the illness called 'albaras' has progressed and medical remedies are of no avail, then cauterize it with a somewhat deep cautery according to the quantity of flesh around the heart until the blackness is removed and its color changes;
Then apply a poultice of wheat flour and lentil flour mixed with rose oil, plantain leaves, donkey's blood, and almond milk, each ingredient taking up one part. And mix everything together, tie it with a cloth, and apply it to the place until it becomes sound.
"Treatment of Chancres by Cautery"
When a cancer begins, and you see it halt, then cauterize it with a fire cautery that seems like a circle, all around the circumference of the cancer.
And likewise, the wise said that one should perform cautery in the middle of the cancer;
But I do not think this is good advice, for I fear that it may cause ulceration and corruption, and I have seen this happen before;
And a more appropriate thing to do is to perform cautery around it, using the cautery called 'circular', as we have mentioned in many cauteries.
When someone has an illness called 'adubelati', and it is prolonged either because of the excessiveness that it causes or because of the weakness of the patient due to old age (that is, being too elderly), and they have a shortage of blood, or because of the time; And you shall see it hasten to die: Then cauterize it with many small cauteries, pricking all around: Leave it like this afterwards. For she will hasten to die.
And if you see that it is piercing all the way through the cautery, then heat the cautery which has this shape:
And place your hand on the middle of that illness called 'adubelati' until the cautery pierces the heart, and make the cautery such that the patient feels drawn towards it in such a way that the course of corruption is eased.
After the treatment, until he is perfectly healed.
Another kind of illness there is called 'corrodens', which is nothing other than the consumption of limbs, for it consumes them just as fire consumes dry logs.
If you see this disease in a place that can tolerate a cautery with fire, then heat the cauteries, both small and large, according to what is needed for the location where the disease is.
Then cauterize it on all sides until you remove all the corruption, leaving nothing of it, so that all that is corrupted is removed.
And then leave it for 3 days, and put on the cauterized places a poultice with oil until the burns of the fire are removed, and all corruption.
After the treatment of hot fomentations
And if, after three days, no healthy flesh appears, then it's good;
If not, then start cauterizing again where the corruption remains.
And this method has sometimes been cured with medicated ointment instead of a fire cautery;
However, the fire cautery is of greater help, and I have already mentioned the cure using medicated ointment in the section on divisions: Take what you need.
of warts that come on the feet Often, at the feet, a disease called "clos" arises, which is a large, broken thing that wounds the foot.
And the cautery for this disease is done in two ways. namely, fire cautery and cautery with hot water.
Fire cautery should be heated like an oven poker, made of good iron to fit the nail evenly with delicate edges;
Then place it hot onto the nail and turn your hand around the nail until you reach the tip of the nail; Leave it like that for 3 days until it begins to discharge pus; Then apply a poultice of crushed wild mallows with salt, leave it overnight and the nail will fall out along with its roots.
Then heal the place with ointment around the flesh until it is clean.
If they are turned away from the body, which often happens in hands and feet, you must bring a cautery of hot water. And it is done in this way: Take a bronze or iron rod or an oven poker and place it on the nail and around it, that is to say, for warts; And place the funnel on so that it encompasses all around, then put some warm water inside, and hold your hand tight, and press your hand while turning such that the edge of the funnel reaches the root of the nail, and can find the deep warm water path even to the root.
And let the patient endure the biting sensation of the hot water for about an hour; Then leave it thus, and it will be uprooted entirely along with all its roots.
Thus do one after another until you remove all those that are on the body, then treat them with ointments that generate flesh.
When someone shakes due to coldness of the nerves, or quartan fever or others, you must perform four cauteries or five on the spine of the back, one between each spine; and one cautery on the foot, and one above the stomach at the 'olive' cautery;
So it will stop trembling, and the saints of the cold illness will be restored.
No part of the body appears more often to emit stinking pustules than those coming from corrupted matter.
If when they first appear, you must perform a cautery on each head of the pimple: A fine cauterizing iron made of myrtle wood, from which the tip is heated in fire, or from the long root of artemisia, or from the lenticular cautery.
And sometimes they cauterize at the beginning when they appear, according to this manner, and they cannot grow further afterwards, but the excess from which they come is severed, and they are clean.
but it is necessary that this be done after the evacuation of blood.
Many times there are great flows of blood from the artery that is cut at the wound that comes to the backside, or in the incision of an abscess, or in the cautery of the limb, and similar things and it is very difficult to stop.
And nevertheless when this happens to someone, quickly place your two index fingers on the wound of the vein and press strongly until the blood is quieted under your fingers and no more drops come out
Then place on the fire olive oil cauteries of various sizes, both small and large, until they are all red.
Then take one [cautery], whether large or small depending on the wound and where the artery runs, place it on that vein where you hold your finger, and hold the cautery there until the bleeding stops.
And if it jumps out when you lift your fingers from the vein, and the cautery is extinguished, so take quickly another one of the cauteries that are on fire.
And keep doing this one after another until the bleeding is stopped;
and beware that you do not burn the nerve nearby, and that no other harm comes to the patient;
And know that when blood flows from an artery, it cannot be stopped well unless it is done by one of the four ways we have mentioned: Either by cautery, or by extracting [the arrow] if it has not been treated, or by tightly tying a thread, or by applying medications that have the power to stop bleeding. And let it be tied and bound properly.
Which will bring about stopping of bleeding is tying very tightly with rags or putting hot things on top, or similar things, if it profits little or not at all.
And if this happens to anyone and he does not have a doctor or medication nearby, then he should place his second finger on the vein wound as we have said, and stretch it well so that it presses firmly upon the wound and the vein. And do not move the finger, but wet it with cold water often until the blood is frozen and solidified and pressed.
And make such signs beforehand as are needed for cauteries and medications.
We have told you in the first chapter all diseases for which a fire cautery or hot medicine is needed, as well as their causes and instruments and forms of cauteries.
And I have placed this chapter from head to foot in the previous one, and I will go along the same path in this chapter so that what one wants may be found more easily.
And before I begin this one, dear friend, it is necessary that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first one about cauteries, and therefore it requires greater caution.
For in the work of this chapter there are often evacuations of blood when opening veins, incising abscesses, treating wounds, extracting arrows, cutting into stones, and similar things. There is doubt and fear, and death comes to many
And I warn you not to attempt anything foolish. For many people come seeking treatment. such people come from those who tend to their illness so poorly that they die easily due to the harshness of their disease and the severity of its harm. And one must fear these things.
And there are some who give it meaning and say: wait, I am healed"; and the disease is spiteful.
You should not consent to those who come to you with this manner, but rather put greater care into your honor than in your desire for wealth, and do not open yourself foolishly but wisely only to those whose character you know well and whom you can take in and receive praise from.
and use prognosis and diagnosis in treating your patients so that health may be restored
And this will help you attain good reputation, glory, and the memory of praise.
"Dear son, May Our Lord grant you good understanding and uprightness, and if it pleases Him to inspire you with the holy breath of His hand, Amen."
"I have arranged this chapter in sections for you to consider, according to what is before the chapter on cupping, which I have outlined from beginning to end, so that you may find more easily what you will need."
Know that this disease often occurs in children during childbirth, especially when the baby's head is constricted too tightly;
And sometimes this occurs due to a hidden cause which one does not know.
And I have never seen this disease outside of children, and it always ended in death for those I saw; Therefore, it seems to me that it is worth leaving the work in such cases.
And I saw a child whose head was full of water, and each day it swelled so that he could no longer hold up his head;
And the moisture increased so much that he died, and this moisture collected under the bone above the hip, between the heart and the bone;
And if the moisture is between the heart and the bone, and the abscess is small, then you should make a wide cut in the middle of the head;
And let it be as long as two fingers, until the moisture flows out.
Here is the form of the spina bifida:
If the moisture has grown more and the swelling is larger, then make two incisions in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
And if the moisture is under the bone, and you see these signs: the corners of the head turned upwards on both sides, and water jumps out when you press it with your hand from within, but it does not respond to you; If thou must cut into the head three cuts according to this manner:
After incision, remove all moisture forcefully. After binding the cuts with bandages and powders, put on wine and oil, and leave it thus until the fifth day;
Then unbind it and treat the wound with dressings and anointments. Keep the head bandaged evenly, and give the patient dry food from a moist place until the limb is strengthened and healed.
And another method of incision is to observe where the abscess appears largest, and the gathering of water;
For sometimes it is in front Sometimes behind Sometimes on the right And sometimes on the left.
Therefore cut where the abscess appears and the collection of water is full, cutting according to your ability;
And beware that thou dost not cut the artery And the windpipe of blood, so that the patient dies from bleeding and evacuation of moisture.
When it happens to someone that they have a disease called "catarrach" in the ears or the nostril, and the disease is chronic, and treatment with medicine does not help, then the last resort is to use cauterization along with cutting the two arteries.
It is therefore necessary, when you cover the eyes, that the patient turn his head back. Afterwards, rub the spot with a rough cloth until the arteries appear, then have the patient twist his neck with the whole cloth. Then look where the vein lies, and its location is behind both ears, and it is rarely missed.
Then mark the locations with a point, then cut both sides with a sharp spatula two parts deep until the vein reaches the bone, and this should be done at the wide part of the head.
And if you see, put the spatula under the artery and cut it above, cutting also like two fingers across.
And when the vein is cut, then blood flows out continuously upward.
And if the artery does not appear when felt, then you must measure the width of three fingers, then mark and cut until it reaches the bone.
And about six ounces of blood should be let out, and sometimes a little more or less, according to what the patient can endure, and the fullness of the artery.
Then examine the wound If it remains on the sharp bone tip, if the abscess does not drain well, then compress the wound and bind it, anointing it until it is healed.
de emigrainne When chronic migraine comes with severe catarrh and moisture from tears, and heat in the temples, along with long-standing madness and similar things, and even though medical treatments are used, none of them help, then cut the arteries of the temples and cauterize, as we have described.
And the method of extracting them is such that the patient shaves the hair from their temples and listens to the artery that opens in the temple, for it beats well there, and is rarely heard outside except in some men who are excessively cold
And if it is heard, then the patient presses on their neck with some cloths, then rubs the spot with a rough cloth, and applies warm water to that spot until the artery appears clearly Then take the spatula of which this is the shape: Then carefully cut through the skin until you reach the artery, then lift it up with tweezers, and carefully separate it from the tissues beneath each part
If the artery is slender, cut it with the tip of the nail clipper, then cut off that part according to the quantity of two fingers. But if it is not severed, blood will not flow freely throughout.
And draw out blood for six days, up to three times;
And if the artery is large, you must tie it in two places with a strong doubled silk thread so that decay does not reach there before the wound heals, and let the blood flow freely;
then cut off the excess that is between the two ties at that same hour, and then, if you wish, cauterize with a knife cautery up to the bone until the head is severed;
And this is the best work if the patient has no fever and is of warm temperament. For cauteries are helpful in drying out moistures; So they are more helpful for moistures.
For the extraction of arrows, it is necessary that one fills the place with old cotton and then places well-made tents upon it;
And when they are dislocated, they should be treated with dry medicines that cause flesh to grow, and with compresses, until they are healed.
And if the artery is severed as often as you work on it, then hasten to cover it with a cautery, or use the place of quicklime and press your hand until the bleeding stops. And if you do not have this (quicklime) present, then place your fist on the wound until the blood is frozen, and rinse the wound with cold water until the bleeding stops, and let it be bound as necessary.
And there must be one thick spike of space between the two knives, and then when you have indicated the two places with them, heat the iron until it comes close to the bone, and cut the vein in two places. And let them be kept apart between the two shoulders, for it is not entirely suited to this cautery altogether.
This is the form of the cautery
And it is easier and quicker in extracting the artery to cauterize the vein with this sharp cautery of two parts, but let the points be well spaced so that their heat lasts longer. For when the material is too thin, it retains less heat.
tears When the tears of the eyes descend from the veins that are above the forehead on the head, and it does not help to apply medication there, and you see the face of the sick person reddening, and feel tremors on the forehead like shivering and the eyes are thin and moist so that the hairs of the eyelashes have fallen out, and the eyelids are heated and burned by the heat of the tears, then this treatment is necessary And the ancients called it "treatment for contusion", and this is what you should do to the person who has this illness: let them have hairs on their forehead, then make three incisions equally spaced according to the length of the forehead
And the ancients called it "treatment for contusion", and this is what you should do to the person who has this illness: let them have hairs on their forehead, then make three incisions equally spaced according to the length of the forehead and let one of the incisions be just like two fingers wide all around the forehead going downwards until reaching the nose, and let the other two be on either side of the eyelids above them, but beware of cutting into the arteries that are on both sides above the eyelids
And keep your hand away from the continuity of the two lower jaws, let each wound be the quantity of three fingers wide across the join.
And have ready a piece of sponge and many cloths to wipe away the blood, then insert the spatula two parts from this point: here is the form:
From the incision that runs from the temple to the second incision. And peel off all the flesh that is between the two incisions up to where the sinew is on the bone, then do likewise from the middle incision up to the other second one, and then remove this spatula. If you insert the tool called "cultellarium" into the first slit, it is very sharp on one side and not sharp on the other side. This is its shape:
And place the thin blade towards the flesh near the heart, and the blunt blade towards the bone, and press until it reaches the middle fissure.
And cut all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes until the incision is continuous up to those that open from the heart, and then do likewise in the middle furrow up to the other opening.
Then remove blood evenly, and press the area for blood collection.
Then place in each furrow a wisp of old cotton, and put moist cloths soaked in wine, oil, and rose water on top, ensuring no abscesses come.
On the third day, untie the linen and apply abundant cold water, then treat with basilicon ointment with rose oil, and other treatments for wounds until healed.
If some come with catarrh habitually, and you see the eyes thin and small, and weakened sight, and burnt papers; and the hair falls out, and deep in the head there is a burning pain, and the patient sneezes. Then know by these accidents that those matters and that catarrh come only from many veins, and the proper remedy for it is this.
And have the patient lie on their back, then make a long incision down the middle of the forehead, and another across its width. And begin from the left temple to the right temple, with the incision reaching down to the bone; and keep your hand away from the nerves of the temples that move during chewing.
And when the bone is uncovered, wipe away all the blood with a sponge, and then open the two lips of the wound and put in cotton wool and strips of linen. Then place compresses soaked in wine and oil on top, and guard against a hot abscess.
When it is removed, you must rub the bone until flesh begins to grow, then dress it with drying agents that prevent inflammation of the flesh.
In this manner: Take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony, and make a poultice; And apply this to wounds to prevent inflammation throughout.
Chapter: "The Stopping of the Ears"
Everything that falls into the ears is one of four things: either grain, or beast, or a pebble or similar thing such as iron; or seed, such as peas, beans, peas or flowing things like water and vinegar and similar things.
When something like a stone falls into the ear or in some other manner that does not fit with the ear and does not grow within it, then place the ear to the sun.
If you see the stone, then apply a drop of violet oil or sesame oil, then perform extraction; and when the sneezing begins, and block his nostrils as it comes on, and put around the ear compresses of cloth or wool; And they hold the ear above.
Often fire comes from this treatment;
If it does not come to a head, use small forceps for extraction; here is the form:
If it bursts open with the forceps, that's good;
If not, then use small forceps with a doubled-over blade;
And if it still doesn't come out, make a hole with a needle and insert the end of the hole into the ear opening with force, then plug what is around the hole with soft wax so that air cannot enter through the hole; Then draw fire strongly, for often it comes out as we have said;
And if it still does not come out in this way, then take some glue that birds use, and put some on an instrument that is pointed for this purpose, and put some cotton around it; Then press the glue onto the stone or whatever it may be, and draw fire.
And if it does not come from all these things that we have said, then hurry to cut the ear before the boil becomes hot and causes spasm;
And the manner of cutting is such that first you make the patient lie down on his back, and draw out blood according to their strength, then have the patient sit between your hands, turn the ear upwards, and make a small cut at the root of the ear where it hangs. Make the cut like a crescent moon until you reach the stone, then extract it according to your strength and quickly suck it into your mouth;
And continue this treatment until they are healed.
And if it is a grain that is inside and it becomes swollen, then administer extraction.
And if it cannot come out, then administer the thin and subtle spatulum according to this form: And help incise that boil.
But do not do this when you think that the grain is moist due to the moisture of the ear until you have made many attempts;
Then extract with delicate forceps and tweezers, as we have said, so that the extraction is aligned.
Therefore, in the case of water entering the ear, the patient should first sneeze forcefully and plug the ear with soft cotton. And lie down on the same ear where the water is. If it flows out by itself, that's good.
If not, then take many pins according to the length of your thin fingers, and heat them a little in the fire; And have the patient insert one or two of these pins into their ear piercing through to the other side, and then pierce another pin on top of the one in the ear; And continue doing this with one pin after another until all the water flows out, and thus it will all flow out;
And if you wish, take a reed, insert one end into the ear and hold the other end in fire until it chars;
Then repeat this with other reeds until all the water flows out, as we have said earlier.
In extracting a small creature like a flea or similar, treat it as we have said in the section on dividing;
But if it [the dislocation] is of great size so that one can feel it, then bring forth an extraction with pincers. And this is the easiest thing to remove that exists within the ear.
When extracting worms that are inside the ears, if you treat them as we have described in the division and treatment of distillations, but the treatment does not help, then you must examine the ear in sunlight: If no worms appear, then take them out with delicate pincers; if they do not appear, then use the tube that is depicted here:
And let it be narrow below and wide above. And insert its most subtle end into the ear according to the extent of the patient's suffering, then suck strongly through the entire tube; Do this often until all the worms come out.
And if they do not obey coming out, then stuff cotton around the tube as I have described in the stone treatment;
And if they still do not come out as we have described, then bring forth distillations that the ancients have proven in the killing of worms; you will find them in the treatment of distillations.
And then distill your oil and medicines onto this instrument, as shown here: And let it be of silver or fine brass underneath with small holes, and above for distillation;
and to press during distillation, have ready an instrument of well-made brass for this purpose; and if you wish, take a razor and wrap cotton around its point neatly; then pour your oil or juice into the funnel, along with whatever medicine you wish to use; and place the funnel in the ear;
then insert the razor with all its cotton into the ear, pressing your hand gently until the oil is distilled cleanly from it; And when the patient feels it inside, the distillation should be placed in a heated vessel over the fire before being distilled into the ear; But guard against it being too cold, for then the medicine would not be effective.
Chapter: "The Stopping of the Ears"
No child is born without any holes in their ears;
And this same thing happens to people due to impacted wounds or a birthmark inside the ear, and these impacts sometimes penetrate deep into the ear so that one cannot see them.
Sometimes it happens that there is no opening and none can be seen.
Therefore, if one cannot see it because it has penetrated deep, it is difficult to treat in many cases. But if it can be seen, you must put the ear of the patient to the sun. And look inside: If you see the operation clearly, then perform all this procedure for which these are the forms:
And let it be sharp and cutting both before and behind, so that it does not wound the ear;
If the operation is a birthmark or on the flesh of the ear, then hold it with fine forceps and cut it lightly until all that flesh is removed.
And if the operations are deeply embedded in the ear, then take a light and fine razor and heat it slightly on the fire, then place it on the body of the ear.
If you feel the operation from which the patient feels pain in hearing, pierce it lightly, but be careful not to damage the nerves of the ear.
Then place in the ear a plug according to the width of the opening, and use Egyptian ointment for the dressing. Do this several days until the wound is healed, or take a plug and use rosewater for moistening, and sprinkle powdered vitriol upon it.
And if you see the ear swollen, then remove the plug and insert another plug moistened in wax made of rose oil and beeswax, until the swelling is gone. Then continue treating it until it is healed.
"And if there is discharge of blood, take a sponge and wring it out in cold water, then place it on the ear. Use other remedies that stop the discharge of blood, which are found in treatises on distillations."
This substance that comes on papers from the eyes when they are moist and then dry, you should stretch it out using tweezers and pinchers, and scrape it off with a spathula from its roots. Then place powdered vitriol on the wound.
And if it does not heal, then cauterize it with a subtle lenticular cautery, and after the incision, the cauterization should be moved.
And many times they grow back, when some things remain at their roots; And when they are burned with fire, those roots are singed and do not return.
"Hailstorm" Often come onto the eyes certain things that resemble hail in shape and hardness, and therefore this illness is called 'hail', being a gathering of thick moisture on the paper above and below; The works are such:
The works are such: Be aware if hail moves from one side to another; this is an easy thing to know;
Then make the cut wide, then scrape each part lightly, then grasp it with tweezers and pluck.
If you cannot pluck it without piercing the paper a little, do not worry about the patient;
And if the crack is large, sew it together and care for it until it is healed;
and if it is small, do not put any pressure on it, because the eye will restore it quickly and leave flesh.
And if the hailstone descends inside the ear towards the upper part, it turns the paper, and they take the hailstone with tweezers, pressing and holding it on both sides.
And if the paper is moved by the incision, it matters not.
Once the hailstone has been cut out, rinse the wound with salt water and cleanse it with material that draws moisture until the patient is healed.
Here's a possible translation for "de la graisse des eulz": Exinach is a fatty substance found in the tissues of paper that affects more often children than adults, causing great pain to their eyes. In the mornings they have catarrh and cannot look at sunlight because tears rush to their eyes.
And because of this they constantly lie on their faces and sleep that way. Their papers are moist underneath their eyebrows, causing swelling and redness covered with the exinach that opens into the eye. And when you press hard with your two hands and feel the exit between them.
And the manner of working is thus: the patient places their head on your hand;
And then take a linen cloth and prepare a tent in the shape of a circle according to the quantity that each part can contain, then place it on them; and press with your two thumbs on either side so that the veins are gathered within the circle;
then make in the middle of the moisture with the sharp scalpel a slit no wider than the wound made for bloodletting;
And cut through the skin deeply until you reach the vein; and in several positions blood comes out from the slit, resembling a piece of white fat.
So draw it out all at once with a wad of cloth held between your fingers, and twist your hand back and forth until it is dispersed;
And make sure you do not insert anything into the slit lest you draw out the scalpel completely up to its eye without cutting.
And if the exit does not open at the beginning of the wound, then slightly pull apart the wound lightly until it opens.
Then extract it as we have said, then wet cloths in hot water and cold water, place them on the wound, and press with bandages.
And there are some men who grind salt and put it on to corrupt that moisture which remains.
Then treat him until he is healthy.
And if a hot abscess forms, then treat it with poultices until it is healed.
hairs from the papers When hairs growing adjacent to each other in paper skin are wrapped around and become entwined, they harm the eyes and cause diseases such as habitual tears and softening of the eyelids and whitening of the eye; this can lead to blindness.
And there are four methods of treatment: Either by fire cautery together, or by hot medicine according to what is written in the cautery chapter, and it is done either by incision and suturing or by ligatures, depending on what I will say.
First, place the patient's head in your lap, then turn back the eyelid with your left hand.
If it has turned, then that's good If not, stick an needle into all of its threads and let it be near the edge of the paper where the hairs grow near these hairs; and draw the thread upwards over all the paper, and turn it towards the razor.
then cut into the part beneath the paper, underneath the hairs attached, from the large ring up to the small one
then pull out the thread, and place underneath the paper a small tent of cotton and cloth; then press upon the paper with an iron shaped like a bellows, like a minting hammer, but always ensure that the shape corresponds to how much you want to elevate the cut surface
And if cutting off a large quantity of paper is needed according to its softness;
then cut along the entire spatula on both lines you have marked out, starting from the large ring down to the small one And let one of the incisions be near the natural hairs in the thickness of a root, then place the cautery in one of the two angles of the heart, and then scrape it all.
Then bring the two lips together with a stitch of thread made of fine wool, wipe away the blood, and make the excess hairs adhere to both eyebrows using any sticky substance you see fit.
And if not, do not worry about it; then leave the stitch and the threads for three or four days;
Then dress the wound without stitching with drying and constricting substances, for paper causes wounds to relive and prevents their healing; but stitches are harmful (as the ancients said), so perform these actions without fear. And if there is another method:
And if there is another method: namely: you should mark the paper with a figure resembling the shape of a myrtle leaf, as we have described, using three cauteries arranged according to the form shown here:
"Then cut that which is above the small forces equally according to the shape shown below:"
And if you lack power to hold the tweezers, and the thing is not even, then take a needle with thread attached, and insert it into the figure. and place the other thread near the large pupil, and the second thread near the small one, and bring both threads together evenly between your two fingers.
Then lift your hand evenly and lift all the skin where you have cut, as we have described, then bring together the two lips of the wound with stitching, and heal it until it is sound.
And if an abscess forms at your incision, soothe it with cerate and similar softening ointments
and sometimes the hairs of the paper are curled
then you must use what we have said about incising
but stitching is more skillful in one way and another.
The treatment of cankers is according to this form and it is that you fold the paper and make an incision inside according to what I have said, then make two artificial cankers and two thin ligatures as long as the paper and the width of the spathule And cut both heads of both parts where you hold the threads.
Then gently bring together both parts onto what lies above the oil paper, and strongly pull on the two canines of both parts. And let it remain thus for several days, and the hide that is pulled will die and shrink and rot until it falls off.
If it takes too long, then cut it with force, then cure it so that it heals without any infection.
And when the wound is healed, and if the paper has been removed, the hairs will no longer point.
And this is how you should shape the two canines according to this figure, and according to these measurements of length and width:
The procedure is as follows: take a fine needle and insert one thin, soft silk thread. Then bring together the heads and tie them both gently, and let the length of the threads be a palm's width.
Then prepare another fine thread of silk briefly, and tie the heads of the two threads together.
Then have the patient place their head in your hand.
And let them be near the sun so that the work is well-lit, for this is subtle and delicate work. Then insert the needle all along the thread at the root of the hair and make it pierce through a piece of paper swiftly until you draw it up above the natural hair.
Then pull out the hair along with the thread, and insert that hair into the thread if there is one or two or three or more;
Then withdraw your hand so that all the hairs come out along with the paper and the natural hair.
And if the thread is pulled and the hairs do not come out with it, then pull the thread from below along all the thread that you have prepared until the thread comes out of its hole and you can see it with your eye.
Then you shall draw out the dart and thread, close the eye and leave it closed for two or three days, until the hairs stand upright in their place and flesh grows over.
And if the hairs are short, then accompany them with one long hair from the eyebrows, and lift it up along with it, until it is lengthened and then remove it.
"Treatment of eye inflammation" When this disease called "aleacrati" or decay comes to the eye, there are two ways to treat it:
One is natural and the other unnatural.
And it happens suddenly from a wound, or from cutting or cauterizing, and from similar things.
And the manner of treating it is to cut open that suture, spread open the lips of it, and place linen wicks inside, allowing them to remain until the wound is healed;
It is not necessary to use things that dry out and constrict in its treatment. For if you do this, the disease will return worse than before;
But there are things that soften it, such as fenugreek; And rosewater or altered and linseed oil should be cooked, and diacylglycerol melted in some of the oils, and wrapped in a tent, for eye treatment.
And your remedy's treasure is that you take care it does not heal crookedly as before.
These works we have spoken of are only remedies for this disease, so that it does not return in the same form as before.
This illness that is underneath, which is truly called "axacrati", is natural and accidental.
The accident comes from wound and tear and cautery and similar things;
And the way of the operation in it is that you take a needle with a doubled thread, stick it into the flesh, and make it pierce from the left eyelid towards the right one until the threads come out on both sides of the flesh.
Then stretch the flesh above the whole needle and cut it with a wide-spatula scalpel. And if the shape of the paper returns as it should be, that is good;
If not, then take the razor and place it in the crevice, turn the paper, and make two creases on either side within the paper.
And let the heads of the two creases be at the two corners of the incision that you have made, and form an angle such that when they are brought together, the figure is like the figure of the Greek letter "".
Then remove that piece of skin according to the size of its sides and underneath from what is attached to the paper, then join the two separated parts together with a thread of wool.
Then perform the treatment for that which we have said concerning softening medications and dressings, until it is healed.
And if the disease comes from a cut or stitch or burn, then you must make a full-thickness incision below the hairs of the paper, as described above. Then separate between the two leaves of a dressing, as I have said;
Then separate between the two leaves of a dressing, as I have said; And one should perform the work according to the form of the disease, for it is very diverse in form, and the wise master prepares every device with all his power so that he can make the form return to its natural state;
And the patient himself, according to what is necessary for work and tools in various positions.
When this adhesion occurs in many people such that the paper above is stuck with the white of the eye, and cannot move or perform its natural tasks, then you must place the point of a razor underneath the paper and lift it upwards;
And stretch it like tweezers until you grasp what is adhering to the eyeball, which should not be too blunt nor too sharp so that the patient cannot bear if the spatula is too blunt or blinds the eye;
And your incision, with which you remove this adhesion, should be light so that the paper returns to its natural form.
and all those gathered are healed; sometimes they apply salty water to the eye and rinse with fresh water and collyrium.
then place a linen tent between the paper and the eye, and put on the eye wool soaked in egg white; and after the third day apply collyrium and compresses until they are healed.
You should know that a nail has two forms: one is nerve-like and similar to hard fat, and another that is not nerve-like but resembles moist snow, which when touched with iron cannot be grasped with pincers.
and both forms begin near the large pupil and gradually grow until they cover the entire sight, light, and motion of the eye.
And the manner of incision is as follows: the patient should put their head in your hand, then open their eyes; Then lift the paper to your hand, then file the fingernail like tweezers of small thickness, and stretch it upwards. Then take a needle, and put on it a horsehair, or cowhair, or ox hair, then draw the thread tightly; And double the point of the needle slightly and insert it into the fingernail, then push it all the way through, and tie the nail with a thread and stretch it upwards, and scrape off all the hair on the side of the nail that touches the cuticle and the skin along the hair up to the tip, then trim the remaining part at the root of the nail bed with a sharp small scissors, leaving the natural flesh in the nail bed so that tears do not flow as usual through the incision;
And sometimes stretch the nail only with tweezers and thread, as we have said; Then scrape it with a sharp blade all along here is the shape:
And ensure that the scalpel does not touch the delicate tissue and tear it, nor is the probe pierced.
After incision, apply a drop of ground sel to the wound, and cover it with a plaster made of lead, leaving it until the next day; Then treat it as necessary until it is healed.
If the nail is not nerveless and you cannot insert the needle, nor can tweezers grasp it, many times this type of nail is cured by medicines;
And they grow as I have described in the division; if you wish to cover it, then open the patient's eye gently with a scalpel held thus: Raise the nail gently upwards; if you see that it does not thin and the reason presses against it, then distill from your mouth onto the eye a plaster made of lead and red plaster and ground sel, and stopper the eye until the next day;
If there is any obstacle in the eye that prevents you from operating, such as a hot aposteme, then use milk first and cure the hot aposteme until it is healed; then recommence the operation as before until it is healed.
Then resume the other work according to this same operation until it is completely finished.
And if the appearance of the flesh around the eyelid harms the eye greatly, then suspend it with an onion, and cut off part of it, not all, so that no onion juice comes.
Then drip into the eye red collyrium made from lead ore.
Sometimes in the eyes of certain men red flesh is born, which covers the pupil and restrains upon the papers and turns towards the back, resembling a ruby.
And the operation is that the patient puts his head in your hand, then opens his eyes wide, and you scrape off all that flesh with suitable lancets, and hold it with pressure.
Then cut off the first piece of flesh, and keep cutting right down to the end without wounding the eye during the operation.
And let the incision of the pimple be like that which we have said in the cutting of the nail and small forces with which one removes thorns, as depicted after this chapter.
And when the incision is complete and all the flesh has been removed, then apply to the eye some crushed willow bark or distilled red collyrium and similar corrosive medicines, and place on the eye hot cotton with egg yolk so that it is securely covered by the abscess.
And if there remains any residue, and hot blood overflows, and you suspect a hot abscess, then leave the eye alone and treat the abscess with cooling remedies.
Then return to your work until it is clean, and so do in all cases where flesh adheres to the eye due to this cause.
But nonetheless, you should adjust the treatment of each weak eye according to its natural tendency; and also considering accidental causes, specifically those involving iron.
And do not attempt any of these procedures unless you see that the patient's limbs are able to withstand them.
Before veins appear red which cover the eye, they obscure sight and weaken the eye every day.
It is therefore necessary for you first to examine whether the eye with bone protruding from it is actually foreign, and if there is no other external disease besides the protruding bone; Then heat it in such a way:
Command the patient to put their head in your hand, then press those veins gently according to your wisdom, and let the onions be finely chopped as follows:
And hold two tweezers by degrees on one body according to this shape:
Then heat it with force those veins gently, and squeeze out blood hour by hour afterward, until you see the veins swell up.
And be careful not to cut the eye with the tips of the tweezers, and perform this task at midday before the sun, and be very thorough in your work so that you only touch those veins.
And when you have done this, then distill green and red collyrium into the eye to dissolve what remains of the stone.
And if you are unable to remove all of it in that hour, then apply a plaster made of soothing substances for the pain of the eyes, and leave it on for several days until the pain is eased and a hot abscess is assured, then resume according to this method until they are healed.
And these are the forms of the remedies:
The physicians call a fistulous ulcer 'arissati':
When you treat it with cautery and hot medicine according to what I have said earlier, but it is not yet healed, then there is a trick in it that you should incise above the abscess where it must burst, and remove all the moisture that is there until the bone is uncovered.
And when the bone is uncovered, and you see the corruption and blackness, then remove everything with the instrument mentioned here is its form;
And it is called 'sharp head', and let it be made of iron from the hammer's head, and be pointed like a file as it is in this form:
And place it on the location of the corrupted bone, then twist it between your fingers, and press your hand a little until you know that the corruption has been removed;
and do this several times, then apply drying medicines.
If the place is solid, and flesh is born there, and the bone of the bow is solid, and remains thus for 40 days, and it does not renew itself nor becomes an abscess, and no bad accident occurs, know that it is healthy;
If not, then there is no other option but to bring the fistula back to the opening of the nose according to this form: and that you uncover the bone again with iron and hot medicines; and when it is uncovered, then take iron number one according to this form, and make the head of the iron three-angled, and thin the stake up to its top as you see here:
then place it on the bone near the eyelid and keep your hand away from the eye, then turn the stake entirely until it pierces the bone; the patient will feel this through their nostril if they hold their hand over it.
And then restore the place with dry medicines as I have taught you, and when the flesh grows and hardens the joints, then the matter goes to the sinews. If it is easier for the patient.
When the eyes open wide in every direction and nothing obstructs the breath nor decreases it, then you must tie down the patient;
Then wash it, then place cupping glasses or leeches without striking to suck, then put on the eye a linen cloth made of acacia and aloe and incense and nard, and then compress the eye, covering it with bandages and cloths;
And the manner of the bandages is that you take soft cloths and fold each one into four, then place them on top of each other according to how much the eye needs;
Then compress it with a tight bandage from above and restart the cupping glasses to suck without striking.
Then remove the cupping glasses and keep the eye restrained day and night, and if the ligature becomes moistened, then you must draw it out carefully.
Then remove the ligature after the day and night, and if you see the eye recovering, that is good;
If not then recommence the emplacement and dressings and the ligature and cupping glasses until it is sound.
About the bursting of an ocular vein When disruption occurs in the ocular tissue, then appear, and come fire from the papers like grains of resin, and it is frightening to see
then if you wish to cover it, the operation is such that you thrust a needle into the root of the part beneath until it reaches that above, then thrust another needle where there is the doubled thread of the eyelid and make it pierce, and leave the first needle according to the direction
then cover the place of the doubled thread and tie one part of the uve around it, and bind it tightly, then remove the needle and place a linen cloth moistened with egg white above the eye
And leave it until the threads fall out with the ulcer, then heal the eye with soothing substances until the wound is healed.
And sometimes the wound is restrained on all sides by a circle of cloth until it heals.
And if the eye shows great appearance, then pierce it with a subtle spatula that comes from deep within the eye, and remove the moistened albuginea and let the eye descend and enter quickly.
Then extract it until it is healed.
This disease called 'alcunnati' is nothing but bowels assembled in the eye, resembling descending water, and it is not water.
And the manner of appearance for this operation is that you make the patient sit on an appropriate and straight seat, then take their head between your hands on both sides, and move it until you see the bowel rising up to your eyes; Then let it be inserted, and do not descend, nor let light enter, until the patient sees things as they were.
And if it does not descend from below, know that it is acute; and if the descent of the bowel is not as we have said.
Then seat the patient between your hands and take a fine spatula and cut through the corneal tissue about one point along the continuity of the conjunctiva with the cornea and the crown until the bowel emerges
And once it has emerged, then distill hot water mixed with honey, or water in which fenugreek has been boiled and mixed with honey onto it; then cleanse it with another cure until it is healed.
Water of the eye We have shown the likeness of acute cases in division, and what is needed for piercing If done according to the instructions.
The patient must be seated between your crossed hands, away from sunlight; keep the healthy eye tightly closed.
Then place the paper on your left hand if the eye is left, or on your right hand if it is right.
Then take in your right hand, if the eye is left, the instrument called "almagda", or in your left hand, if the eye is right.
Then place the tip of the instrument near the cornea on the thickness of a ray at the part where the lesser eyelid meets, then gently push the instrument called "almagda" until it pierces into the eyelid and you feel that "almagda" reaches the empty space.
And it is necessary that the measure of the path of "almagda" be equal to the depth of the space from the pupil to the end of the iris. And this is the cornea of the eye.
Then you will see the bone through the transparency of the corneal tissue, and then move the instrument until it reaches where the water is present, and then press down along one pathway after another.
If water flows downwards now, then the patient sees before him and the instrument in his eye.
After resting for a short time, if the water rises up through the second passage, place the funnel with the instrument; and once it is inserted and no longer rises, gently withdraw the sponge by turning your hand bit by bit.
and then put back into water a little of precious stone dust, and lift it off from there the eye inside. Next, place over the eye a plug of linen moistened in rose oil and egg yolk, and tie it with the healthy eye.
Nowadays, we put crushed cinnamon on top with plenty of egg yolks.
And if almagda cannot enter the eye because of its hardness, for there are some men who have very hard eyes, then you must take the instrument called "alberit", of which this is the form:
And then carefully pierce only the connective tissue, not going too deep but making a subtle cut, then insert the sponge as we have said;
and upon completion of the procedure prepare for the patient a comfortable resting place where he can lie on his back in a dark and quiet location;
and let him be kept free from all movement, and have light foods, and not move his head either to the right or left; and let him be bound according to his condition for three days.
then release him in that same dark room, and test his sight; and if he can see some things, then let him remain bound for seven days.
And it is not necessary that you do this during the hour of cauterization or afterwards when incising; but rather, you should ease off on this, for water rises quickly.
If an abscess forms that has not burst by the seventh day, then you should open it before the eye and use a plaster that draws out inflammation.
And when it is healed, then remove the bandage and put on its face a lint covered with olive oil to cover for several days, and keep it always in that dark house.
Then gradually leave the house little by little, and change into his clothes.
And know that no disciples should meddle in this case. And one came to us from Iraq who told us that in their land they make an ointment called "almagda," with which water can be sucked up, but nevertheless I have never seen any of it in our land nor do I know if it exists in the books of the ancients. And perhaps it is a new thing.
And these are the likenesses of Almagest forms, so that those who do not know them may see them;
and they should be made of pure gold: "And their heads of these same subtlety are two, and one behind has three angles."
Sometimes joined wagons are born with various shapes, among which some resemble many-legged scorpions;
And there are those where the enchanted flesh has a rusty color, and also soft flesh with good color. Therefore, in that wagon which is soft and not enchanted, you should make the patient sit between your hands facing the sun;
Therefore, in that wagon which is soft and not enchanted, you should make the patient sit between your hands facing the sun; and open his nostrils, and cast the unicorn upon those wagons, and draw them forth. For cut off that which you can sustain on the subtle needle's sharp point until you know that all the flesh is removed.
And if there remains anything which cannot be cut off, then open it with all the subtle and light instruments, so that nothing remains. And if blood overflows, or a boil bursts, then burn it as necessary.
And if it is malignant boils, then hurry and cauterize until the blood is stanched and all the flesh is burned off, then apply neat asphalt and vinegar or wine. If the nosebleed continues and moisture reaches the palate, know that it is healthy;
and if moisture does not reach as it should, know that there is flesh grown into the bone above, to which the instrument cannot cut:
Therefore you must insert a somewhat thick linen thread there, moistened with hot water, and have space between each knot of at least one finger or less; And the patient places the head of the thread in their nostril with some force and pulls it out smelling until it comes through the nostril into the mouth;
And many times children do this at school, and it is an easy thing for those who wish to do it;
Then grasp the head that comes through the knee with one hand, and the other head that comes through the mouth with the other hand, and pull them alternately as we do who are experienced in this.
Do this until you know that the nerves have rotted that flesh, then pull out the threads, squeeze out the blood, and wet the thread in Egyptian oil, and replace it in the knee as before;
Do this for three days or more, until the oil has rotted all remaining flesh.
Then place in the knee a bandage of lead for some days until it is healed, and if there is need for drying medicines, use them.
And this is the form of the instrument used to purge the head, into which oils and medicines are distilled for the knee:
And let it be made of silver or brass, resembling an open lamp like a tube, with its channel as well.
And if you see [that] make a closed cane, and let the instrument be full to purge the head.
And have many hands at the head to hold it when heating the oil or any liquid.
To remove flesh from the nostrils
Often at the head, near the eyes, a disease called 'telul' arises, which grows and becomes large constantly, appearing visible to see.
And therefore you should cut it at the beginning, remove all hair, then put on the cautery or burning medicine in place.
But if it is delayed to cut until it becomes large, take care whether it is hard, of dark color, and lacking sensation:
If you do not touch it with iron for it is an enchanted abscess; because when it is cut open, great harm comes to the patient.
But if the abscess is soft to touch, not dark colored, and you see that it can be completely cut open, then drain the patient and cut without fear, and cure the area with drying and astringent things.
Know that when solutions of continuity occur in one of these cartilages, they profit little, whether in some men.
It is therefore necessary, when this happens to anyone, to consider whether the wound is fresh with all its blood. and then join the two lips together in a stitch, and continue to heal it until it is clean
and if the lips are already separated on both sides, you must scrape away all the corrupted parts until they heal, then join the two lips together in a stitch, and bind them tightly, and sprinkle powdered dragon's blood powder and crushed incense upon them and put on top of the powders a strong plaster or another adhesive plaster, and leave it until it falls off by itself, then heal it with an ointment until it is clean.
The manner of stitching is as follows: or with needles, as we have described in the abdominal stitching; or with thread, as I have shown you.
Of the swellings on the lips
In many men, hard abscesses resembling peas in size, both small and large, occur within the lips
Then it is necessary that you turn back the lips, and cut open each nostril, take hold with tweezers, and cut in every part;
then fill the place after the incision of crushed glass until the blood is staunched.
and then dress it with a poultice, and dress the wound with dry things until it is healed.
Often there appears on the flesh of the cheeks that which the ancients call "albulae";
Then you must hold it with forceps and cut at its root, allowing the vein or blood to flow freely.
then place on the wound crushed glass or other powders that are restrictive and drying;
And if that flesh returns after the incision, which often happens, then cut it again and cauterize it. if it does not return after cauterization
Somewhat, sharp and ugly scales are gathered at the head of the teeth, within the mouth between the gums; and sometimes the teeth are black and yellowish-green, so much that corruption reaches the gum, and the teeth stink;
therefore you should make the patient sit between your hands, their head in your lap, and remove the scales or tartar from the teeth until none remains; and likewise do for blackness and greenness, yellowness and other stains, until they are cleaned;
And if you remove what is there due to the first cause, it's good. If not, then start again on the second day and the third, until all is removed;
and know that teeth require various shapes of tools to scrape them according to what the work shows, because the scrapers used to clean between the teeth have different shapes from those used to remove tartar from the teeth; And let these forms and others be prepared with you.
It is necessary when treating a toothache that you delay extraction as long as possible, for it should not be done at all; for it is a very high substance until one has no excuse to extract it.
Therefore, when the patient is constricted by a draught, you must be certain of the throbbing tooth. Often the pain leaves the patient and they believe it was in the good tooth that is extracted; yet still the pain does not leave due to this, for we have seen many times that the bad one remains.
And when you are certain about the aching tooth, it is necessary to scrape around the tooth with a strong spathula to protect the gum on all sides;
then move it gently between your two fingers or with fine forceps until it is well loosened, then firmly hold the forceps; And keep the patient's head steady between your knees while you hold it firmly so that it does not move.
After extract the tooth straightly without breaking it, and if it does not come out easily, then take any of these tools and place it gently on each side, and with the lever move it as you have done previously.
And if a tooth is pierced and swallowed, you must fill it with bandages where the hole is. and gently extract it with forceps so that it does not break while being extracted;
and much bleeding must be caused around the gum to loosen the tooth.
And make sure you do not break it, and if a piece remains, it will return to the patient through the wickedness of the root causing even greater pains than before.
And beware that you do not act as foolishly as some hasty and reckless surgeons who sometimes break the jawbone and thus fail to achieve what we have described.
but sometimes cause serious illness through their carelessness due to roots left behind or a broken jawbone, as we have often seen.
And when the tooth is pulled, rinse the area with wine, vinegar, and salt.
If bleeding occurs afterwards, which often happens, then apply powdered vitriol to the area;
And if that does not work, cauterize it.
The shapes of the tools with which you first move the teeth should be long-pointed and thick-hafted so that they do not double over when you pull the tooth.
And these are their forms: "And let them be of heavy members so they do not bend at all during the pulling, and let them be of good iron well-made, and let them have teeth for holding moves."
"from the root of the teeth" When the root remains during extraction, you must place cotton soaked in honey on the spot for one or two days until the spot becomes softened; then insert the tweezers called 'algefri', from which the head seems like a bird's beak;
and they should also be made inside like a file, and that is their shape.
And if the roots do not want to come out with all these pliers, then you must uncover the flesh all around the root and place the instrument called "althali," that is, tweezers, this is the form.
And let it be strong and thick so that it does not break; and if the root comes out through it, that is good;
But if not, then help yourself with all the tools, of which their forms come next:
And if one uses this instrument which has two handles, this is the form: and other instruments that are placed on the surface of the teeth, and this instrument resembles large pliers, here is its form
And let this tool be strong so that it cannot break; and know that there are many tools for teeth; and also other tools which are not counted here.
And the wise master finds his own instrument, according to what his works and the illness show him, for there are such illnesses where the ancients did not teach any instrument because of their diversity; and if one breaks a limb or other bones where it is useful, then he seeks the instruments that are needed, as I have told you, and helps with gestures, of which this is the form:
And let them be thick and well-fastening to hold the bone, so that it does not slip away, but can hold and remove it;
And then restore to its place with appropriate medications, and if there is rot in the bone, even if it is small, remove all this equipment:
When the teeth appear not according to their natural course, and their form is ugly, especially in virgin women, then it is necessary that you know if the tooth is near behind the tooth, and is not in its proper place, and cannot be removed or filed:
Therefore cut the ray; And if it is next to the tooth, take this instrument of which here is the shape, like a small beak, and let it be made of iron well-sharpened on top:
And gently tap with your hand every day for the hardness of the tooth and so that you do not move the others. And if it is apparent so that one can file it, then use a file like this whose form is like
and it is also like the file with which needles are made;
And file the tooth gently bit by bit over several days until it falls out without moving.
Then level it at the end with any sharpener, and if the tooth is too sharp and wounds the tongue, then file down its sharpness until it is even so that it does not wound the tongue nor impair speech.
When a tooth before the eye is knocked out, either by blow or fall, and the patient cannot bite down on what they eat without it falling out, even after treating them with medicines that restrict it.
then you must bind it with a gold thread, for silver threads turn green and rot, but gold does not change.
And let my son's thread not be too thick nor too thin, according to the quantity of space between the teeth;
And if you see the teeth aligned, then take the thread and pass it through both healthy teeth, placing the heads between the loose teeth, if there is one or more, until blood flows up to the neighboring healthy tooth. Then resume the wrapping up to where you began, and hold your hand gently but firmly, so that it does not move.
And let your ligature be at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape.
Then cut the heads of the thread with pliers, join them together, and pass them behind the healthy tooth, placing it so that it does not injure the tongue.
And then leave it tied as tightly as possible until it can remain in place; and if it becomes loose or the thread rots, tighten it with another thread.
If it remains thus and serves in this manner throughout its lifetime, that is the form of the teeth and the arrangement of the two upper teeth and the two lower ones, as you see.
And when a tooth falls out, replace it in its position little by little, as we have said;
and let not the ignorant and impatient meddle with it; sometimes a tooth shape made of cow bone is used, placed in the position where there is a gap, secured as we have said, and remains and serves for a long time.
Sometimes this tie comes under the tongue by nature at birth; or through an accidental wound;
And the operation is such that you open the patient's mouth and place their head on your knee, raising the tongue;
then cut the nerve ligature from behind, until the tongue is freed from its attachment; and if there is any hardness or knot, which is from a wound scar, insert the nail and cut it from behind;
And ensure that the cut is not too deep, lest the artery beneath be harmed.
Then lift the wound with rosewater and salt or cold water, then place a linen bandage beneath the tongue
And have the patient apply it every night so that the wound does not close.
And if blood oozes from the wound, then place powdered vitriol on it and if the blood dries, cauterize it with a lentigo cautery, which is good for this purpose then treat it with another cure until it heals.
And if you see a streak of black or hard colour, which the patient does not feel, do not touch it, for it is cancer
And if it tends towards blenching and there is moisture present, then cast on the ointment called Onction, make an incision with a subtle spatula, and draw off the matter from both sides If your blood becomes faint during your work, then place powdered vitriol upon it until it stops flowing, then return to your task until you have drawn all the fire.
Then raise the lever of earth and stone, and heal with other remedies until he is healthy.
Throat abscesses Sometimes into the throat come stones called 'godath', which are properly called tonsils, and when you treat them as we have said in our discussion, if they are not healed, then be aware:
If they are hard boils with a small opening and dark color, do not touch them with iron.
And if they are red and the root is large, do not touch them with iron, also for the letting out of blood; but leave it alone until it is ripe, and then you will break it off, or it would burst on its own.
And if it is of pale color with a slender root, then prepare the instrument for cupping, but first make sure that the boil is warm and has softened.
Then make the patient sit before the sun, and his limbs in your hand, and he opens his mouth and the servant takes it between his hands, and presses the tongue from below with all the instrument; this is the form.
And let it be of silver or refined brass like a sharp knife:
When you press the tongue with all this instrument and see the abscess, then take the hot cautery iron and insert it into the almond, and pull it out upwards as much as you can.
And bring some cloths with you, then wipe the instrument clean; this is the form that resembles forceps. And moreover, their heads are curved and one towards the other, and they are very sharp, made of iron or tin.
And if you do not have this instrument present, then use pincers, of which here is the shape And let it be sharp on one side and blunt on the other
And when you have incised one of the almonds, then incise the other in the same manner; afterwards, the patient should gargle with warm water and salt water, and if there is bleeding, he should gargle with warm water and pomegranate rind or myrtle leaves boiled, until the blood is staunched. Then [apply] the treatment until it is healed;
And sometimes other abscesses are born in the throat besides the tonsils, so cut them thus like the tonsils equally.
And I treated a woman for an abscess that had grown inside her throat;
and it had almost completely closed her throat, so that the woman could not exhale because of the blocked passage, and she could neither eat nor drink, and would have died if this had lasted for one or two days.
And the abscess was already so swollen that it had pushed out both ears through the nostrils
I therefore acted quickly and inserted a probe into the one boil, then drew it out forcefully, and drew out a large portion of pus.
then I inserted again into the other hole that had grown, and opened its mouth and pressed on its tongue;
afterwards, inserting the probe into these abscesses and cutting one part of it open, only a little blood came out. and thus the woman's throat passage was opened up, and she began now to drink water and then wine, and I did not cease cutting this abscess for a long time.
And the boil crisscrossed often, filling again the space I had emptied, becoming very large;
Therefore I pierced and cauterized it inside its core: So it remained without growing further;
I departed from these parts, not knowing what God did with him afterwards.
The eye
When rheum descends to the eye, and it is swollen and protuberant, it is called 'perpendicular';
And if it is below, thick and round, it is called 'eye'.
When it is treated as we have said in the section on cutting, and the treatment does not help, and you see that the large boil has healed over but the inflammation persists, then you must lance it;
And the one that is rounded together and not protuberant; and if it is red in color or blackish, you should avoid incising it. For there is great danger to the patient thereby.
It is therefore necessary, when you see it in the manner I have described regarding its whiteness and length, that you make the patient sit facing the sun and press his tongue with the instrument whose memory we made before; Then insert the needle into the eye, and draw it under, and cut with the two instruments that I mentioned in the incision of the two membranes.
And you must not cut any further than the natural limit beyond which there is excess;
For if you cut more, it harms both sight and speech;
And after the incision, apply what we have said in the incision of the two membranes, until it is healed.
And if the patient fears being cut, you must use a device for cauterizing that fear.
The manner of cautery is sharp and hot. And it is necessary that the patient place their head in your hand, and then press the tongue with the instrument mentioned in the chapter on cautery, and cauterize it with hot iron, so that it is not too thick nor too clear; And here is the shape of this instrument:
And at its head there is a hollow where one places the medicine, like the bowl of a spoon, and places the instrument with all the medicine on the eye;
And let the patient lie on their side such that saliva and mucus from their mouth flow towards the medicine within, so it does not descend to the throat, and avoid drinking.
Then hold your hand over all of the medicine and press it onto the eye for about half an hour until you see it darken and the pain from the medicine has ceased.
If you see this, take cotton and wrap it around some instrument, wet the cotton in the medicine, and place the instrument with the cotton at the corner of the eye until the cotton touches the eye.
And do this often until the cauterization is complete, then let it dry and it will fall off after four or five days.
And if you need to restart the cautery with the medicine, do so, and afterwards wipe around the eye with cotton dipped in butter, and cleanse what is around it from the medicine.
And let it be washed with cold water, and let it be cured by gargling until it is clean.
This treatment is safer than incising or using a cautery;
If it is cured by fumigation in this manner, take calamint and hyssop and origanum and rue and camomile and celery and similar herbs, gather them all or some of them into one pot, place it on the fire, and let it boil;
And the pot should be well covered with clay, and inside the pot there should be an instrument for removing hair like this: And it should be made of silver or bronze, and one end of the instrument should be placed in the patient's mouth until the steam rises to the eye through the canal until the eye is destroyed;
Afterwards, repeat this often until the eye dries out; but be careful not to do this at the beginning of the appearance of a hot boil, as many things can happen then. And do not make fire except for the declination of an abscess boil.
And if this instrument is not present, take a cane and put in its head an eggshell so that the mouth of the patient does not get too hot; For the eggshell does not allow the vapor to harm the mouth, and it is a good remedy together with health.
Many times something sharp like bone or fish spine, or anything else, gets stuck in the throat;
So then you pull out what you can see, and press down on the tongue with the instrument so that you can see the object move;
And what you cannot see and is stuck in the throat, you must make the patient vomit before the food is cooked in the stomach; Perhaps then the object will come out through vomiting.
Or if the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of nail, or a root of lettuce, or a morsel of dry bread; Then bind the sponge with thread, and then suture it. And when it comes to its place, it will harden, and then draw out fire;
and if it does not come forth as we have said, then take the instrument of lead according to this form:
And let the instrument be curved at the head so that it can more easily enter into the throat, and have its head raised upwards; and ensure you do not touch the epiglottis so that it does not close over everything, nor push the bone inside.
And have the patient move the instrument there so that they may know where the thing is hardened; So push it down until the place is drawn out evenly along the entire length of the instrument.
de la sansue de la gorge
Sometimes the sinew is healed as I have mentioned in the division, by the treatment with medications; And when this does not help, then look into the patient's throat towards the sun, and then press their tongue with the instrument I have mentioned to you.
And if you see the vein, then treat it with a small iron pin or with fine forceps that are suitable for this purpose.
And if this does not work, then take a headed cane and put it into the throat of the patient, and then put red-hot iron on the head of the cane, and do this often. And if the patient sweats all day long.
Then take a full handful of cold water, open the mouth, tilt it back without swallowing, and move it with your hand often. and as soon as the blood senses the water, it flows out.
And if it does not flow out as we have said, then fumigate the patient with incense, using the same instrument mentioned in the fumigation of the eye.
Do this many times, for it will fall without fail.
And the manner of fumigation is this: take a pot with live coals in it, and cover the pot with a cloth pierced in the middle, and insert the head of the instrument into that hole.
Then throw in your incense, and the patient puts the end of the tube in their mouth, closes their mouth so that no smoke escapes, but goes straight to the blood.
And now the blood will flow out, and if it does not, repeat the fumigation many times.
And the patient suffers thirst, and consumes salted and sour foods, and should not drink water.
Therefore, it will then be necessary for her to discharge it through this treatment.
And the shape of the instrument used to treat the tonsil looks like curved tongs for entering into the throat. and resembles a goose's beak and has sharpness of a rasp, such that what it grasps, it cannot let go.
Many similar kinds of abscesses are described, according to what memory brings forth here from one and another in this book, and they differ in perforation and incision.
And there are two ways in which it resembles itself and those that hold moisture.
And the second manner is for those places where abscesses are located on the body.
because the abscesses of the head are different from those of the fundament, and the abscesses of the flesh are different from those that occur in joints, and each has its own judgment in the work.
However, some abscesses should not be pierced until the bowels have completed their function.
And there are others that must be pierced as soon as they form and do not wait for completion, like those near joints.
For when abscesses occur near joints, and they are left until they have rotted around, sometimes the ligaments and nerves of the joint become corrupted, which causes contraction in that limb.
When an abscess is near the main member,
If they prick at their base, pierce them before they grow.
And it is not necessary that you pierce a boil that has grown without first digesting it, except for those near the base, so they do not go too deep and become an internal fistula. And it may take a long time to heal.
And you should know the stage of the boil's perforation that has grown according to its completion, which is when the pain ceases and the fever subsides, along with the decrease in pain and redness, and the flattening and hardening of the head of the boil, and other signs.
And it is necessary that you make the incision where the boil depends the most and where it opens more easily;
And the incision should be long in proportion to the body, and if the boil is on the hands or feet, or in joints, near arteries, and in all similar places where there is no fold. In those cases where they affect, according to that limb.
And when an abscess is in a fleshy location, it is better that you delay perforating until it is confirmed with digestion completed, as we have said.
For if you pierce it before then, the body will be filled with its venom, and is full of much filth. and perhaps harden the lips and deepen its wound.
And some abscesses should be pierced according to the breadth of the body, according to what the limb requires.
And you must bring small abscesses, small perforations; and in large abscesses, large perforations, and many cracks according to the likeness of the size of the abscess.
and if there are such abscesses where it is necessary to dig with the cautery and cover when they have become like the scales of a dragon, and are softened, then you must do as one does for boils.
and if there are such ones that are split into three corners, and those whose covering is like the skin of a mullet, as abscesses of angels
and if there are such ones where one makes a round incision, and other incisions and similar coverings.
Those that have no head, like soft superficial abscesses, you must pierce them plainly
And when an abscess is large, and it has collected much bowels, and you pierce it, then do not draw out all the bowels at that hour, but draw out a part. Then stop up the abscess until the next day, then draw out something again afterwards; Do this many times gradually, until all the bowels come out;
Similarly if the patient is of weak virtue, or a woman carrying a child, or small infants, or elderly feeble men. For the spirit sometimes jumps at the release of the bowstring, which by chance causes the death of the patient, and you do not realize it.
Therefore leave this chapter with great caution, and when you have pierced your abscess, then examine the wound, and see if the wound of the abscess is small; And if it is a clean cut, then bring clean linen or old cotton bandages; And if it is a large abscess and there are many holes in it, then you must put into each one a bandage so that they come together.
And if you have cut off a part of the skin around an abscess, and you have shaved it around, then you must fill it with dry cotton or linen cloth without moisture, and bind it until the third day;
Then remove the dressing, and apply ointment until it is healed.
And if flows of blood occur during your procedure, then bring cold water and towels, wet the cloth, and place it on the bleeding area many times.
And if the bleeding persists, then apply dressings and treatment, and the powders that I mentioned elsewhere in this book; and if it is during wintertime, and the location of the wound or abscess is very nervous, then you should place wet bandages and cloths on it, warmed in wine and oil.
And if it is in summertime, and the location is fleshy, then you must place wet bandages in water and oil, or in wine and cold oil, until the third day, as we have said.
And then remove the abscess, cleanse it, and dress it as necessary until it is healed.
And this, he must universally recognize in treating abscesses:
And I have told you how one should proceed with the treatment of abscesses, and here is that chapter.
Where the head meets the neck come small abscesses, resembling those of chickens in their skin, and there are many similar ones.
There are some thick ones and such where there is moisture like poultices;
and there are those that are hard and bony in appearance, and there is no doubt if the artery opposes them.
And the work of cutting is such that you should test all instruments called 'entromissoire', from which the form comes later, what it contains.
But if it contains moisture, then close it with a long stitch.
And when the moisture is drained, scrape it off without leaving any of the skin that contains it, because it returns again if anything is left.
then dip cotton in Egyptian unguent, if it is present; If not that, use water and salt, and dress the wound until the next day. And these are what remain of the night.
And then start again with cotton as before on the second day and the third, until you know that there is nothing remaining from the night;
Then heal the wound with appropriate ointment until it is clean.
And if an abscess holds much matter inside, cut it according to this shape, with a long incision and cast your incisions, and scrape off all the skin around it, and focus all your effort on drawing out what lies beneath the skin
And if the artery opposes you, do as I have told you afterward.
And likewise do for an abscess if it is hard, and with cutting and dressing as I have told you.
And the cutting of a hard and moist abscess is easier, because they contain little blood. And also for those abscesses that have no moisture at their head, and especially for those hard ones that I cut from the head of an old woman
I found the abscess to be like a hard, rough, white stone, which could not be broken; And if one had tried to break it, they would have done as much harm as striking a stone.
For other abscesses that come at the head, especially those that appear on the heads of children and the roots of ears, open them always in the lowest position possible, so that the boil can easily come out
And heal as it is necessary.
Many times these abscesses occur on the neck, and under the armpits, and in the groin; sometimes they also come elsewhere on the body, and there are many of them, and they intertwine with each other.
Each boil is properly within its own skin, such as the pimple on the forehead and the abscess on the head, as we have said; And similar sorts of boils are many.
And similar sorts of boils are many. There are some that contain moisture, and others malignant that refuse to yield to healing.
Therefore, the one that you see has a good constitution to touch, and is similar in color to the body, moves from every side and is not hard against the veins of the neck nor against the artery or the passage, and is not deep;
So you should cut it from above, scrape each part, and stretch the two lips of the heart wound apart if necessary, as we have said regarding head abscesses;
And cut little by little, and be sure that you do not cut the nerve or the vein, nor should the scalpel be too sharp or cutting deeply, so that you do not cut what you should not.
And if you cut the vein or artery and it does not allow you to work, then place powdered vitriol or some powders that stop bleeding in the wound, and press the wound. And leave it until the abscess is soothed, and the wound becomes softened, and begins to rot.
And when the bleeding has stopped, return to your work until you complete it;
Then check your finger for any small scabs, and cut them off and cleanse them.
And if there is a large vein at the root of the scab, it is not necessary to cut off that scab at its root, but tie it with a strong doubled thread and let it fall without harm;
Then fill the wound with Egyptian ointment-soaked cotton, then dress it.
And if you cut the entire scab, then you must bring together the two lips of the wound and sew them up tightly; for there will be no excess left due to the size of the scab. If you must understand to cover the root of it, and draw fire, and the cut as we have said.
If you must understand to cover the root of it, and draw fire, and the cut as we have said. Those scabs that are full of fluid, pierce where they burst open;
And pierce it as that mentioned earlier, depending, then bring bandages with salve and similar things so that it rots what remains of the rot. And when the wound is well cleaned, apply a salve to the flesh until it is healed.
The ancients said and spoke of the cutting of the throat; But I never saw anyone in our land who did it, and this is the writing of their words.
For those with coughing fits, it is necessary that the fold of the throat called 'epiglottis' be cut away; and do not provide assistance to those who have hot abscesses in the mouth or throat, as all their veins and pores are open.
When the disease is in the channel of the vessels, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to avoid suffocation which comes from strangulation.
It is therefore necessary, when we want to cut the epiglottis, that we do so below three circles or four a small cut across, between two circles or through the quantity of the cut of the soft palate, not in the cartilage;
And these places are so attached to the epiglottis that there is no flesh there, and the vessels are long on either side.
And if the master is fearful, he must stretch the skin of the neck all around, then cut open the chest until he reaches the breastbone; and avoid the blood vessels if you see any, and then sever the esophagus as we have said;
And it is demonstrated by the cutting of the windpipe at the breastbone that blood flows from the broken place and by the loss of voice;
and leave the wound open for a while.
And once the danger of strangulation has passed, join together the two lips of the wound in the chest and sew it up without the cartilage;
then administer medications that cause flesh to grow until it is healed.
Albucasis says that one should not do this until the throat is completely blocked off, and the patient is judged to be near death, and his breathing has failed. Therefore, cut off the epiglottis so that the patient cannot swallow and breathe through the wound, thus avoiding death;
And therefore the ancients commanded that the wound be kept open until the worst of the illness has passed; this usually takes three or four days. Then they commanded that the wound be stitched and dressed until it was healed.
I will tell you what I saw. 
And I was called to heal her, but found her already dead.
I discovered the wound and found that the blood issuing from it was not from the veins or arteries but only from the throat, and the breath was coming out through the wound.
I hastily cleaned and dressed the wound until it was healed.
And after some days, her voice returned to normal, and she recovered her usual appearance;
Therefore I say that there is no fear in cutting the epiglottis.
This type of abscess is called 'hernia of the throat' and appears as a large, dark bruise, common in women;
And it occurs in two ways: by nature and by accident.
Nature has no remedy.
And accidents occur in two ways: one is like a bruise, the other is like an abscess that comes from an artery; and there is fear involved, but one should not operate with fire cautery except in the case of a small [abscess], and prove and search this throughout the entire introvertor: if you find it like a hard tumor and not connected to any vein, cut it like a boil and treat it entirely with its cover if there is one; and search well all around, and cure it as necessary until it is perfectly healed.
There are many kinds of tumors, which I will describe in detail;
and now I must explain the difference between a tumor and an ulcer.
I say that an ulcer is warm and has fever until the boil bursts, and then decay is complete; then the fever and heat subside.
Without heat or fever or pain, and contains the lymph, which is its own sack and is according to the color of the body, and begins also like a sieve, and becomes swollen;
And they are similar to either fat or moisture, and most have the colors as I said in the division.
"When treating a fatty tumor, it is necessary to first examine and express the contents using an instrument called the 'intromittor', according to the shape described in the following chapter."
And the manner of examining the abscesses in the nose is that you take the moistest part that you find in the abscess and twist your thumbs little by little until you know that the instrument has pierced the center, then according to the size of the abscess;
then remove the trocar, and beware lest anything spurt forth.
If moist pus runs forth, whatever its color may be, open it as I have said of other abscesses;
And if after the trocar no moisture comes forth, know that it is fat; therefore cut it in crosswise and take it with forceps, and scrape it lightly from each side and beware of the skin where it lies so that you draw it out whole with the lymph;
And if you cannot draw it out whole, then draw it out piece by piece so that nothing remains.
But if anything remains, the pain will return many times;
And if a little remains and the blood grieves you, then apply to the wound some corrosive waters, bind the wound, and put on cooling remedies for the heat of the wound, and treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
And if the pain is great, cut open both lips of the wound, and treat those that enter the flesh.
And if a beating vein is opposed to you or another, quickly apply powdered vitriol to the place and leave it for two or three days until the wound rots, and let the blood's ebullition rest. Then return to cauterize what remains of the pain.
Here are the shapes of intrusive instruments, and they come in three kinds: Big, medium, and small
And there are 3 squares called 'albaret', and 1 called 'breb', and they come in three varieties large, medium, and small to surround fistulas
and they are also like the needles used to suture wounds, and they are made of brass, iron, or silver; those that are yellow are most valued, and they are especially praised for surrounding fistulas
and they come in three varieties large, medium, and small according to the size of the hole's width
The shapes of the needles are very similar, as you can see here
and there are also needles with two curves in three varieties
and there are needles with three curves, which also come in three varieties
and there are needles with two curves and needles with one curve only, both of which come in three varieties
And all these are necessary in their place.
The tips of these instruments are cutting; there are some that cut only on one side, from which the nerves are stripped off so as not to cut the vein or nerve.
Among these instruments are also spoons inserted into handles, so that the patient does not feel them when opening abscesses;
and there are three kinds of them: large, small, and medium-sized, as you can see.
Use them only on smooth skin, such as legs, arms, breasts, angles, and similar areas;
Sometimes another small instrument is used, resembling the skin of fists, in this shape, with which blood is wiped away: "And it is sometimes placed at the location where veins and arteries are severed or where there has been excessive bleeding. Sometimes they are made in this larger size:"
Sometimes men's breasts swell when they begin to be corrupted until they resemble women's breasts;
And who wants to treat them should do so according to this form from line .b. up to .g.: Then strip away the fat, dress the wound with salve containing flesh powdered fine, then bring together the two lips of the wound for stitching, and treat it until it is healed.
And if the breast tilts downward and is large like in women, cut it into two along the two similar creases above. So that one holds onto the other at the end of each, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this shape:. Then scrape off the skin between the two lips, remove the fat, and apply what we have said about stitching and powders as necessary until it is healed.
And if it is not healed, or the incision is not complete because the patient will not rest, or due to bleeding, then you must fill the wound with cotton moistened in corrosive ointment. And let him suck until he consumes the remainder and the fat, then heal it until it is clean.
"The abscesses that occur under the arms are usually hard tumors resembling scrofula or have rough surfaces, and some contain moisture."
Therefore, those who contain moisture must be cut according to this form, from line .b. to line .g: And when all the pus in the boil has been drained out, then fill the wound with soft cotton, and leave it until the next day. Then remove all the cotton and dress it with an appropriate ointment until it is healed.
And if the boil resembles scrofula, then cut it as we have said for scrofula wounds, and if the wound fills with pus again, then apply a cauterization as we have described before.
When an artery is cut, and the skin above it is cauterized, abscesses often form; likewise when a vein is inflamed and becomes abscessed.
If one recognizes this, then if it is for the artery, the abscess will be long and deep; And when you feel it with your fingers, there will be extraction.
When it is due to the vein, red appears around the opening.
And it is foolish to cut this abscess, especially when it is under the armpits and angles of the jaw and neck, and in many other places; and they are very large. It is therefore necessary to avoid the cautery of iron, and especially for one who is at its head; also for one that is swollen from an artery cut through the skin.
Then open the incision widely, carefully separating the artery from the tissues until it is exposed;
Then place a needle beneath one side and pierce it through to the other side, and tie off the artery with a doubled thread in two places, according to what I have shown you regarding the extraction of the two arteries that are in the temples.
Then prick the spot between the two ligaments with an intrument until blood comes out of it; and let the abscess be drained.
Then apply pressure to the outer thigh until the ligament drops. Then treat with an appropriate ointment until it is healed.
And if the abscess is due to the cutting of a vein, then you must squeeze whatever you can from the abscess towards all the skin, then place the needle beneath the spot where you are holding it and pierce it through; and let there be one doubled thread so that you may draw it out from the other side. Then tie off the abscess as I have told you, with the ligament of one of two parts using a thread.
And if you doubt that the thread is not on fire, then insert another needle underneath all the thread beneath the incision of the first needle, and pinch the threads at four places;
Then cut the abscess until the excess comes out, then cut the excess from the heart and leave what is tied.
Then place a cloth moistened in wine and oil upon it, then apply dressings and ointments until he is healed.
Similarly, just as boils come to the artery and vein, so too do boils appear on the nerves when they are injured or from excessive exertion, etc.
And this happens most often at shoulders and hips, and in all places where there are joints; these are the worst abscesses, their color resembles the color of flesh, and they are found in many conditions without pain;
And when it is squeezed strongly, the patient feels pain, but it is not deep within the body, rather beneath the heart;
And moves easily in all directions, and does not go forward or backward, nor below nor above; and one that is in joints should not be cut with a knife: By chance, there might be contraction here. And those who are at the head or forehead, cut the skin at the temple.
And those who are at the head or forehead, cut the skin at the temple. If the abscess is small, grasp it with forceps and cut into its root;
And if it is large, suspend it with tweezers and scrape it off, then cut into the skin and bring together the wound edges in stitches; treat until healed.
Sometimes it happens in bellies and nowhere else; this is an illness called "fungus" because of its resemblance to mushrooms, having fine roots and large heads.
There are some that are small and others very large.
And I saw one man who had two in his belly that resembled mushrooms more than anything else; they were white with fine roots and split open, continually secreting moisture.
I cut them open and found that one weighed eighteen ounces, and the other six; when incised, this is how you can tell if the patient is moist: the flesh appears pale, moist, and with fine roots. If he strikes the shoulder blade wide, and the fire cautery is present before you.
If he strikes the shoulder blade wide, and the fire cautery is present before you. For at cutting comes many times too great flows of blood; if your blood fails, then hasten to cauterize.
And if you see the patient frightened and fearful of the iron incision, then take a well-made thread of lead, and tie the artery as we have said, leaving it for two days.
Then bind it tightly, and do not cease to pull on the lead thread until it cuts through the artery without labor or struggle.
And if the roots are large, then fear cutting itself for the belly, but you can nevertheless cut half of it, then cauterize so that it does not return.
Then treat the wound, and make sure not to cut the lobe which is of fox color and poor sense and produces milk.
"For this is an incurable tumor, and I will discuss the treatment for cancer later on."
"When the wound has healed" If the swelling of the belly comes from a cauterization of wound or cut of syphilis, and is on the belly and in some cases involves the testicles, as it happens in other diseases, or from blood flowing from veins or arteries according to what is ahead, or from flatulence;
and if it is due to rupture of the sinew and exit of the bowel, then the color of the abscess resembles the color of the flesh, and it is a light matter without pain, and has varied exits. And if it is due to the bursting of the intestine, then it becomes more diverse; and when it is pressed with two fingers it sinks in and then returns, and sometimes it is hard, and greatly enlarges at the entrance of the anus during difficult labor.
And if it is due to moisture, it is a light thing, and opens well when you press it with your hand, without constraining [it].
and if it is due to blood, then the abscess opens by these signs: large and hard, and is fixed according to a quantity. and if it is due to windiness, then it is soft to the touch, and the appearance shows whether it is for arterial blood, or venous blood, or windiness.
and if it is due to windiness, then it is soft to the touch, and the appearance shows whether it is for arterial blood, or venous blood, or windiness. If it is necessary for you to leave the treatment. Because there is doubt and fear about it, as I told you in the chapter on abscesses, regarding the artery and the vein.
And if the appearance is for the intestines or the bowel, then you must instruct the patient to tie their shirt and stretch out entirely straight, then press around the belly. then have them lie quietly between your hands, then go around the place you marked with the spatula, then stretch half of the abscess upwards with the whole large thumb. Then tie around it with a strong thread or silk cord tightly, and let the knot be secure.
Then open half of the boil extended over the bandage, and insert your index finger, seeking the intestine; If you find it caught in the ligature, untie it, and place the intestines back inside the abdomen;
And if you find the boil, take it with the pincers and cut off any excess.
And if the artery or vein opposes you, go gently around it, then return to your work and take two needles, thread them with silk threads, and pierce them crosswise where you have made the incision.
Then press the abscess in four places around the needles, and if it bursts, remove the needles, leave the wound to drain, and cut away any dead flesh. Or you can also cut it when it becomes thin and ready to burst, then treat it as necessary, and cauterize the boil as we have said.
Or you can also cut it when it becomes thin and ready to burst, then treat it as necessary, and cauterize the boil as we have said. Extract the blood or moisture you find, then treat the place where it is necessary, and bind the joint.
Of a chancre We have said in the previous section about the appearances of cancer, and how one should operate there with medicines, and how to avoid iron treatment.
And we speak of cancer spreading to the marrow, and great caution is needed in its treatment, and the ancients said that when cancers are located where they can be removed like cancers that are on breasts or in the hip area, they should all be cut out at the beginning.
Neither has anyone else ever been healed from it before me.
And when the operation is in a place where it can be removed, as we have said, you should purge the patient of black bile once.
Then make him fast if he has shown signs ofpletion, then place him in a good position to perform the operation;
Then pluck your eyelashes near the cancer, and the hair from all around it, and scrape off all the bone without leaving any behind.
And let the blood flow freely, and press well on the wound with your hand or something else; if the bleeding opposes the incision of the artery or vein, cauterize it until the bleeding stops. Then apply other remedies until it is healed.
Of dropsy We have previously discussed in the chapter on dropsy the similarities between it and how water is gathered together, as well as the signs of each similarity and the treatment using medicines or surgery.
And one should not use iron in these two conditions: That is to say, tympanites and hydrosalpinx, for they are deadly.
Therefore, when treating this form of dropsy called "eclites" with medications and the treatment does not help, consider if the patient is weak or has another illness besides dropsy, such as coughing, diarrhea, and similar conditions. If you don't touch with iron, there is doubt.
And if the patient is of strong virtue and has no other illness than dropsy alone and is not too young nor too old, you should act thus: Lift the patient upright onto your hands, and the assistant press the belly by pushing water towards the lowest part of the back, then take the spatula (backward facing) according to this form: And let it be cut into two parts. With a point, and yet not so deep that it can reach the intestines when inserted, nor can it cut.
Then look if dropsy has entered towards the intestines: If so, you must make a cut with the scalpel III fingers wide directly below the navel. And if dropsy is due to liver disease, then make your cut on the left side of the navel III fingers wide.
And if it's due to worms, then cut on the right side, and ensure that the patient does not lie upon the incision so that the excesses do not flow towards that weak area.
Then pierce all the hide with the instrument, remove it and raise your hand to all the space between the skin and the sinew as when skinning, to the quantity of one fingernail or around.
Then pierce the sinew until the space comes to the empty place, and that is the location of water, then draw it out and put this instrument in its form: And it resembles a thin silver rod, made of brass or lightweight iron, with a small hole at the bottom end. and on one side, three holes; and two on the other side, and one more
And the head is cut like a feather, which is the shape of the incision with which scribes cut feathers:
At the top of the blade is the handle, so that when the instrument reaches the water, it stops now on the instrument.
Then empty out one half or one third of it, for if you empty too much at this time by chance the patient may die from the release of his spirit due to shock, or fall unconscious, or approach death.
But emptied according to the quantity of its virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the patient's virtue signify, and his pulse.
Then draw the instrument and hold the water, which is now retained by the heart that obstructs the opening above the spleen, as I have spoken of, that you pierce in this manner;
Then begin the instrument again on another day, if you see the patient enduring this, and draw out a small quantity of water.
Do this for some days, but guard against letting too much remain at once; just a drop of water.
And if you doubt about the patient, and leave much water in him, then he will be cured by hot earth or sand, frequent sweating baths, or exposure to the sun, and he should drink. And the cure of drying medicines until they are healthy, and cauterize upon the stomach, liver, and spleen after extracting the water, as I have said before.
Sometimes children are born without an opening in the penis, or with a small one, or one that is not in its proper place.
If it must be pierced promptly with a very fine needle according to this shape:
Then place over the hole this subtle plug of pitch, and tie it, holding it thus for three or four days. When he wants to urinate, remove the plug, let him pass urine, then replace it.
And perhaps no plug is needed at all, for the urine that comes forth will leave it open.
Those whose hole is small shall use lead plaster, as we have said, so it may widen.
Those whose hole is not in its proper place are handicapped; for some are born with the hole at the tip of the penis, which means they cannot urinate without lifting their penis upwards. And they cannot ejaculate because the matter cannot reach the mouth of the urethra, and this is a serious condition.
The method of treatment is as follows: the patient should lie on his back, then stretch the head of the penis and cut it like the quill of a feather, so that the hole falls in the middle, as it should.
And beware of excessive bleeding that often occurs; if it happens, staunch the flow with whatever can stop blood, and treat the wound until it is healed.
Of the blisters of the penis Many times these swellings come to the penis, and it is an ugly appearance of flesh.
and among them are malignant ones and benign ones;
therefore you should take hold of them with a sharp pin, scrape and clean all, then place damp cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment on top; then apply the diaphoretic ointment until it is healed.
And if the navel is inflamed, of foul color and smelling bad, you must apply a cautery to it.
When you have scraped it off, and if the swelling is at the tip of the penis, with part inside the skin and part outside, then first remove the swelling that is inside; and when it is loosened, then treat the outer part.
For if you treat them together, then the head of the penis may not be spared from being pierced, and blackness and corruption come to its tip and around it.
Therefore cut away all that is black and corrupt, then apply the plaster made of honey and flour mixed with pomegranate peel and figs, then treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
And if bleeding occurs, then apply the lunar cautery according to this form:
The cauteries help with two conditions combined: That is to say, for bloodletting, and for rotting flesh;
And if the head of the penis is corrupted and retracted, then you should insert a lead tube into the penis and have the patient urinate through it;
And when the skin around the head of the penis is hard and tight, which happens to those who are not circumcised or have a wound or abscess there, then you should burn it with the cautery comb until the foreskin is loosened, and relieve the pressure from the head of the penis in all directions;
And if it is difficult to retract the foreskin, then you should burn it with the cautery spoon slightly at the head of the penis and the skin;
Then carefully draw them apart, and insert a thin linen cloth dampened with cold water between them so that it does not become hard again.
Circumcision does not involve continuity like other wounds; However, when we perform this procedure by choice, especially on children, it is necessary that we do the best and easiest work for healing.
I say that the ancients did not practice circumcision on their children because it was not part of their law, and we only have knowledge of it through experimentation.
For I have seen most masters and surgeons who perform circumcisions around the glans, and through force, and with one stroke;
but the heart may fail because there are two veins, and sometimes one above is cut off while the other below remains. Or if it is covered up again, there will be double pain, and during cleaning, the tip of the member may not be secure;
and during cleaning of the foreskin, sometimes the iron may slip and ruin the work, and many times they do not need cleaning afterward, as I have seen.
Regarding the cleansing done by force, I have found that using a thread tied around the entire length is the best experiment because the force cuts equally well both above and below.
For when you press your hand, cut all around in one swift motion; But let the threads be well wrapped around the skin;
And the manner of the first operation should be such that you make the child think, if he understands, that you are only binding the thread around the penis at first, and then you let him rest in all ways that you can;
then hold him straight between your hands, and hide the weights behind your hands or under your feet so that the child does not see them nor any of the instruments;
then place your hand on the penis and blow on the heart, and pull it upwards until the head of the penis is inside; then clean it well from the impurities that are gathered there, then tie the foreskin with a double thread, then tie it below at another point;
then clean it well from the impurities that are gathered there, then tie the foreskin with a double thread, then tie it below at another point; and hold it there with the second tying between the pouch and the index finger, and cut between the two threads, then quickly raise the heart upwards and pull the head of the penis; Then let blood flow little by little, for this is the treatment; And sprinkle powder on it and on the powder lay a bandage made of cooked egg white tempered with rose water, mixed with good fresh rose oil, and let it stay overnight, and treat again until healed.
The form for the preparation of forceps is this:
Let the two heads be thin and sharp, and let the heads also be as large as a hazelnut, equally.
The fault of the cautery is when the heart is cut during the incision;
Therefore, you should stretch it to your fingernail before the wound becomes inflamed;
And cut it evenly, and if you cannot hold it with your fingernail, use forceps, and then cut it.
And if three days pass, and what is under the penis is swollen, let it be until the inflammation subsides somewhat, and then peel it gently.
If you move the cup as you are able, and guard from the part of the shaft, it will not harm him at all.
Therefore heal the wound caused by powder with the methods we have said for treating powders; if one scoops out too much from the heart and it goes upwards, there will be no harm.
Therefore heal it as we have said until it is healthy again.
"On the retention of urine"
Retention of urine is due to obstruction from stone, or blood clots, or bowel, or flesh born, or similar things, as we have said in the division.
And if urine is not released, and you see that retention is due to a stone located in the neck of the bladder, then the patient must be made to bend over on his knees. And place their feet on their back, extend their belly towards the part above the back, and let the patient hold themselves down as much as they can. And then the neck of the bladder is constricted during the expression of the stone above, causing urine to be retained.
And if it does not come forth as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you must administer extraction using all the instruments called "syringe," of which this is the form:
And let it be made of fine, lightweight silver, like a bird's feather; And let the tube be one and a half palms long, and slender at the end.
And the manner of issuing urine is that you take a doubled thread, and tie at its head a pouch of wool or cotton, and insert the head of the thread into the syringe;
And cut off the excess wool and insert it up to the head of the syringe, then grease the syringe with oil or butter made from egg yolks, and have the patient sit on a chair, and raise the bladder and penis with moistened oil of olive and hot water.
Then gently place the syringe in the penis, until it reaches the root of the penis, then bend the penis upwards towards the belly.
Then push the syringe forward until it reaches the bladder, and the patient feels it emptying, but this should not be done in that manner unless the tube through which it goes is twisted.
Then slowly pull out the thread along with all the lint, and let the urine follow the lint; then remove it completely, and let the urine flow freely.
and continue with the syringe until the bladder is emptied, and the patient feels relieved.
"When there is erosion or blood in the bladder, or putrefaction has accumulated there, and you see that watery and medicinal substances are being discharged, then use all the instruments called a 'clepsydra', of which this is the form:"
It has three holes: Two on one side, and one on the other, as you see;
And the raised parts are such that the medicine's cutting should be so tight that it effectively stops the penis without any additional help, so that moisture can be drawn out and inserted when needed.
And when you see your medications entering the bladder, place the head of the funnel in the moisture, and draw out what is inside it.
You shall draw out moisture from the cauldron, then strongly push back the lid. Then moisture will enter inside, and it will come to the bladder at once, so that the patient will feel it.
And this is the form of the subtle enema used to administer an enema to the bladder:
And it is made of silver or brass, and its head is higher;
And below it is placed against the back where the sinews fall.
Then take a sheep's bladder and put into it the moisture that you wish to use for the enema, then tie it between the two breasts with a doubled good thread, and heat one part of this moisture over the fire;
Then insert the tip of the enema into the urethra, then press your hand on the bladder until all the moisture has flowed in, until the patient feels that this moisture has reached the bladder;
And if you do not have a bladder, take a piece of parchment and make it into a circle, and pierce it evenly around. Then insert a strong thread into these holes, then close the circle as one closes a nut, and put within it what you see of oil and moisture and water, and tie it on the instrument;
And do as you did with the bladder, squeezing by hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
"on stones"
We have already said in the section on stones their types and extraction together with remedies;
And I have said the difference between a stone entered in the kidneys, and all its signs, and in which stone one should operate by cutting; And in the bladder, and in the penis.
And I will tell you plainly and briefly.
I say that the stone which is entered in the bladder happens more often to children, and it is a sign that water jumps from the bladder like water in its fineness.
And it openly appears like sand, and the patient feels grit in his penis, and he often sneezes, and then becomes rigid. And many die from these wounds.
And the healing of children is easy until they are four years old; and it is very difficult in old people; and it is moderate for those between youth and old age.
And treatment is easier for those with a large stone than those with a small one.
When we come to treat, first cleanse the patient with an enema to draw out all the feces in the intestines. For it sometimes hinders finding the stone.
Then take the patient by the feet and lift them up and move them downwards so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, and sometimes it jumps out from above.
Then have him sit between your hands, prepared like this, with his hands under his thighs, so that the bladder is completely tilted downwards.
Then find it and touch it inside;
If you feel the stone in the space, then quickly cut into the stone.
And if it does not fall out on touching it completely, then moisten your left index finger with oil if the patient is a child, or your middle finger if the patient is fully grown. And place it at its base, and seek the stone, and when you feel it with your two fingers, then move it to the neck of the bladder;
Then press upon it with your two fingers, and push it out where you see the incision.
And instruct the assistant to press the bladder with his hand, and tell him to extend his right hand's genitals upwards, and remove the skin that is beneath the genitals at the part where the incision is made.
Then insert the spatula in place, of which this is the shape: And cut between what lies between the genitals and the fundament, not midway but at the left side of the buttock.
And let it be straight upon the stone, and your two fingers always on the fundament, and make the cut across so that it is wide from without, and within narrow, according to the size of the stone, not too large.
Perhaps then press with the finger that is on the fundament, causing it to jump out without effort;
And know there are such stones that have corners and edges: If it is painful to pass:
and some are smooth, like a pebble, and rounded, from which the outcome is favorable.
Therefore, for those that have corners and edges, make the incision larger;
and if it does not jump out, then you must use forceps that are shaped like a file at the tip to extract the stone so that it does not escape; or place underneath the instrument a fine, curved tool at its end;
and if you cannot grasp it this way, then widen the hole slightly, and if blood seeps out, sprinkle powdered vitriol on it;
and if there are more than one stone, first insert the largest one into the neck of the bladder, then cut it, then pull it out with forceps, and then remove the smaller ones if there are more.
And if it is very large, it must be opened wider and a larger incision made. For two things happen to the patient: If death occurs, or if urine comes repeatedly through where the wound cannot heal.
But nevertheless, make every effort to pull out with forceps, or cut it out with pincers, bit by bit;
And once you have completed your work, cover the wound with incense and aloe and dragon's blood, bind it tightly, and place over it a damp cloth soaked in oil and wine, or oil and rose water and cold water, to cool the hot inflammation. Then have the patient rest on his neck, and do not untie the bandage for three days.
And when you remove the bandage, wash the wound area very well with oil and water, then apply ointment of diacereion and ointment of basilicon until it is healed.
And if hot inflammation and corruption come to the wound, and congealed blood appears in the bladder, and urine is retained in such a way that it cannot pass without pain with the urine: Then cut your finger into the wound and remove that blood, for if it remains, it will damage the bladder and cause putrefaction.
Then lift the wound of water and air and dust, and help him in all ways that you know until he is healed.
And it is necessary that every time you treat him, you tie his two thighs together and gather the medications on the spot.
And if the stone is small, and it is in the passage of the penis, stuck within it, and urine cannot come out; then the treatment I mentioned earlier, which involves cutting him many times, is excused by this cure. I have already tried this.
Take one iron needle according to this shape and with three points stuck into a splinter of wood
Then take a thread and tie it around the penis below the stone so that it cannot move back into the bladder;
Then gently insert the probe into the penis until it reaches the stone. And turn the probe in your hand against the stone little by little until you can pierce the stone on the other side;
Then urine will come soon after, and then press your hand on what remains of the stone that is still inside the penis. Soon afterwards broken, and sparks fly with urine, and the patient is healed.
And if you cannot do this due to any obstacle, then tie one thread under the stone and another above it; then insert the probe towards the stone between the two threads; then draw out the fire, untie the thread, and cleanse the blood that has gathered in the wound. And treat him until he is healed
de la piere des femmes
It can happen that a stone gets stuck in women, and if it does happen sometimes, the treatment is difficult, and it is forbidden for three reasons:
One reason is that perhaps the woman is a virgin;
And the second is that it is difficult to find a skilled woman who dares to uncover herself for physicians, especially when she is chaste.
And the third manner is that perhaps one cannot find a skilled woman in this art of hands
And the fourth manner is that women's stones are more deeply embedded than men's, so one must make a deeper incision, and there is great fear involved. And if you must resort to this, then you should take a skilled midwife, but if you cannot find one, then seek out any discreet physician.
And she presents a well-reasoned case for the life of women, or a woman who knows part of the art, and commands that she perform what you command regarding the inspection of the stone. and examine very carefully whether the woman is virgin:
and examine very carefully whether the woman is virgin: then she should put her thumb on the fundament and seek for the stone;
and if she finds it, she should press it under her thumb, and advises that she put her thumb into the patient's anus, squeezing and pressing her left hand firmly on the bladder.
If she finds it, then she must move it gradually from the entrance of the bladder until it reaches the root of the thigh.
Then cut on the stone at the root of the thigh opposite the middle of the anus, where it moves around and feels the stone in that area; and do not move her thumb above or below the stone, and let the first cut be small.
and do not move her thumb above or below the stone, and let the first cut be small. Then place the hot iron on the hip, if you feel the stone so close the wound until the stone can exit fiery, and know that there are many kinds of stones.
This is to say, small and large, sharp and blunt, long and round, and those with roots.
and know their similarities for knowing the outcome.
And if the blood overcomes you, then place crushed vitriol in its stead, and hold it there for an hour until the blood is stanched;
Then return to your work until the stone is out, and have the tools I told you about ready for extracting the stone from men to help you in your task;
And if the blood overcomes you, and it is from an artery that has been cut, then place powder on the wound and bind it with bandages and cloths, and do not recommence cutting, and leave the stone alone and do not attempt to remove it, lest the patient should die. Then heal the wound.
And when the heat of the blood has been stopped, and the place is ready, then return to your work until the stone is removed.
The gathering of water is nothing but an assembly of moisture or white phlegm that is underneath the heart of cows and contains the egg.
And it is called 'spleen', but sometimes it is properly within the tissue of the egg, so if one thinks this is the other egg. And it is the skin of the cow between the white spleen that we have spoken of
But none are like a drop of milk. And the generation of this hernia comes from weakness that affects the thighs, and this matter becomes spread out.
Sometimes this moisture comes from percussion on cows and has many colors: Either it is colored declining towards yellow, or red without blood, or black, or watery white; and there are more
And these are the signs to recognize this gathering: if it is in the white spleen we have spoken of, then the abscess is round and long like the shape of an egg, and does not open the cow's skin because it has moisture all around.
And if there is moisture in the proper cloth, then the abscess will be soft with part of the egg, and therefore one thinks it is another egg.
and if the moisture is between the skin of the testicles and the scrotum, he feels it well;
Therefore, when you see the color of the moisture, try the whole four-square introvert, which is shown above. "Therefore, according to what comes after the introite, judge what is inside."
And when we cauterize it with iron, the patient must be made as healthy as possible according to our ability and the fullness of his body;
then lay him on his back on something a little high, and put many blankets underneath him;
then sit on the left side of the patient, and command the assistant to sit on the right side, and extend the rod to one of the two ribs near the heart of the testicles;
then take the scalpel and cut the skin of the testicles midway along its length near the pubic hair, making a straight incision through the skin of the testicles up to the white scrotum, and scrape it finely according to your ability;
Then pierce the sac full of water with a wide opening, and draw out all the water, then place your bandages, and let the sac be upstream.
and do not touch the heart of the kidneys, but only the sac itself; Cut it all or in pieces itself subtly, the cost of him so that if you do not cut it well enough, water will return.
And if the egg jumps out during your operation, then put it back in its place once you have finished the sac's work.
Then sew together the two leaves of the heart of the kidneys with a stitch, then heal it like other wounds until it is healed.
And if you find the egg corrupted by another disease, then tie the vessels that are suspended, while doubting the flow of blood.
Then cut the kidney with all its suspensions, and remove the egg, and heal it as we have said.
And if water is gathered into two parts together, know what these are"; Then cut the other part evenly as you did the first, then squeeze out the blood, and put on the wound clean linen moistened in rose oil";
Then cut the other part evenly as you did the first, then squeeze out the blood, and put on the wound clean linen moistened in rose oil"; And put over another layer linen moistened in wine and oil, and place it on the two wounds, then put doubled cloths over them, and tie everything according to this pattern.
Then take two cloths, and fill them with woolen lint according to this likeness and sew them together at the waistband of the breeches, and one of the heads takes up the fundament as far as the back, and the other at the part of the wrist.
And the other two heads over the two angles, and let all the restraint be assembled in the loop of the breeches.
And sometimes this root is medicated with cautery instead of iron cutting, and it is that you take one sharp scalpel cautery, and cut the skin of the wounds, and let it be heated as we have said, so that the white matter that contains water is exposed.
Then take the cautery according to this form, and prick it once on the sinew, and burn the skin with this fine hot cautery.
And scrape it in all ways that you can, until you scrape everything away.
and make sure the fire does not touch the eye
And know that this procedure is more beneficial; And move carefully avoiding bloodletting, and gently cut as much as needed.
If anything opposes you, such as a hot abscess or bloodletting or other issue, then treat what opposes you according to what is written above.
And if the patient is afraid and will not undergo this procedure because of its horror, then prepare for perforation, as I tell you. But when you are certain through signs that we have said indicate that there is moisture there, then make the patient sit on a raised seat; then prick the abscess at its lower part with the entire spatula width, and insert the cautery into the wound.
Let the opening be wide enough so that all the water flows out freely.
Then place cotton on the wound, tie it, and let it remain for the rest of the water to flow out; then treat it until the wound is healed.
And if the linen bandage does not allow water to exit through the mouth of the wound, then you must insert a feather or the instrument used to treat hydrops with, whose shape is shown earlier.
Then widen the wound's opening and ensure that water flows out; know that six months or so after it has gathered again as before, it will then pass its days.
Know that there is fear and many dispositions in the cutting of this vein, therefore it seems better to leave it alone.
And I will tell you about the operation and the like of an abscess.
I say therefore that many abscesses come into the body, especially in the groin area. And that happens often.
It is known to happen due to acidity or fever that spreads through the joints or from blows;
And the color of the boil appears according to the color of the body; and feels no pain, yet it is a severe boil;
And sometimes there appears a painful, hard, and pockmarked boil with a reddish hue, or from the bursting of an artery or swelling of a vein.
When it is due to an artery, it is known by the hot disposition of the boil when pressed with two fingers; And one should not touch it.
That which is caused by the swelling of a vein is known by its disposition when touched with two fingers, and it can be well incised in this manner and others. And you should cut the skin around the joint, then pull the egg upwards and remove the fatty membrane that surrounds it.
If the egg is already solid with these roots, then you must draw out the egg, along with its head.
And if it is air in the syphilis or in those that are within the vessels, then you must remove all of this thick substance, and round off the head.
"And if the birthmark of the skin is in the hinder part, then it is necessary that you cut off all of it and remove the boil as we have said."
"And when your procedure is completed, then fill the wound with wool moistened in rose oil and wine, then dress it with other dressings until it is healed."
This is an abscess wrapped in wrapping like a boil, with softening of the skin, and the patient moves around crying out when touched.
And the treatment of this disease is quite frightening as well, but nonetheless we will tell you its operation according to what the ancients did.
You must make the patient sit on an elevated seat, then you place the suspensory ligature of the scrotum below your fingers, grasping all nearby vessels close to the penis, and the master ties it off firmly.
Then cut through the scrotum with a sharp, wide-bladed knife across the vessels until they are exposed, and then strip each side as we have described in the extraction of arteries in the temples.
Then he inserts a needle where there is a doubled thread, and ties it to the first place where the wound appeared, and ties it again at the other end. Then the edges are cut evenly straight according to the length of the body, and corrupted moisture is removed from them;
Then treat the wound as others where one has been pierced by an arrow, so that no vessel may remain to nourish either end.
For there is no harm from this, and if blood comes from all vessels, then the ends must be drawn together on all vessels. So that the bone does not lose its nourishment due to the incision of the vessels, they dry and cannot help it.
The outcome of this treatment is through the section that extends to the side or the extension on the abdomen in the area of the groin, which causes the intestines to descend from that opening towards one end.
And this rupture is either in the side or due to extension from it, and these two ways come from many causes:
From blows, from falls, from kicks, from lifting heavy weights, and similar causes;
And the sign that it is due to stretching of the sinews is that it happens gradually over a long time, not suddenly. The abscesses are level with each other down towards the depths because the bowels press against them.
"And the signs that it is a fracture of the nasal bone itself are that there is sudden pain at the onset, and there is diverse swelling apparent under the skin, due to the escape of intestinal contents through the defect in the nasal bone."
"And sometimes the intestines may descend with the fracture and become trapped in it, causing great pain to the patient, especially when they are pressed upon."
"And these fractures of the nasal bone require careful handling so that they do not happen frequently due to poor treatment."
And the manner of treating it is that you should instruct the patient to press their intestines with their hand inside the wound if possible. Then have him lie on his back between your hands and raise his thighs;
then raise the heart above it [the wound] and cut away all the skin from the inner thigh; then insert unguent-soaked bandages into the wound according to what you need to open it, so that the bone may come out;
then strip away the sinew that is under the skin of the thigh until all around the white tough sinew is exposed;
Then insert your two index fingers into what guides the thigh bone, that which is between the white muscle that is under the skin of the thigh and between the second muscle, and separate what is behind the thigh, and between the second muscle.
And then move your right hand inside the hollow of the thighs and stretch the white muscle upwards with your left hand, and lift the thigh up towards the hip bone. And instruct the assistant to stretch the thigh upward and release what is behind the joint.
Feel your two hands if there is any entrapped intestine or hard white muscle, and if you find anything, put it back into the abdomen below.
Then take a needle with a thick thread made of linen and insert it into the rear part of the muscle that is behind the skin of the thigh. After the hip bone, then cut the threads that appear from the needle, until there are four left. Then they are assembled one upon the other like a cross, and tied with sinew which is beneath the skin of the testicles, with a strong tie of two parts; Then wrap the heads of the thighs and tie them firmly with two parts, so that none of the vessels nourishing them can enter inside, lest a tumor come there; And then place the tie according to the first tie two fingers away from it, and after these two ties leave enough sinew which is beneath the skin of the testicles for one finger's width; and finally according to the roundness that the egg carries.
Then cut into the part beneath the skin of the testicles until blood flows and the bowels, as we have said before;
Then prepare wool moistened in oil and put it on the wound, and bring the tie that we have mentioned. "And sometimes it may be necessary to cauterize the exposed nasal bone after the incision has been made in case of any bleeding." For this often happens, and leave the tie until it adheres by itself;
And if it takes time to fall asleep, let him be aroused with warm water, and apply what we have said until he falls asleep;
Then heal the wound with another remedy until it is perfectly healed.
Here is the translation of the given text with a focus on the term "hernie carnosous":
In this art I have never seen anyone dare to perform a cure by iron.
And the ancients said that it is done like the branch that binds the wrist, in such a way that you tie the vessels lightly after cutting above gently underneath;
Then cut into the middle of it and heal the abscess with what opens until the vessels bleed.
And treat it as we have said until it is healed.
Sometimes a fracture occurs in bones, as we have said, and the location is revealed;
And do not leave any of the intestines at the joints, and if some are left, it's little, and repair all hours.
And moreover if it remains too long in this state, the wound becomes inflamed or suppurated until the intestines protrude;
And this happens due to the stretching of the sinew which is at the angles, as we have said, for it becomes stretched and then softened and swollen the joint and opened.
And its treatment is by cauterization, as we have previously stated.
And sometimes it is cured by iron in this manner: And the patient should lie on their back between your hands; then cut the swollen area of the break with a knife, about three fingers wide.
And then pull out the sinew which is under the skin that follows; then take some fat and place it on the exposed area of the sinew.
And press it firmly onto the deep part of the abdomen; then sew up both visible areas of the sinew over the top of the fat, sewing one and the other.
Then remove the head of the fat; do not cut into the sinew nor extend the wound or anything else, as I have told you in the treatment of intestinal prolapse. Then treat with wound care.
Then treat with wound care. And when you cut the threads, cleanse it and heal the wound until it is healthy.
The infection is confined, and has no appearance in the rupture, and the cauterization should be performed more gently at this place, and closer to saving the patient's life.
Regarding the softening of the skin of the thighs
The skin of the scrotum is often softened in some men because the flesh inside it becomes softened; this is unpleasant to see.
It is necessary, when one wishes to treat this condition, for the patient to lie on his back and the skin that has softened should be cut away from the natural skin.
Then sew the two lips together with stitches; if you wish, first sew up the excess softened skin tightly with three or four stitches.
Then cut between the stitches, and treat it like other wounds until it is healed; then remove the thread.
Regarding castration
Know that those who practice sorcery are punished in our law, and therefore I would prefer not to speak of it in this book;
and it is only necessary to mention it for two reasons:
The first reason is that the physician may know how to respond when asked about it, and its treatment;
And the other, because we often have need of castration of certain beasts to help us, such as of goat and sheep and cat and other beasts.
I say therefore that castrations are done in two ways: either by attraction or by cutting.
In the one that we do by attraction, we make the beast sit in warm water until the testicles become softened and pendant; then grasp them with your hand until they are replaced and you no longer feel them.
On castration by cutting: It is necessary that you tether the beast and press the skin of the testicles with your left hand, then tie the suspender, and cut each testicle once when they are well exposed;
and leave a small hole above and below where the vessels are severed;
And this method of castration is more reliable than that done by attraction, because sometimes some part of the testicles remains with attraction, causing the beast to desire lust.
Then heal the wound until it is sound.
Regarding hermaphrodites
Hermaphroditism exists among men in two ways: One way is that between the two testicles opens also like the form of a woman's nature, having hair and sometimes urine in the area.
And another way occurs in women: they have upon the pubic hair both like a penis and two testicles.
The treatment for both men and women is that you cut away all adherent skin and dress it like other wounds;
In the second manner, for men whose urine passes through the skin of the testicles, there is no treatment.
Tentigine is an adherent skin on the natural part that appears too unsightly to behold; Some women have it as large as their hand, and this is its treatment.
It is necessary that you shave off the excess skin of the tentigine with your hand or scissors, and then cut it lightly;
And do not cut too deep, lest blood flow excessively, and then dress it like other wounds until it is healed.
And there is another wound that arises at the mouth of the womb, and the hymen, and sometimes it swells up like a cow's horn; therefore the ancients called it "cow disease". It is necessary that you bind it, as we have said regarding tenting, and continue the treatment until it is healed.
Incorrect if the woman's nature is not pierced, or the hole is small. And it is either natural by birth, or accidental due to illness that has come upon it.
And it is either natural by birth, or accidental due to illness that has come upon it. Or it is caused by adhesions of flesh, either thin or thick, and occurs deep within the womb, on the sides, below, or wherever it may be.
And it prevents conception, childbirth, and sometimes menstruation as well.
The diagnosis of this is made by examination of the belly.
If the inflammation appears nearby, then seek it in your two ears or in your throat.
If it is due to thin adhesions, and it extends for two fingers' breadth, then hurry up and round it in this manner:
Join your two index fingers together, with the woman lying on her back and her legs spread apart;
Then the two books are fully opened, so that the subtle face is rounded, and the poultices are covered.
Then take wool, dampen it in oil, place it on the wound, and have the woman lie face down each day so that it cannot dry.
And if the shoulder blade is hard and thick, then you must cut it like a bay leaf.
If the poultice is of new flesh, then suspend it from the ox's horn and cut it off;
and have ready staunching medicines such as aconite, dragon's blood, frankincense, mixed with egg yolk.
Then prepare a wide lead plate so that the wound cannot dry out.
And likewise have ready a tent of dry linen.
Then let him be treated with other remedies until he is healed.
And when flesh-born matter comes in the wound, it must be cut according to this manner, unless it is an incurable abscess. For an incurable abscess that is in the wound, one should not cauterize with fire.
Emorroides est une maladie de la partie postrieure de lanus et du prine, cause par une dilatation veineuse ou un hmorragie de ces veines. Les symptmes incluent le saignement lors de la dfcation, la douleur dans la rgion anale, et des masses dures  cet endroit. Hemorrhoids are abnormal openings of veins from which blood usually does not flow, and when hemorrhoids are old they become hard.
And as we have said in the division, their similarities, signs, I will say here those that require treatment.
I say that hemorrhoids and piles, when they are buried deep in the marrow, and they cannot be felt, then there is no cure by iron.
Those that are at the mouth of the anus, which can be felt, those can be cured.
It is necessary then that you place the woman in a cold house; then put hot pincers on the navel with tongs and cut it at its roots; then apply powder containing medicines that stop bleeding, such as acacia and dragon's blood incense, and similar things.
then place her feet to the fire for an hour, then put her in cold water.
and if bleeding persists, make her sit in a decoction of sumac and pomegranate bark and gall nuts and similar things; then take barley flour, mix it with honey and celery, and apply the plaster on her back.
And if she bleeds, that is good. If not, then apply cupping glasses to her back and breasts without striking them.
then take wool, wet it in plantain juice or celery juice with old wine, and apply it to the affected area.
And when the abscess is ripe, then treat the wound with ointment until it is clean.
And the one called 'albathir' is red, and resembles a sharp-pointed head, so it should be covered just like the thelul. Then perform treatment until he is healthy.
Many kinds of abscess occur in the martyrdom (i.e., the genitals), such as chancre, pierced abscess, herpes, erysipelas, fistulas, hemorrhoids, hot abscess, and many other diseases that I have mentioned in their categories.
It is therefore necessary that I discuss in this treatise the hot abscess that appears in the marrow, which is not one of those that boil.
And if you wish to know the work of iron, look whether the abscess is hard at the beginning of its appearance, and full of heat and fever, and becomes red if you can see it. Therefore do not hurry to pierce, but let it swell until the pain subsides;
And then have the patient sit on a chair, and place two small chairs where they can recline, and lean on their back and bring their feet together below the knee.
And let their thighs be spread apart, and place their arms under their knees, and tie them securely with a good bandage;
Then follows the removal of the bile towards the right side, and there one brings the instrument with which one operates the mouth of the gallbladder, about which further details come below.
And it is necessary that when you bring this instrument there, you insert the reed first to know the depth of the gallbladder, so that what enters from the instrument does not go deeper than it should, and does not burn the patient. And if the instrument is larger, then one must cover the depth of the gallbladder with rags so that the instrument does not cause pain.
And it is necessary that he place the funnel of the instrument above and that he moisten the instrument.
And when the abscess opens and one cuts into it with a gentle hand, then one must cover it at the head, at the upper spine.
And when the gallbladder is emptied, then you must put in the wound wet bandages in rose oil or in dry green oil.
And place the hot iron of the cautery on the bottom of the wound, and put behind it a wick moistened in water where mallows have been cooked.
Then, after two days of applying this ointment, continue until it is healed.
And sometimes lift the wound and the boil with an enema of water and honey, then with water where roots of lily and long aristolochia have been cooked. Then apply the ointment again.
And if the wound is in the marrow, you must beware of cooking with iron, but treat it as we have said in the division.
Childbirth It is first necessary that she know the shape of natural childbirth, and the sign is when you see the woman straining downward, and wanting to smell the air:
Then the child hastens to come out. You then know that this birth is according to its natural form, and the head is the first to emerge, along with the afterbirth.
When you see these signs, gently press her belly so that the child comes out quickly.
Because when he sits on his head, so does his second line with him, and the bridle of his excesses is cleaned by good purification;
And that which comes differently does not come naturally.
Because sometimes it comes on its feet and the body or head turns upside down, and the hands, or it comes onto its belly, often turning by chance onto its neck, and into other unnatural positions;
Therefore it is necessary that the midwife be wise and skillful in these matters, careful to avoid error and deception, and I will show you all the positions and how to assist them.
If the child comes out onto its head naturally, and the woman gives birth screaming, and her strength is weak, then have her sit on a stool or let the women hold her up;
and raise her nature with oil or ground fenugreek cooked, and then put the midwife between her thighs the small spatula, of which here is the shape: Cut the navel cord, and clip it with nail clippers until the moisture inside flows out;
And press the woman's belly until the child descends, and if it does not descend, then you must administer a suppository of ground fenugreek mixed with sesame oil to the woman;
Then make her inhale warm steam and sneeze, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour: The child will now be born.
And if the two hands come out first, you must gently push them back in bit by bit; and if they cannot be pushed back in, then place the woman on a seat and raise her feet up high; then suddenly lower the seat to the ground, taking care that the woman does not fall during this maneuver;
And if the hands still cannot be pushed back in and the child is dying, then cut off the hands at the joint just mentioned, extract the child, and reset it correctly.
Of the birth of a child upon its feet When the child comes onto its feet, then you must push upwards. And then turn it gently, little by little, until it is even.
Then grasp one of the feet and stretch it out gently.
When it can jump up to its thighs, then command it to grasp [the foot], and make it sneeze with conditions. If it were to leap, God willing.
And if he cannot jump as we have said, then turn it bit by bit until it is in its natural shape For then it is easy
And if it does not come forth as we have said, then take musk-rose of old age, and sesame oil, and melted gum, and grind all in one mortar; And put this ointment on the woman's womb, then make her sit in hot water up to below the ribs.
And when she is moistened underneath, put a collar of myrrh on her and leave it there for an hour; Then make her sit on a chair, then make her sneeze and hold her mouth and nose, and gently press her belly, for the child will leap now.
From the outlet of the child onto his knees When a child comes in this form, then the midwife places her hands softly and gently. Then let it be suspended by its neck, with its feet hanging down, lying on the bed; and fold her hands gently and gently, then she takes her hands to place them on its belly, removing the pillows underneath so that it is well positioned below; and if the child does not slip out, she takes its feet and pulls firmly, then brings her belly upwards, and then inserts her hands; and remove the child gently. and tell the woman to hold herself back so that the child comes out easily.
From the outlet of the child who comes from the thigh, keep one hand It is necessary to devise a means of reducing dislocation: if it cannot be reduced, then make the woman stand up and walk around;
if she cannot walk, then make her lie down on the bed, and forcefully extend her legs;
then apply the cataplasm that I have described
and if she does not give birth, then make her sit on a chair, and then try to reduce the dislocation And wean the child according to its natural figure, and let it sneeze, and instruct her to suckle until the child is full.
From the outlet of the child on his neck, with his hands spread out and his face turned towards his mother's back It is necessary that the peasant take his hand, then turn it gently and gently, and weave lightly.
And when it is even, then apply the medicinal plaster of alum and oil, as we have said, and instruct her to move gently.
Then make her sit on the seat, and tell her to suckle; And let her sneeze. In the same manner for all the afterbirth
In the same manner for all the afterbirth When the second milk comes forth in this manner, cut off the second milk with your nail until the moisture is emptied;
And if the child falls on its face and neck, cut off the skin from the corners so that it does not remain trapped, lest the child die;
Then place the child inside until you have positioned it correctly, and instruct the woman to suckle several times:
From the outlet of twins Know that twins are often born, sometimes even three or four at a time; and this is not unusual, it happens quite often. Two are strange, and do not live long unless named early;
Two are strange, and do not live long unless named early; I know them, that they multiply, and are devoured by the wolf who divides them, which is tied to the mouth.
And sometimes they come out as naturally as one all at once, as we have said.
If they are born crying, then the treatment should be carried out as we have said, and let the midwife be skilled, doing what she does quickly and easily; and do so in such a way that it leads to health. Of several children
Sometimes they are formed in the womb one or two or three or four or five or six or seven, or even more up to fifteen, and all are perfectly formed like children by the measure of the glorious Creator, and thus the midwife should know everything about this, for such things can happen. If it is done as it ought to be.
Of a dead child
When you treat a woman for a dead child or miscarriage, as I have mentioned in the division, and it does not expel, you are compelled by necessity to act with your hands; Therefore, you must know if the woman is of sound virtue, and whether she has no accidents or fears death.
It is necessary for the woman to be positioned on her back, with her head inclined downward, and her legs raised;
And the helper must hold her thigh at two points, or tie it to the bed so that she cannot move during the descent of the child.
Then rub the mouth of the womb with moist oil made from althea and fenugreek and linseed, then anoint your hands with these oils and powders.
Then place them gently into the womb, then seek the location where she expelled the waters that are suitable for this purpose, and be careful that if the child is presenting feet first it does not descend headfirst.
If the splinters are in his eyes or neck or mouth or throat or cheeks or under the beard or near the armpits, and if the dislodging is below the feet, he should push or pinch around the middle ribs;
And he should grasp the splinter with his right hand, place the crook between the middle fingers of his left hand, push gently with his whole hand, and insert the splinter into any of these places that we have mentioned, until it reaches its empty destination;
Then insert against the other splinter, or the third one if necessary, so that the extraction is even;
And then pull them evenly by moving from side to side, so that they come out more easily, and the splinter should have teeth for better gripping, as shown here:
And if there remains a part of it, then he should smear some of his fingers with oil and push them into that part and pull out the other part;
And if there remains none, then place this ointment at a higher location, and do so until it has all flowed out.
And if one hand comes before the other and cannot be brought back due to tension, then you must wrap a bandage around it until all tension is released. Then strike the handcuffs at the joint of the sole or the wrist, and likewise you must do with the other hand, and for both feet.
And if the child's head is large and it is tight at the outlet, or if there is an acute angle assembled there, then you must insert the spatula spinous between your fingers, splitting the head and extracting the fluid. or else round it with the instrument called "almidach", with which the shape comes out along with the instruments in the chapter that follows this one.
And do the same if the child has a naturally large head.
And then seize the bones with pincers, and if the head jumps forward and is restrained by the forceps, it should be cut, until the moisture in the bone socket comes out.
And if it cannot come out, then cut it into pieces with a saw where you can reach.
Should it be swollen in the abdomen or below the ribs, then it must be pierced until the moisture flows out.
"And if the child is on its feet, then traction is easy, and directing towards the mouth of the matrix is also easy."
And if it is tight in the belly or the wound, then you must pull it out with a cloth wrapped around your hand; Open the belly or the wound until the moisture flows out.
And if the other bones are disjointed but the head remains in place, then insert your hand deep into the flesh and pull it up to the entrance of the socket; Then insert one or two fingers and pull it out.
And if the entrance of the socket is narrowed due to heat from an abscess that has formed there, then one should not work it open; instead, apply moist and greasy things. And the plaster maker uses, and this is in softened and moistening water.
And if the child is on its side, and you can make it even, then plaster as we have said in the living child:
and if there is no power, then remove it by sections, and leave nothing of the afterbirth.
And when you have done this, if the plaster as we have said in hot boils that come on the face:
and if bleeding occurs, then let it be put into tightening water, and the plaster other remedies.
I saw a woman whose womb contained an infant that had died, then another infant became lodged on top of it and also died After a long time, she developed inflammation in her vulva which swelled so much that it opened up and began to emit a foul odor
I was called to treat her, but after pondering for a long time, I could not heal the wound
I applied a strong attracting plaster and an bone emerged, then after several days another one appeared I was greatly astonished by this, for the womb has no bones
I concluded that they were bones from a dead infant
I sought the wound, and pulled out many bones, until the woman was better. and the woman lived a long time thus, and sometimes a little bit of bowel came out from there;
I wrote this chapter only so that when the master finds something strange, he may know how to help.
Hereafter follows the form of the pressure, by which books are weighed;
Also, turn to page two for the heads of the ribs. And always, let the horn be more subtle in restraining, and make it from ebony or boxwood;
and the mouth of the wood should be two fingers wide, and its edges one palm and a half long; and between the two ribs there should be two joints of this same wood, which close firmly on both ends, half a palm long or a little more;
And these two joints are placed in the mouth of the mallet to open it when turning the two horns.
Another form, more subtle and lighter in appearance, should be made from ebony or boxwood wood, according to the shape of pliers; And it should have two joints at each head, as you see, one palm long and two fingers wide;
And when you want to open the mallet with all the instruments, then have the woman sit on a bed, feet hanging down and legs spread apart, then insert the two joints together into the mallet, and hold the head of the instrument under her thighs; Then open your hand to all the instruments, just as you have done evenly with the forceps, according to the quantity that you see opening the mouth of the abscess, until the boil does what it wants.
These instruments are all mounted, and their appearances are multiplied; And when the physician has prepared them, the work goes faster, and the higher for men because of their quantity.
"Do not disdain the instrument until you have prepared it, for its necessity is not excusable."
When the afterbirth is retained during childbirth, you must command the woman to hold her breath, then make her sneeze with condition, and hold your hands over her mouth and nose; And if she sneezes because of this, all is well.
If not, then take hot water, and make a hole or an opening, and put in herbs that can open the mouth of the abscess, such as celandine, rue, anise, chamomile, cassia, and centory; All these herbs, or some of them, should be cooked in water over the fire;
Then place a tube through the hole of the pot and put the other end into the mouth of the patient, keeping it there until the steam enters the patient.
then make her sneeze, as we have said. "If the membranes are expelled quickly."
And if she remains afterward and is not completely healed, command the maiden to wet her left hand in sesame oil or in ground iris and then place it on the navel, pressing gently. And when she has found it, take it and stretch it little by little straightly so that the patient does not fall during extraction.
but one must move it gently to right and left, then pull gently then it will come out and be freed.
And if the mouth of the patient is too narrow, we have mentioned the treatment of sneezing and fumigation with herbs
If it does not come from any joint we have spoken of, then ensure you do not err in its treatment.
But you must tie what is at the mouth of the womb to the woman's hip, then perform a clyster with terebinth wax. If it can be extracted and replaced, then fire will come.
However, when it is extracted, if a bad odor comes to the stomach and head, and harms the patient. Therefore, foments suitable for this are required:
The ancients have proven that fumes from watercress and dried figs are beneficial.
"The shape of the instrument used to fumigate the woman during the retention of the flowers and membranes is as follows:"
It is like a snake's head in appearance, with the subtleties of nature placed at its top, and wide branches above the fire;
And let there be fumes on the coals, and continue until the wick is spent, then begin another.
Many children are born whose anus is not open but obstructed by some subtle membrane: Therefore, it is necessary for the woman to pierce that boil with her thumb, and not touch it with her nail, and cleanse the clothing so she does not touch it.
Then place wet linen soaked in wine and oil, then treat with salve until it is healthy.
"And if you doubt that it has not healed, then place a tube of lead in the opening and leave it there for a few days, removing it when the child is ready to be taken to its room."
And sometimes this swelling comes suddenly from a wound or abscess; If it happens suddenly: then treat it as we have said for the boil of the buttocks.
Fistulas that come under the anus are nodular and growths that come near the anus or in the space of the buttocks are also considered fistulas, one or more;
And when this nodule is chronic and grows, it emits moist white pus or subtle bowels, and sometimes these fistulas persist;
They are recognized by those who experience emission of wind or ventosity during evacuation, and sometimes a worm jumps out.
And there are fistulas that extend to the bladder, and halfway down the penis. And they reach as far as the hip joint, and as far as the buttock's point.
And thus one knows the fistula that perforates the anus, but does not perforate: and stick your two index fingers into the anus and insert a thin needle of brass or iron into the fistula where there is no twisting.
And if it has tortuosity, insert a thin reed or horsehair into it until you feel the reed or hair with your finger.
and if you do not feel it, and there is no discharge of pus or wind or bile from the opening, as we have said: know that it does not penetrate. If you hurry to cure it.
"And when the fistula is perforating up to the bladder or up to the urethra, urine comes out of it and cannot be healed by medications."
If it is pierced as far as the hip joint, then the reed will come up to that place; If there is no twisting and the source of pain cannot be found, then it is always worse, and there is no use in applying medicine or poultice immediately.
And for these Persian fistulas, there is no cure other than labor, and the foolishness of those who meddle with them in vain.
In those that are not Persian and are not ancient, there is hope of healing by iron, as I have experienced; and it is necessary for the patient to lie on their back between your hands.
And lift their legs up to their thighs, and let their thighs be inclined towards their belly. Then place an awl or a probe if there is twisting, until you know where the opening is located.
If the patient feels it around their anus, then you must insert your two index fingers there; now you will know if the awl has pierced.
And when you feel between your fingers either the sinew or the flesh, then know that it is a Persian fistula. If one does not work at it, one cannot heal it.
It is said everywhere that some can be healed well, but this happens rarely;
and the aid one does there, if it is to heat the cautery subtly according to the width of the fistula, as it is said before; And place everything hot into the fistula until it reaches the bottom; and do this twice or three times until you know that these broken vessels have been burnt, which resemble an ostrich feather;
And then use warm compresses to rub until this vessel comes out, then apply ointment inside the wound and around it.
If it is healed thus, it is well.
If not, it cannot be healed otherwise.
And if the tent enters and does not pierce all the way to the base which is at the bottom, and between your two fingers and the tent there is a thick layer of flesh or fat, then you see the fistula coming out through this fatty covering. If you cut off the beginning of the fistula, and push it forward again, and then apply the cautery afterwards until it reaches the tip of the tent. And the tent will be delivered, and it will fall.
Then cleanse those shattered bones that resemble a bird's feather, and leave none remaining.
"If the sinew breaks and tears between you and the work, cauterize it with fire or strong medicine."
For the fire cautery combines two things: namely, the burning of these joined bones and the draining of blood and drying of moisture;
Then for wet tents in furuncles or broken skin, burn until the place is bare and the burned bone emerges from the boil;
Then treat the wound with quick-acting oils that soften hard flesh; these are dry medicines.
"For when it is cauterized in this way, it is truly cured and does not return."
"And if the fistula comes right down from the fundament and is far from the body, push your thumb into the fundament and search for it."
If you feel the tent, and between two there is cloth or skin or bone where it is about to burst, then make an opening with confidence and hope by administering one of these three methods:
When you cauterize it as we have said, or cut it all the way down to the bottom, then insert tents there if possible and treat it first.
And do not go too deep lest you cut the tissue that holds the fundament, causing unwanted evacuations to occur there. Then treat it as we have said;
Then treat it as we have said; Perhaps it will then be healed, or you may remove that covering and clean it after cutting near the fundament using a tent or other pointed instrument; Then cleanse the faulty flesh in the wound as much as possible; Then study how to heal the wound and keep the fistula away from the fundament:
Then study how to heal the wound and keep the fistula away from the fundament: So that it may be easier for the patient.
And there are some fistulas that follow this manner That is when you insert the tent into the fistula, and it is located near the fundament on the skin above, then take a pierced tent with this shape: "And tie one end of a thread to the top of the tent, then insert the tent all the way into the fistula until it reaches its tip."
If it pierces the margin of the foundation within, then pull out the thread of that hole, so that you push your thumb into the foundation;
and draw the head of the thread, and bring the two heads together, and tie them to each other, leaving it for one or two days;
and tighten it occasionally until the threads cut through those tissues that are between them, and lie flat.
Then heal the wound until it is closed and clean.
"If the fistula does not burst open on its own, make it do so by any means you can, unless it is too deep." "For it would not be good to cut too deeply and then treat it as we have described until it is healed;"
The shape of the spina bifida deformity from which a fistula is opened is usually angular, with one side concave and the other convex; and on the other hand it may not be, because you should not cut what you should not cut, as you can see here
Worms are of two kinds: Either they are within the fundament like grains of resin, some small and others large, with blood constantly flowing from them, and there may be one or several, and they are defective in the fundament and at the head of the fundament;
But those that are displaced have little moisture, and often contain a bit of yellow bile or a bit of blood, having the color of flesh.
And the treatment for those who have them within the fundament is to instruct the patient to strain while walking in chambers until the haemorrhoids come out and become apparent. So hurry, and take it with forceps or hold it with your nail, then cut it at its root.
And if the forceps cannot hold them due to their moisture, take them with a cloth, cotton, or a piece of linen. Then pull them out with your two fingers, cut them off, and apply some warm powders in place of cauterization. Or cauterize them as it is said in the chapter on cautery, then treat them with other remedies until they are healed.
And if the haemorrhoid cannot come out, clusterize the patient with a biting and sharp enema to wash what is in the fundament so that it can come out clearly. If the patient can't sit up on their own, and if the threads were fiery at their base, then the treatment is easy.
If the patient can't sit up on their own, and if the threads were fiery at their base, then the treatment is easy. Then you should grasp them with your fingernail or forceps, cut them off, then cauterize them as we have said until they are clean and the incision by iron is feared. If it is necessary that you arrange the suturing in this manner:
If it is necessary that you arrange the suturing in this manner: Take a twisted thread, insert it into a needle, then draw the thread upwards and pierce the needle from the other side, and turn both ends of the thread under the needle; let it be wide.
And pull the thread tightly, then tie the knot, remove the needle, and do likewise for all the others; leave one loose to absorb any excess blood.
Then place on the wound a moist cloth soaked in rose oil or wax, and cover it, instructing the patient to rest.
And then let them fall until they drop, and once they have fallen, heal them with ointment and other treatments until they are healed.
"For the drying of the fissure in the fundament:" "Often times a fissure occurs in the intestines due to drying, and this can happen naturally or when the patient is old and medication is ineffective." It is necessary that you scrape off the outer skin of the boil with the point of a lancet or your nail to prevent it from getting wet. Then heal it until it is solid as it should be;
And if it cannot heal, then resume scraping more forcefully than before until it heals completely and the skin is peeled off. Then heal it until it is healed.
"For trembling:" A formice is a small hole made by an ant that goes very deep into the body;
And sometimes cold finds it, and he feels almost like dead from trembling, and it comes throughout the whole body, but more so in the hands than anywhere else.
And the treatment for this is that you take a feather from a goose or a strong crow's feather and place it on the trembling so that the circle covers the trembling entirely; Then turn your hand to the entire bone until you encircle the quivering, then place it deep and press down on the roots of the quivering.
"And if you wish to do this with a feather of brass or iron, then do it in this manner, and make sure that it is thin underneath and sharp above:" Nor pierce it, so as not to hold onto both sides, or squeeze too hard.
And if you see, cauterize the quivering, as is discussed in the chapter on cautery.
Sometimes a silver or lead enema is given, or melted copper or brass;
and sometimes these small and large instruments are used, according to the person for whom they are intended. "Therefore, those that are used for the treatment of children and those who are weak and sickly should be small;"
"Therefore, those that are used for the treatment of children and those who are weak and sickly should be small;" "The form of a small or large clyster is as follows: wide where the belly is bound according to this manner:"
And if there is constipation or the belly is bound up, as you see, and the feces are pierced within;
and there are two perforations on one side and one on the other.
and the belly should have medicine placed inside a beast's bladder or parchment pouch, pierced all around with small holes, with one inch of space between each hole. Then insert strong thread made from coarse yarn twisted into an 'X' shape or wrapped around, and tie the belly closed like a goat's udder. And when the medicine is inside, then tie it to the instrument ahead with a strong thread, then enema.
And this is the form of the circle:
And let the medicine not be too hot nor too cold, and grease the head of the enema with oil or egg white, or something similar, then insert it gently. Then the minister squeezes with both hands together until it is all out, then remove the enema, and the patient lifts their legs towards the bed, and if the medicine wants to come out, tie as much as possible. And if he sleeps a whole night like that, it will be more helpful.
"And if you perform a clyster in an illness where the belly is inflamed and the medicine rushes out quickly, then repeat it until it is healed."
And if the hemorrhoids are at the fundament or abscess, let the enema also be as subtle as for a child.
And this is the form of the subtle enema where the skin is stretched
We have already said in the division the treatment of wounds;
I will tell you about treatments of hands and medicine, according to their completion.
"I say that wounds are diverse according to how they are made, and according to the places where they are made, and what they are made with."
Things by which wounds are made are by blow of stone, and cut of sword or dagger, or spear or club or arrow, or similar things.
Or made according to the locations on the body, such as wounds that fall on the neck or head or buttocks or belly, or liver, and similar limbs.
And I will tell you the treatment for each wound, and begin with simple head wounds, since the memory will come in its chapter.
I say that when a simple wound comes to the head and the bone is not broken, you should consider whether it was caused by a blow of stone or similar things, and if the skin is completely torn and the wound is large, then you may doubt hot swelling. Then cleanse it quickly with the cephalic [cephalic vein] itself, especially if there is little blood coming from the wound, and let the cleansing be contrary to the wounded part.
And when the patient has finished his consumption of wine and fatty foods.
And if he does not wish to improve, then let his food be made smaller, and let him neither drink wine nor eat meat.
And place on the wound, if an abscess should come about, cotton soaked in oil cooked only, or in stringent wine;
And if there is no hot abscess, then place on the wound, if it is fresh with all its blood and not moved by the air, powder that I will mention later.
And if the air has moved it, then place on it some ointments until it is healthy.
And if the wound is large like one from a sword cut and similar ones, and its lips cannot be brought together by binding alone, then bring them together by stitching, as I shall say regarding wounds of the belly, concerning stitches.
If the wound is open to the bone, and deep, and hangs only by a little, then cut it. Then treat the wound with medicine, and replace hard flesh in place of skin, and instruct the patient to eat fatty foods such as testicles and cooked wheat, also poultry, and similar things.
And if you find rottenness in the skin, but it hasn't reached the bone, cut away all the rotting part and burn it with fire, then treat [the wound].
And if there is an artery in the wound or vein that cannot be stopped from bleeding with medications alone, then seek out the artery. And if you find it dislocated, tie it with a thread. And if this does not help, cauterize [the artery].
And if these wounds are small and simple, then the treatment is easy: and this is what you should do: put in this powder that seals before the wound closes.
And here is how to make the powder: Take frankincense, one part; Dragon's blood, two parts; Grind this finely and fill the wound, binding it tightly until it is well-closed and joined with all its blood.
And then bind it well and leave it without removing [the bandage], unless it swells; Because one does not remove medicine until it is healed.
Sometimes heat alone is applied when incense or dragon's blood are not available, but only after the art has moved the wound.
And if the wound has moved, especially in summer, do not apply this powder there;
but apply some digested oils or poultices made from barley flour and water mixed with honey, until it softens. then treat with other treatments until it is healed.
And if the fracture of bone comes with the wound, and it is small, then extract it with fine forceps;
and I will tell you about fractures of the head later on.
"of the neck wound"
"If a wound comes on the neck and it is simple, there is no difference between it and one on the head, but if the nerve of the neck or the artery is cut."
If it is the nerves, there is no other remedy but to leave it alone and not apply anything constricting, for it harms the nerves and causes them to retract. And do not apply anything cold to the wound, because the substance of nerves is cold, and their continuity extends to the brain, which is the highest organ.
But let the medication be warm, such as hot water washed in warm water mixed with rose oil and cooked likewise in warm water, and other mineral stones according to this method, and moist ointments.
"And if the wound is large, then suture and bind it with bandages, then treat it until it heals."
And if wounds are deep and blood has gathered and is full of bowels, then pierce it below or even lower.
And if the artery is cut and blood flows profusely, then dress it, bandage it, and cauterize it if necessary.
And if the spine of the throat is cut or the heart, and the windpipe is guarded so that the flesh goes there, then cut the heart from the throat's artery, but do not touch the throat; rather, reset it according to its natural shape. And then constrain it carefully, and leave it for a few days, then treat it with warm compresses until it is healed.
And if the wound has impressed upon the bone, then scrape it away. And if there are bone fragments, remove them all if you can; if not, leave the wound to suppurate until it is dressed and drained.
And if the wound is fresh, sprinkle on the powder I have mentioned. "And if there are bones and fistulas in the wound, then treat it as I said in its chapter."
If it's a cut from a lance or knife, and the wound is deep, observe if wind comes out of the wound as the patient breathes. then know that the wound is mortal;
and if it's not deep but full of fresh blood, do not apply the powder at first nor bind it so that the blood does not flow too deeply and reach the heart, killing the patient; but apply an attractive ointment and bandage it twice a day;
and if you have no ointment, place damp cotton in the wound to draw out moisture, and make the patient lie on the wound for three days, or four, or more. So that there will be no spasm, nor harmful trembling of the heart, nor shortness of breath; and when you see these favorable signs, know that the wound is healed. Then treat it with splints and other treatments until it is healed.
And if it cannot heal or close, know that there is a fistula present;
If the treatment is performed as it should be. And if the wound is from a sword or knife cut, and is simple, whether on the front or back, then treat the one that is in front; If it is large, stitch it;
And if it is small, use powder; and if it is close to the bone and has taken chips of bone, clean the wound, and treat any broken bones; and if they are not broken, leave the wound to fester until it is ready for extraction;
And for other wounds on other limbs, the judgment is as we have said.
"on rupture of the abdomen"
Abdominal pain can be severe, moderate, or mild;
Sometimes with a large wound, the intestine or mesentery jumps out,
And the stitching is more difficult; sometimes a small wound is worse than a large one because if one puts too many intestines back in place, unless they are put back together carefully.
Therefore, the intestines swell quickly when they feel cold, causing them to return too soon; thus, it is better to move the wound slightly so that one can put the intestines back in place correctly rather than in other ways.
And know that a hole in the belly comes about in four ways:
The first two are common stitches that occur during abdominal surgery; the other two stitches for wounds on other parts of the body are also common in other wounds.
Yet they are more suited to abdominal surgery, and I will discuss each one and explain them.
I say that when the wound is small, nothing of the intestines has spilled out, and there is little need to repair it, this can be done in one of the two ways: For due to the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestines are swollen with cold.
And when he is cold, warm him in this way: Soak a sponge or soft cloth in hot water only, or cook in boiling water with cumin and cypress seed, and warm the intestines until the swelling is gone;
and sometimes this restricting wine is made, and it is believed to help reduce swelling.
And when you see the swelling begin to subside, then moisten the intestines with water in which alfalfa and mallow have been cooked, for by this means the entrance is eased somewhat;
And if it still cannot enter, then make a small incision in the wound with an instrument used to cut hemorrhoids;
and the first cure is believed to be better than the cut, so none should cut without great necessity.
And this is the instrument for splitting [it]:
If you cut within the curve and do not go beyond it, see here its shape: And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestines leap out, then carefully replace them according to their natural form in their proper place if you have the power, for this is worth more.
When the wound is wide and located below the belly, you must make the patient lie on his back and place his legs higher than his head; And if it is located below the belly, raise the head and chest higher than the lower parts; likewise, if the rupture of the belly is in one of the two parts, make sure that the injured part is higher than the other.
And thus you must arrange what I say for large and medium-sized wounds.
For small wounds, put on what you are equipped with, then have between your hands one cloth moistened with which you gently wipe the entire wound and bring together the lips.
And this is the common way of suturing: first take one or more needles according to the quantity and width of the wound, then leave two spaces from the beginning of the wound, and attach a strong thread to the needle. And pierce the two heads of skin with the two heads of sinew, which are underneath the skin within, until you make it pierced from that part, and join the two heads of sinew together in fours.
Then tie a doubled thread around the needle on both sides, then bring together the two heads of the wound evenly, and leave two spans apart, and insert another needle.
Then tie the thread as you did with the first needle, and continue doing so according to what you need needles for, until all the wound is constrained.
And let the needles be medium-sized, between thin and thick, because thin needles cut through all flesh, and very thick ones cannot enter well. Therefore they must be medium-sized;
And do not push the needles too deep into the flesh and skin, lest they cut and open the wound before it is sewn.
And then cut the heads of the needles so they do not prick the patient while sleeping; and place tents or cloths on the heads of the needles to keep them still until the wound is healed.
And this method of stitching with needles is more suitable for small wounds, where only one or two needles are sufficient.
The second stitch is common, which involves sewing the two heads of skin and the two heads of flesh together with one needle having a medium-strength thread.
And once you have pierced all three heads together, then draw the needle back to where you started, in the manner that one sews cloth.
Leave the thickness of a barleycorn between each stitch.
This stitch closes the wound; I sewed a wound that one man had in his belly, which was cut by a knife and was more than a palm's length wide, and it opened to expose two palms' worth of intestines.
I reset the intestines after it had been twenty-four hours since the blow, and the wound healed up to fifteen days, which I dressed, and it remained healthy.
And the physicians judged that he would die, but it was a miracle.
and I did not treat him with ointment, for I was in a place where none could be found, nor any medicine. and twice daily I placed old cotton on the wound and washed it with honey water until it was clean.
Now I will tell you two proper methods of stitching:
Take the needle and pass it from the outer part to the inner.
When it has pierced the heart from right to left, then place the end of the silk thread where you inserted the needle and pierce it on the other side from inside to outside.
And the meaning of this stitch is that you should sew like a furrier sews furs, leaving the silk thread once on one side and taking it up again on the other until the stitching is complete.
The second method of suturing, which Galen describes specifically, is as follows: some people join the two parts naturally together and apply one end of the suture to the other in this manner:
Stitch a needle at the near end of the thread and pierce only that spot, leaving both ends of the suture. Then turn the needle and make it pierce from the outside part until it reaches the inside, at both ends of the suture.
Then pierce both ends again from the outside to the inside in two other places near each other on the other side
And this is the best and most common method of suturing.
Galen also says that one should suture the abdomen with two needles each having thread on them
And one must insert one needle on this side and the other on that side in the manner of those who sew leather
And know this: when the ulcer is inside the belly, then the stitching is more difficult than in other places of the belly.
The judgment of the wound is like the judgment of other wounds:
And it is that when you find the fresh wound with all its blood, before the art has moved it, then reset the intestines and the stitch.
Then put powder around the flesh, and if the wound has moved, then put some ointment that is available, so that the wound heals; And cut the thread, and may the lips be closed, and the edges. Then treat the wound like others until it is healed;
And if you have no medicines, then put on cotton wool soon after it begins to discharge, and change it twice a day until it is healed.
For in many dispositions when wounds are simple, you need no other medicine;
And if you doubt that the wound does not communicate with the main members, then it is necessary to moisten clean linen in warm rose oil or rose oil and place it around the angles and under the armpits.
And if he feels pain or corruption in his bowels, and this happens often, then apply black wine enemas, especially if the corruption reaches the intestines.
And pierce within it, knowing that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small one.
Injuries to the intestines called 'jejunum' cannot heal, due to the thinness of their vessels and the delicacy of the entire body, and their closeness in nature to nerves.
If the bowel protrudes from the wound, then push it back in as with the intestines while it is fresh;
And if it is old and turned black or green, then tie off the black part to prevent blood flow, for there are veins and arteries.
Then cut what is between the tie, and place the two ends hanging down from below the wound until it reaches far to facilitate the extraction when the bowel drops, and the wound gapes.
from the rupture of the bowel
When the intestines are wound around each other, and the wound is small, it can be restored in some people, for I have seen that a man was wounded in the belly by a lance;
and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and it became inflamed and turned into a fistula, and the digestion and wind passed through it;
I applied treatment as best I could there, and did not cease to cleanse until he was free of infection, and the area was sound.
And when I saw it healed, I worried that the patient might have some injury in his belly; but there was no harm, he simply remained in better condition, eating and drinking.
And some experimenters said that when there is a small wound in the intestines, it should be tied in this manner: Take a thread with large knots, then bring the lips of the wound together, and when the thread has opened its mouth, place it on both lips so that it pulls its mouth shut.
Then he cuts off the head, and this is held so that it cannot be untied; then he puts another stitch afterwards in this manner as before until the wound is completely closed. Then close the wound.
Such a head will harden in the intestines and cause no harm to the patient, and the intestines can be tied with a fine thread that is cut from an animal's intestine in this manner:
Take the head of this intestine thread that is very lean, and then tie at its end a thin twisted linen thread; then insert the thread into the needle and stitch up the intestine, and draw it back together.
And this manner of sewing with stitches is used only according to trustworthy and hopeful ways;
And if the wound is large and wide, especially if it is in one of the large intestines, then there is no remedy or health except for subtlety.
"whether it is a fistula or wherever it may be," Know that every wound or abscess, when it grows large, is universally called "fistula," and likewise when it becomes hollow and sinks inward.
A fistula is truly a broken vein, hard and white, where there is no pain felt, and it is also called like the feathers of a bird.
And sometimes it appears clear and thin, but other times thick. Sometimes small, and other times quite large.
I have spoken of this in the division of wounds, that any wound which is not clean and has no flesh, appears only through one of the eight causes. That is to say, because of the thickness of blood or flesh. Or due to its wickedness. Or because there is hard flesh inside and on the lips that prevents flesh from forming. 'Or when there is too much bile.' Or where the place is putrid, and the matter is of poor quality. Or because the medication used for treatment is not good. 'Or because the corruption is a kind of pestilence.' Or because the property in that region is slow digestion, delayed healing, and naturally inflamed. Where there are veins or bones:
And I have already shown all these causes, signs, and medicinal remedies in this section.
"Now it is fitting that I tell you about the cure of fistula which is done by manual work:"
A fistula happens in every limb of the body; for there are fistulas that come from large veins, and arteries, and nerves, or in the face, or in the intestines, or in the bladder, or in some of the ribs, or in the spine of the back, or in any joint of the hands or feet; And there are some that come from the property of the principal member, and similar places.
And all fistulas that are like this are difficult to heal, and there is only labor and ignorance involved;
And if there is any fistula that does not reach the place I mentioned, and you have confidence in its treatment, and you recognize it, then take a tent of lead or iron, apply it to the fistula.
And if the fistula is twisted, search it with a subtle probe of lead, for lead bends around the twistiness.
And if the fistula has many holes and you cannot search it well with probes, then irrigate it through one of the holes, for moisture will pass from one hole to another and cleanse it.
Then squeeze it as hard as you can to see if there is bone or nerve inside it, and how deep it goes. Ask the patient carefully about the pain they feel when you press your hand on it, and where they feel it most.
And once you know truly where it is and if it is far from a joint or nerve or artery or vein or in any of the places I told you about, then cut according to what I told you, and remove the fracture and the rotted flesh that are inside.
And then treat it until it is healed. And if the fistula is very deep in the right place, you must cut as deeply as you can, and then insert moist probes soaked in hot water into the fistula up to its head, so that the medicine corrode the excess flesh remaining at the bottom.
And then I apply dressings made from holy flesh until it is healed.
And if it does not heal with this [treatment], then cauterize it as we have said, and if the bone is rotted by the fistula, cut it off.
If a vein or nerve does not trouble you in the main members [limbs], as we have said;
And if the bone is exposed and there is decay and blackness, scrape it until all the decay is removed, then dress it with holy flesh until it heals.
And if it does not heal, return again as before; know that you have not yet reached the source:
So uncover and search until you reach the bottom, remove all the corruption, then restore it to its proper place.
And if it heals thus, that is good. But if not, know that the decay is too deep for you to reach; If there is no other means but to let nature take its course
And if there is a small rotten bone and you can grasp it with forceps, then extract it with the appropriate tool; but if there are many bones, pull them all out, leaving none behind
And if moisture is causing harm and there is no error or fear, then cut away the moisture, flesh, and deliver the bones.
And if you cannot remove them within an hour, put something irritating on the wound to cause decay around the bones; then when the place has rotted around the bones, they will come out more easily
And if it is a large bone like that of the leg or thigh, then remove only the corruption until all the blackness is gone; then restore the wound
And if there is much decay and it reaches close to the surface of the bone Then it should be cut all the way down to the decay, and then cured until it is solid.
And I will tell you about a fistula that happened to a man in his leg, so that you may take example and help in your work.
A young man around 30 years old had pain in his leg from an internal cause. Matter accumulated in the leg and it swelled with a large abscess, but there was no apparent reason to open it.
But the foolish doctors insisted on opening it until the abscess ruptured, releasing much matter. It became a fistula with many holes through which bowels and pus from the body discharged.
For two years many doctors tried to treat it, but none with any skill in the art of medicine. I was called in and saw his leg and the remedies they were using, as well as what was flowing out through the holes in great quantity. The young man's body became red, with a yellowish hue.
I pitched a tent in one of these holes, then searched all the holes, and found that one came against another from all parts of the leg.
So I hurried and cut into one of the holes until I exposed part of the bone. It was found to be decayed and perforated, with corruption reaching the inner bone.
I saw those which appeared to me of the rotten bone, and thought that there was no other corruption besides that which I removed.
And began to dress the wound with healing medicines for a long time, but could not heal it.
And then resumed [the treatment], and discovered the bone as before, and found that the corruption had spread to the bone itself, and I removed it, and tried to heal the wound. Yet still I could not, so I cut around about a palm's breadth of bone, and removed it entirely, then dressed the wound with medicines. And it was soon healed and sound, but the patient could not endure further treatment due to his weakness, and because of his fear of death. For the purpose of bloodletting was often performed, but he was entirely healed afterwards, and in place of the bone a hard flesh grew, and he was of good disposition and had no harm nor contradiction at all, neither oncoming nor departing.
And if a bone is broken anywhere in the body, it must be treated thus: Take linen, and bind it tightly at the end of the exposed bone, and instruct him to stretch his arm upward; And place another linen bandage, thicker than the first, and tie it over the flesh that is above the bone, so that you pull out the corrupt flesh underneath and uncover the flesh on the spot where the wound should be, so that the bone does not ulcerate the flesh.
And place a stick or a board underneath the bone to move the corrupt flesh away.
And this should be done until one can see and feel the corruption, and again another time.
If the bone is corrupted but does not appear open, and the corruption is in the middle or in one part, uncover all the flesh.
Then place a stick underneath, and then scrape the corruption from one side to the other with a spoon that is as long as the corruption, as we have said.
If the corruption is in the joint, cut off the corrupted joint and scrape the bone that contains it from the other side.
And if corruption is in the continuity of the two joints, then there is no other remedy than surgery.
And if corruption is at the wrist of the hand or the ankle, it is very serious indeed, but nonetheless you must investigate that corruption and how it appears. Cleanse it in every way possible, provided that neither vein nor nerve opposes you.
And know that there are many kinds of saws and needles for cutting these bones according to the position of the bones and their appearance from within, as well as their thickness, fineness, length, shortness, and hardness. And therefore one must prepare each tool suitable for its respective operation.
And know that your work will show you which tool you need according to the knowledge of this art and the testimony of the ways of diseases. Therefore, choose the tool you need based on what is appropriate for it.
The head swells either due to internal cause or due to lack of heat;
And once you have treated that inflammation with medication and remedies, but they are not beneficial, then it is necessary to amputate the limb up to the point where the inflammation begins, so that the patient escapes death or the greater harm of losing the limb.
And the sign is that the limb becomes black as if it were burned by fire, and after the blackening, this corruption then spreads from limb to limb, affecting the entire body.
Therefore, hasten to amputate, especially if it is due to the sting of venomous creatures like marine scorpions or snakes and similar ones; but if the corruption has reached the joint of two fingers, then cut there, but do not allow it to progress up to the hand.
And if it reaches the hand, amputate at the joint so that corruption does not spread to the arm.
And if it comes to the arm, cut at the elbow.
And if it passes the elbow, death ensues, and no amount of external remedies can help by their power.
Similarly happens when corruption comes to the foot: If it comes to the first joint, cut after the other joint;
And if it comes to the heel, cut off the whole heel. And if it rises in the leg, cut at the knee joint.
And if it comes above the knee, there is no other remedy but to let the patient die.
The manner of cutting off or cauterizing the limb is thus: tie it above and below, extend one assistant downwards along one of the ties, and another upwards along the other tie, and cut away the flesh between the two ties with a broad-bladed knife until the bone is exposed;
then cut or cauterize it, and place a linen cloth on each side so that the cautery does not touch the healthy flesh, lest another injury and abscess occur to the patient.
And if blood flows during your operation, cauterize the wound immediately, applying some powder that stops bleeding.
Then return to your medication until it is complete, then bind the wounded limb with a suitable bandage, and treat it until it heals.
And I will tell you what happened to a man in sum pity:
a blackening appeared on him as if burned by fire, and this corruption first came upon his right foot, spreading to cover the entire foot.
And when the man saw the corruption, he quickly covered his foot with a copper plate, and it healed.
Many years later the corruption returned on his right hand, and he came to me. After cleansing his body, I applied things that reflect heat, but the corrosion did not stop.
and he asked me to cut off his hand, but I did not want to because I still hoped to drive back the matter with reflection. And I also doubted whether if I cut off his hand, he would die, for the virtue of man was weak;
And he despaired altogether and returned to his land, and hurried to cover his hand, and he recovered.
And I have heard this told only for the purpose that one may do otherwise when there is need.
Sometimes an abscess comes to a very tender place and remains so long that it causes a great gathering of bowel. And then it becomes round and breaks open, and the bowel jumps out, and the place remains empty, like an old vessel. And the skin that is above it is also as thin as delicate cloth, and does not reach down to the bone or to the nerve, and such a disease is called 'sound,' and is not called 'fistula'.
But if it extends so far that it reaches to the bone and goes deep, then it is called 'fistula'.
And you must cut around this skin, especially when it is thin, just like a cloth. But do not worry about its decay.
And if you suspect that the skin will spoil, but the decay is not deep, and the skin is thick with flesh, then prepare a clyster like this:
Look if the breast is large and the bowel emitting it has a foul odor, then use an Egyptian clyster made like this: Take equal parts of hellebore, oil, and litharge, and cook them in a vessel over the fire until the medicine becomes red and as thick as honey;
Then take what you need according to your requirement, mix it with water and honey, and use it for a clyster on the breast, closing the anus. And leave the medicine inside for two hours, then remove it by squeezing.
Repeat this many times until the breast is cleansed and the foulness is removed.
And sometimes water with ashes is used for a cleansing when this medicine is not present; you should take ashes of vine wood, pour on water, then strain it, and use it as an enema until you know that the breasts are well cleaned.
And if the patient cannot tolerate it, nor the Egyptian medicine nor the water with ashes, then use an enema of water and honey, with a little bit of ground orpiment. Or you may use an enema of honey and mixed wine, for the honey has properties to cleanse and wash, and the wine makes the blood thinner.
And once you have done this and are confident that the breasts are well cleansed, then use an enema of what causes flesh to be born there; you should take emplastrum diachilithon and mix it with rose oil and wine.
Or you may use an enema of some medicines and ointments, the properties of which I have mentioned when treating about ointments.
If the hole of the breast is small and the tube of the clyster cannot enter it, then enlarge it slightly with an iron tool, and place a wick of Egyptian ointment or basilicon ointment until it is widened.
If the wound is too wide, leave only enough skin to allow for the insertion of the clyster tube, and if the hole that the bowel throws up is above, cut it lower down or where it is.
And if you cannot cut the breast below as you see it, then prepare in such a way that the bowel runs to its lowest point, for when the bowel is deep, do not allow any flesh to intervene; and if you cannot cut the breast below as you see it, so that the bowel may run easily downward, leaving nothing of the bowel;
so that the bowel may run easily downward, leaving nothing of the bowel; And take medicines to consolidate for placing on the wound, they are placed on the linen cloth which covers all of the wound; Then cut as far as you can around the hole of the breast with a larger cut than the first one, then apply soft ointment on another cloth according to the size of the hole, and place it over the wound to alleviate the pain, but do not remove the outer large cloth until after many days once.
And the one on top of the hole of the breast removes often to remove the pain, and know what comes out of the wound, whether it is venom or little or enough, or digested, or undigested;
And beware if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not, and when this medicine has spread in such a way you see what kind of matter comes out of the wound, then know that the breast has already healed, and the health approaches.
And then unbind it in the morning, or on the third day, and when you open the wound, change the bandage and renew the ointment.
And if subtle poisons are contracted after a long time, do not despair of health, for recovery approaches.
For there are men whose flesh wounds take too long to heal, and those that heal too quickly;
And if undigested food jumps suddenly from the stomach after many days, know that the stomach is not functioning properly;
And if the stomach is slow to digest and is distant from its proper state, apply drying medications that are moist in substance but dry in virtue, such as diaphanous ointment, for it contains much vitriol, which is the final medication.
Take diaphanous ointment, and they make it with rose oil, and rose water equal in substance;
Then mix it together and use it.
And similarly, cooked honey is more effective when diaphanous ointment is not available. Take myrrh, aloe, and frankincense, grind them together, and powder them onto the honey while it is on the fire;
And then glue the drapell, and stretch it over the breast, and sometimes one administers an aristologus longum, and roots of celestial lily, which is also like powdered centory. and in use of simples or of compounds: grind them and make powder of it, and put on the honey that I have said, and use
And if the wound is prolonged, and not cured by this treatment, know that the corruption has gone deep, causing an impression on the bone in hard members or joints if it is the cure of fistula, as we have said before.
Panarice is an abscess that arises under the nail of the thumb of the hand, or foot, or sometimes arises in other toes;
And when it is neglected and becomes old, then a hard abscess forms, which cracks and swells so much that it reaches the root of the nail, sometimes even cracking the entire nail
Corrosion reaches the bone, causing foul-smelling pain; the thigh is doubled over, and the skin appears ashen.
When you treat it as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not help at all, then you must cut away with iron all the excess that remains of the nail, then cauterize the wound afterward. The cautery is a great help if the bones are healthy, and the nail is sound;
And if the nail presses on the flesh and begins to prick, and the sore appears, then you must place a hot iron under the nail that pierces the flesh, and hold it there; carefully cut away the affected flesh and apply burning and corrosive medicines to remove all of it; then treat with ointments until it is healed.
And if the corrosion reaches the bone, cut it away and cauterize with fire, because as long as the corrupted bone remains, it cannot heal;
And if you see that both are corrupting, cut them off at their base just like what was mentioned before, then treat until they are healed;
And if he is wounded, impaled, and feels great pain, then you must heal him first;
Then cut the corner of the nail at an angle using a pair of scissors, but be careful that the cutting does not reach the flesh beneath the nail, for the patient would feel great pain;
And if it happens, then put something on it to soothe.
The two joints that are sometimes found in some men's hands by chance are entirely fleshy, and sometimes there is bone or claw, and sometimes they arise from the root of the joint, where the birth is on some of the fingers.
Those born with a knot on the thumb cannot move, and those born at the joint of the thumb may be able to move;
The incision on the fleshy one is easy, in this manner: Cut it at its root with a wide pair of scissors.
Those born at the root of the joint are difficult to treat: So hold on tightly while cutting.
In him who is born with a hard knot at the shoulder, first you must cut around the flesh up to the bone, then cut the bone with a suitable knife, and then scrape it until it is clean.
The scabs that come on both toes together are caused by birthmarks or scars from wounds or burns or similar things.`
If you must cut that nail, so that the thumb returns to its natural shape; Then place between two cloths or gauze soaked in rose oil so they do not stick together; Where you place between two pieces of thin lead until the spot is closed as it ought to be.
If scabs come on any of his toes with the palm, cut off that adhesion as necessary;`
The eyes are large veins enclosed and filled with melancholic impurities that come from many members of the body;
and it happens more often in the legs of those who walk on foot and work and carry loads than in others.
Therefore you should administer to him sometimes a purge for the colon, and then treat it with the basilica remedy.`
There are two ways to treat with iron: One way is to cut them and draw out the black blood; And the other way is to tie off the vein and draw it all out.
The cutting is done in this manner: First, raise the leg with hot water very strongly until the thick blood is thinned out, then hold the leg of the patient above the hip joint down to below the knee.
Then cut the vein in one place or two or three with a wide cut, then lift and draw out the black blood with your hand from one end to the other until as much blood comes out as the virtue of the patient can bear.
Then apply a poultice, and instruct him to bind himself with fresh meat around a black cloth.
And resume the evacuation and cleansing when the veins are full, but this harms the patient.
The raising of him is done in this manner: Raise the patient's leg if there is much hair on it, then place him in a bath, and apply hot water to the leg until it becomes red and the veins swell;
If you have no bath, heat him by the fire, and then make an incision on the vein near the long bone at the top of the knee, or in the part below the ankle;
then open the skin with an awl and strip the vein from each side until it appears when touched;
And when it is seen red and black, and enters the skin, it seems like a white thread;
then place a hook underneath so that it lifts the vein from the skin, and gently strike it with an awl, then make another incision three fingers above;
Then scrape off the skin above the vein until it appears; then lift it at the root, as you have done before, and tie it to another sinew, as you did initially.
Then cut another incision, or several if necessary; then lift it and cut at the two ends of the foot; then draw it out and lift it up to the second incision.
Then pull it out from incision to incision until it all comes out; then cut it off.
And if you cannot draw it out and lift it, then insert a needle with strong doubled thread, tie it, pull it out, place it under the root, and turn your hand from side to side until it comes out. And make sure it does not break off, for if it breaks, you cannot pull it out or lift it, and this harms the patient.
And once you have completely treated it, place moist wool soaked in wine and rose oil on the wound's location and let him treat until he is healed.
And if the face is contracted and twisted and wrapped together, and it is not straight, as we have said, then you must cut it crookedly, but do not cut all of it. and treat it as we have said before.
The shape of the iron used to cut the face is curved and does not cut straight, so that it does not cut into the vein
and its curve should be large because if it were fine, it would cut into the vein, but let it be thick as we have said, and this is the shape:
This vein enters the legs, in warm parts where no grass or tree grows, and on land where there is no moisture
and sometimes it appears elsewhere than in the legs, and this happens due to rot that comes from under the skin, as when it enters the body like a serpent or worm, embedded between skin and flesh.
And the sign of the beginning of this vein is that there appears a very large inflammation on the leg, then the location changes, and the vein starts to protrude like the root of a plant.
When the wound opens, you should wrap around it a piece of linen measuring about one and a half spans up to two spans, and tie it, leaving the linen hanging on the leg; every time blood flows out at the front, you should wrap it around the linen and retie it
And if it is too long, cut off a part of it, wrap the remaining portion, and do not cut at its root, so that it is all exposed. For if you cut it, it will enter into the flesh, causing an abscess and decay in that place, and evil disease.
Therefore, it must be treated bit by bit until its head, leaving nothing remaining on the body;
And sometimes this vein, when treated from the length of two palms or three, and once a man came to me whose was four palms long; when you cut it, insert one finger into the hole, and pierce it until its bottom so that all comes out;
And let the matter within be emptied, and apply medicines around it to prevent decay for several days, then treat it as you would an abscess.
And sometimes there are many arrows in this vein, especially when it opens at the joint of the foot or in the foot, and there are many holes from which blood flows;
Treat it then as we have said before.
worms that are born between skin and flesh This illness is called in our land "cattle disease", because it happens often to oxen, and is a small worm that is born between skin and flesh, and goes throughout the body moving up and down, and one can feel it well as it travels from member to member, until it reaches the skin where it goes, and leaps forth.
and is caused by putrefaction of certain humors, such as come worms, serpents, flies, and roundworms in the belly;
and its harmfulness is doubted because when it goes through the body and reaches the head, it comes to the eye by chance, enters it, and destroys the eye; And this happens many times.
When you see it being treated and drawn out, one can only be sure that it is when it moves:
Therefore you must tie the limb above and below with a strong and tight ligature, then cut into it and draw out the worm, and if the worm is buried deep in the flesh and you cannot find it, cauterize the spot with fire until it dies.
And the greatest harm it causes is that it damages the eye, as we have said;
And if you see it coming near the head by the eye, press down on it firmly with your eyebrow, then cut upwards, and pull out the feather;
And the patient should use cleansing of body with medicinal solvents to remove corrupt humors, and avoid consuming rotten foods.
due to pain caused by windiness This disease is called in our land 'vakivir', and it is a pain that comes to certain limbs and then moves from limb to limb;
And I have seen what I tell you. I was summoned to a woman who was ill, and she showed me her arm, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm;
and soon after, it rose up like a worm to her shoulder, quickly as anything, just like quicksilver moving from one place to another;
The pain then left that spot and struck into her shoulder, and soon afterwards it spread throughout her body, so that it reached the other arm;
Then she told me that she kept turning around her body, as I saw.
"I wondered greatly how she could move thus from limb to limb because I had never seen this disease behave in such a way." However, I had seen many times that there was great pain moving from one place to another, but I had never seen it like this in a woman;
and I thought that it was because the woman had dry skin, with veins exposed, and thus this constraint of wind appeared;
But they do not experience this according to this reason in those who are dislocated, who have moist skin and concealed veins.
And when you see this disease being cured, and the patient feels that pain which we have spoken of, quickly place your hand above and below it, and then strike until that constrained wind leaves its place; And cauterize the location;
and if you cannot see it with your eyes, then treat it with things that expel wind, such as fetid pills and pills of saffron, and similar other remedies.
"Sighs are various according to their appearances and the parts of the body where they occur."
The varieties of them are such that there are those which have large points, small ones, hairy ones, and smooth ones. And there are those with two edges, those with tongues, and those with fragments
And those that fall onto any limb do so in one of two ways or onto the main members, such as head, heart, liver, lung, kidney, intestines, bladder, and similar organs When it falls into any of these locations, the signs of death that I will tell you about hereafter become apparent to you: you must beware of extracting this arrow for afterwards many deaths occur in various ways And if this bad sign does not appear to you and the arrow is not deeply embedded, then draw it out and treat the wound.
The sign of the head when the arrow strikes it and pierces the bone is when there is sudden faintness, twitching, swelling, redness in the eyes, inflammation of the tongue, spasm, loss of consciousness, vomiting bile And perhaps it lacks fire from the nose, or ears. And perhaps it loses speech and voice And there flows from the wound moist white pus like pigeon's dung, and also burns the flesh like fire.
And if this sign appears to you, then take care of it, and pull out the arrow if it is not embedded.
The sign that an arrow has struck the heart is that it is near the left nipple, and feels as if it were stuck in something hard, not empty. And perhaps the arrow moves like a pigeon, and dark blood is cut off, and coldness and cold sweat come on, and fainting. Then know for certain that death approaches.
"The signs of a sigh that has entered the lung are that foam comes forth from the wound, the throat swells up, the patient changes color and sighs loudly and asks for cold air."
And if the arrow falls into the covering of the lung, it is near the little ribs. And there is great pain and sighing and sorrow. All the shoulders' members move.
"And if a sigh falls into the stomach, sometimes undigested food may emerge from the wound."
"And if a sigh falls into the abdomen and much wind rushes out through the intestines, there is no hope for recovery or for drawing out the sigh."
And if the arrow falls into the bladder, and urine flows out and there is fever, and the patient feels great pain, Know that wounds are deadly.
"The other limbs such as the face, neck, throat, shoulder, auxiliary limbs, spine of the back, forearm, thigh, and similar limbs are safe according to various conditions." "When a sigh is in the nerve or artery and it is not venomous (as I will tell you happened to me so that you may do likewise),"
It happened at home to someone that an arrow fell or was shot in the root of the nose: I tried it and drew it out from beneath the ear's fat without any injury.
And at another game, an arrow that fell into the fat of the eye beneath the paper wadding, and the arrow was stuck fast; only its point could be reached facing the timber, and it was as large as a Turkish bow, all in light iron without ears;
The operation was successful, and no bad accident occurred.
And drew an arrow from the throat of a Christian; it was an Arab arrow with ears:
I cut the barbs and carefully drew out the arrow, and the Christian was saved.
And drew an arrow from someone at home that had fallen into the belly, believing him to be dying;
And then after thirty days had passed, it did not change its position; I cut into the boil, drew it out, and burned it with fire, and there was no bad outcome.
And if you see a boil fall on someone's back, and the wound is healed over;
and the boil remained inside, and did not change its natural position or cause harm in any of his natural works.
And I saw another man on whom a boil fell on his face and the wound was healed; and it remained thus without causing great pain.
and many others like this.
And I drew out a boil from the prince's son, which had fallen into his throat and was slightly inclined towards the right side; and the boil was completely covered over.
I was called to treat it after it had fallen three days earlier. I found the wound very narrow.
I cut into it with a very fine needle and did not feel anything; And he felt pricking and pain beneath his right ear.
I thought it was the tip of the arrow I placed on the wound plastered with digestive attractant, for that reason the wound did not swell up. And then the tip of the arrow appeared
And then the tip of the arrow appeared I applied the plaster again the next day, and the wound healed again, and the patient remained like that for a long time until he felt the arrowhead inside his nose.
And he told me this I applied corrosive hot medicine to the wound for many days until it opened, and I tested it and felt that the tip of the arrow was protruding from its place.
Then I pushed into the opening of the wound with this hot medicine until the head of the arrow became visibly apparent
and it took nearly four months for this to pass, and then the wound opened up so that I could insert pliers into it, but I moved them from side to side and could not pull out anything.
Then I did not cease to devise and plan ways of instruments, until on the third day I found well-made forceps according to its final form described in this chapter, with which I grasped and closed the wound.
And the physicians judge that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored: I then closed it, and the wound was healed, and the patient became entirely healthy.
But I have told you about the extraction of certain arrows, so that you may place your treatment on what I did not mention, for books cannot cover everything;
But wise masters compare even small things, and find new works and new instruments according to the needs of the case at hand in this art.
I say that arrows come out of the limbs where they are stuck in two ways: either through the wound where they entered, or through another part;
And that which jumps out where it enters is an arrow entering flesh, and sometimes it happens suddenly.
And if it does not jump out, leave it until the flesh can be pushed around, and let the wound heal.
And if it is stuck in the bone and cannot come out, leave it there for some days, and move it each day.
And then if it comes out, and if it does not come out, carefully pierce around it with a fine probe until the area around it is widened, and then pull it.
And if the arrowhead is buried in the flesh so that one cannot see it, then search for it carefully. and if you feel it, pull it out with some tool.
And if you cannot because of the narrowness of the wound and the depth of the arrow, and there is no bone, nerve, or vein involved, then cut until the wound is large enough.
And pull out the arrow if you can, and if it has barbs that keep it in place, cut away the flesh that is stuck on both sides of the wound so that you can then break off or bend the barbs to extract the arrow.
And be careful not to break the arrow, lest it cause greater injury when extracting it.
And if you cannot do it at once, then wait until the place around is properly prepared, then pull it out, for the extraction will be easier. And if bleeding is profuse and hinders you, then apply what we have said about treatment in its chapter.
And guard yourself from incising nerves and veins; devise how you might carefully remove the arrow without danger, either swiftly or slowly, firmly or gently.
And place the patient according to how he was when the arrow struck him, for this is the greatest help. If you cannot do so, then place him according to what the signs show you.
The arrow that comes from another direction, where something of it is visible or the skin is swollen there, can be felt around
Then cut down until you can grasp it with forceps, and then extract it. If it is now stuck.
And if it is held in the bone, turn your hand around until it enters into the bone, and widen the bone, then pull it out.
And if it cannot be pulled out, leave it for now and resume the extraction later until it comes out.
If the shaft of the arrow is there, push it all the way in.
And if the shaft falls out and you see that there is no exit point, then administer a cauterizing instrument so that the tip of the arrow enters its hollow.
And then apply fire, and if the arrowhead is stuck, insert an instrument with a pointed entrance end to facilitate extraction.
And if the arrowhead has entered, then you must cut away all the flesh around where the venom is, if possible, then treat the wound as it ought.
And if the arrowhead falls in the thigh or abdomen or bladder or ribs, and it is nearby, you can grasp it with forceps.
And beware not to grasp the vein or nerve, then extract it and sew up the wound if necessary. until healed.
The shape of the forceps used to treat bones is similar to a bird's beak, and here is an illustration of that shape:
There are many ways to do this: Large, medium, and small ones, according to the size of the arrowhead.
The shape of the arrowhead is like the feathers of a bird, for driving into the point of the arrow, as shown here:
There are 31 veins from which we bleed, among them 16 are in the head: Two temporal arteries behind the ears called "doubles 'herbechi'. And two arteries visible in both temples; And two veins in the inner canthus of each eye called "aspirantes"; The vein that runs across the forehead; And the vein which is at the head of the nose And the two arteries that are in the neck And the two veins which are above the mouth's lips, and these are called 'augeherich'. Two veins that are below the tongue.
The five main veins in each arm:
One is the Cephalic vein, running along the right side of the chest, which common people call the 'vein of the head'. And the second is called 'fast', and is composed of the Cephalic and Basilic veins, which common people call the 'vein of the heart'. And the Basilic vein runs along the left side of the chest; common people call it 'the vein of the belly', and it lies above the forearm's muscle and is visible on the palm.
And the Salvatellite vein is the vein that runs between the little finger and ring finger, having two branches;
And in the leg and foot there are three veins: The first is below the curve of the pouch on the left side, and the second starts which is at the ankle on the right side; And the vein called 'nesse', which is in the ankle of the other side;
And in the other leg there are three veins below those.
The discharge from veins that are behind the ears helps with old ulcers and headaches;
And the characteristics of the discharge are, as I tell you, to raise the head of the patient and rub the place where the veins are with a rough cloth; Then have the patient turn their neck towards one side with a wry neck, until two veins appear behind the ears in two places dependent on the head; Then seize them with your thumb and index finger where you feel the pulse beneath your fingers.
Then take the lancet and insert it beneath the vein up to the bone, then lift your hand along the entire length of the vein upstream, and cut both skin and vein deeply with two strokes, until you see blood flowing;
Then hold it still and bind it until it heals.
And I have already spoken of incision and cautery in the first book.
The healing of the two arteries that are in the two temples is beneficial for migraine, catarrh, and habitual ophthalmia, and for the flow of tears from the eyes.
And the qualities of the healer are as I have said: And it is that the patient holds his neck steady so that the two veins appear clearly. And you feel the pulse beneath your thumb, and then compress gently.
Then raise the heart above the vein with your middle finger and place the lancet below it, lift the vein upwards and cut it, as you have done with the other two veins, and let blood flow according to your need.
Then unbind the patient, place your thumb on the vein for an hour, then place cotton on it. And then bind it tightly and leave it until it heals.
And we have spoken of their dislocation and extraction, where this book begins.
The bleeding of the frontal vein is as valuable as the bleeding of the temporal vein for treating old facial diseases, and for migraine and redness;
And its quality is such that the patient strains their neck by twisting it until the veins appear; Then take the instrument called 'fosseur', of which this is the shape:
And place the point on the vein and press with your hand or something else until you see as much blood come out as you wish; Then loosen the patient's neck and tie the vein so it stops bleeding, often with a wide bandage.
However, do not let the bandages be too tight; And tie it diagonally, because the bone is nearby and by chance the bandage may break if it is too thin.
The bleeding of the two veins that are in both eyelids helps with the eyes, and with redness, itching, inflammation of the eye, and diseases of the face;
And the nature of their injury is such that the patient strains their neck by twisting it to one side, as mentioned before;
Then the wound appears, and it should be a cross-shaped cut, about two fingers long and wide, because there is no flesh. And if the flames are thin, they may break;
Then wipe off the blood until you have enough, and then tie with cotton, tying it securely.
This wound from the vein near the nose is beneficial for fever, and madness with frenzy, and facial diseases such as migraines and redness that appears on the face, especially when it's chronic;
And the nature of this wound is that the patient strains their neck, then holds their nose with your left hand, and takes the thin flame and inserts it into the lip in the space between the two nostrils, because the vein does not open well there, and blood will now begin to flow.
And do not go too deep, make it flow with blood according to your need, then let it rest one night, for it is quickly restored.
The urine of two goats helps with constipation, and aids in mixing medicines, and is beneficial for many diseases, including epilepsy, erysipelas, corrosion, herpes, and skin diseases.
And the properties of urine are such that the patient draws his neck under both [feet].
And let the master be standing at the head of the patient, and the patient sitting on a chair; then open a vein on the arm a little wide, then let blood temperately, as much as is necessary.
Then do the same on the other vein; then untie the bandage, and press around both veins moderately so that the patient does not faint. And leave it until morning, when the wound will be healed.
Of the healing of bodies "The juice of the veins of the lips above aids in coldness in the mouth, and corruption of gums, and fissures of the lips, and nose and around."
And the qualities of treatment are to make the patient sit before you, and hold their neck as I have said. Then turn the lip and look at two veins, one on the right lip and one on the left, which are known to be black, and have small black veins around them:
Therefore cut both of them, and if you do not recognize them and are in doubt, then cut the largest one on each side, and do likewise for the two veins that are above and below them, for they are of the same manner.
Of the healing underneath the tongue The treatment of the veins beneath the tongue helps after treating the cephalic vein, for it is used in strangulation of the throat, and for diseases of the eye, and for diseases of the mouth.
And the qualities of the treatment are that the patient sits between your hands facing the sun, lifts their tongue, and looks underneath on each side for a black vein:
Therefore heal both [the dislocations] one after the other, but do not press too hard inward, for beneath are the arteries.
The veins of the elbow that are commonly treated are healed in two ways:
Either by pressing with a broad flame, or with a fine olive oil drop like a cutting edge, which is called 'anesil'; And they are wide and fine according to the width and narrowness of the veins. "The shape of the mirror blow is very well known, and is wide as you see:"
And it is necessary for opening the hairy veins that are full of visible thick blood, and contain thick and turbid blood; And this is the form of the olive oil flame:
"And it is more pointed and fine, and is for letting the veins that have thin, lemon-colored blood."
The cautery of the basilica, which is one of these veins, helps those with illnesses in the throat, neck, chest, and belly;
And it is necessary for the cauterizer to cauterize skillfully, and to beware of the artery that lies beneath. And if he cuts the artery, and blood begins to flow abundantly, then it must be stanched, as I have said. and the flame should not be pointed but cutting like a knife.
And if the boil does not open visibly, then you must draw it out and replace it with another one or any vein from it, or you can also insert the vein into its place in the arm it opens visibly. Cut at the flame like a knife, as we have said.
And if you know the place of the vein, then before extracting it, touch that place until you feel the pulse then mark the place with ink and tie the arm, then cut the vein with the flame like a knife but be careful not to injure the artery when you see the place swollen, for it is of the artery. Avoid it then.
And if you see something sticking out like a child's urine, and the blood is red and subtle, know that it is arterial blood: Therefore, quickly place your finger firmly on top, then remove your finger if the bleeding stops, for this happens many times: Then bind the arm and leave it like that; do not move it.
And be careful, do not move it until it is healed.
But if the bleeding does not stop and you faint, and a physician is not present, then cut the artery if it is open, for its mouth draws back. And stop the bleeding.
And take a fig bark, split it open, and take one half and bind it firmly until the next day;
If the bleeding stops, that is good; But if not, then treat it with powders that stop bleeding, as we have said;
And the stopping of the bleeding is not harmful in many cases due to the small area of the wound and the power of binding the arm.
The vein's blood vessel in the middle helps because it brings blood from above the head and below the body; for this reason, it is composed of both the basilica and cephalic veins, as we have said.
The surgeon must beware of the nerve that lies beneath; if it is pierced too deeply and the nerve is struck, it will swell and cause injury to the veins, perhaps rendering healing impossible.
This nerve is often exposed; however, if it is not exposed in some men due to its fineness, then you must heal it with the aid of an instrument. Avoid damaging the nerve as much as possible.
"And if there is a vein between the two nerves, cut it lengthwise;"
The vein from the head also aids in bringing blood from the head and helps with the eyes;
It is necessary to cauterize with the olive-shaped flame or the myrtle-shaped flame, for this is the safest of all veins because there are no nerves or arteries beneath it. Still, it is necessary to seek out the lightest position, and do not distress if the first attempt fails; begin again. and perhaps the place swells for some men when they fail at the first attempt, but it causes no harm.
"The quality of letting depends on your judgment."
The first thing you must know about healing is that health is maintained only to preserve health and to avoid future illnesses;
and let the bleeding be done in one of the three veins that are on the elbow: namely, the cephalic, basilic, and median cubital vein; and one should bleed at the beginning of Lent, in autumn, and winter after meals, when signs ofpletion appear;
One should bleed on the first or third day, after two or three hours into the day.
The bleeding administered for illnesses has no fixed time, but it should be done when needed, at any hour and at all times;
And it is not necessary to circumcise children until they are fourteen years old, nor women during pregnancy except after four months have passed. Nor should the elderly over 60 years of age receive this medicine.
And when someone wishes to be circumcised, in whatever manner it may be, it is necessary that they cleanse the intestines with a gentle enema if there is much retained feces, so that the veins do not draw harmful impurities from the intestines into the main members.
Nor should one circumcise someone who is too full of food, or drunk at that moment, nor someone suffering from dropsy.
And one should not circumcise after an attack of the colic, vomiting, diarrhea, menstruation in women, hard labor, staying awake all night, fasting, or anything that weakens the body.
Then thin out the humors if there is copious blood, through foods and drinks and medications, if you have the power to do so.
Then enter into the bath, if nothing hinders it, to subtilize the blood, and heal the vein of the leg around the third, as we have said.
And guard on that day against labor, and overeating, and lust, and similar things
And be lying and joyful, and let the healthier person's arm be higher than the one being bled, and rub the arm twice or thrice, then tie the bandage in the middle, for if it is too tight or loose, blood cannot flow
Then rub the place with his hands until you feel the veins swell and can see them.
Then let the bledder wet the blade of a little old oil, then place his left thumb on that vein below where he wishes to cut, so that the vein does not slip or break when struck.
For there are veins that slip away like strings when bled, and some are so full of windiness that when the blade is placed upon them, it retreats with the blade, and cannot open the vein, such are they. And if he opens the vein, then the wound is too narrow, therefore it is necessary for the surgeon to be skilled in such matters.
And if the vein opens at first, that's good; If not, then try again a little lower or higher quickly, if the place is not swollen.
And if the place is swollen and the patient is afraid, let him rest for one or two days, and do not bind the arm: Perhaps abscesses will form;
Do not enter a bath, then resume the cauterization if it pleases him;
And if the hole is small, or blood flows thinly and you doubt that not much blood will come out, then apply fire directly to that hole;
And open it quickly before the place becomes swollen; For this happens often when the wound is small.
If you see the wound swollen, then do not recommence the cauterization, and place a little bit of oil ointment on it, for it lightens the body's blood, and in this case, the ointment that the oil brings is beneficial.
And thus administer the ointment of oil in each cauterization that you perform on veins, to staunch the flow of blood.
This same thing is done by thrice and bowels of urine when placed upon the wound. If blood is too thick and does not spread out evenly.
And if a large abscess appears, which happens often, especially when there is no cauterization except for that one time when the vein opening is small, then you hurry and place on the wound a sponge moistened in water and heated slightly, and hold it there for an hour.
And you must do this after the bleeding stops from the vein opening, and if it remains on the wound for several days any blackness or greenness will not harm it. And if you see, put on some alo or myrrh mixed with juice of calamint, mastich, or something similar.
And many times an abscess and swelling occur at the sinew of the basilisk:
Therefore place your hand on it, and if you find the spot soft under hand pressure, then that is a bad swelling. Hence do not apply anything of what we have mentioned, for it may cause the artery to break:
But make a dry plaster to harden the spot, then treat with other remedies until it is healed.
And draw off the blood according to each person's constitution and the color of their blood.
For if the blood is black, let it flow out until it becomes red: And if you see it large, let it be until it is diminished; and if it is too hot, let it cool.
And for one who is full and bloated, and needs bloodletting, make the incision larger, and let the flame be wide;
And to one who is weak, do the opposite; he must be warmed often with warm poultices, and they should be applied by cutting, not pricking.
And this method of warming prevents bleeding and damage to nerves, and it is better than warm poultices that are long or wide.
And for one whose body fails with warmth, give him pounded bread in juice of pomegranates; if he is overheated, then bleed him three or four times; And if he has a cold constitution, let him eat before the warming bread pounded in thick syrup, or in aromatic honey syrup with spices like pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chickpeas, and well-scented syrup.
And if they faint during bloodletting, after losing much blood, then they must inhale broth of meat, and fragrant subtle syrup, and use the other things that we have spoken of in the division or chapter on syncope, for the evacuation of vein.
And if he wishes to evacuate one arm and have bloodletting done again afterward, it is necessary, when he is weakened by much bleeding, that he be bled a little at a time according to his continuous strength.
And whoever wishes to evacuate one arm after the first bloodletting and has a strong body should be bled seven hours after the first bleeding or after the ninth hour.
And whoever wishes to have bloodletting done on another part of the body should be bled on the second day or the third day.
For there is much blood inside the body that is already heated, which causes fever; So one must draw off a large quantity and widen the opening as much as possible without causing pain; After you have prepared all the necessary conditions for healing, and you place your hand on the swollen area when it is hot, ensure that death does not take the place of improvement, which happens many times if the healer is careless.
And it is not necessary for you to see blood flow out a second time and close the hole by pressing strongly upon it when you untie the arm. Nor if it is crooked, should he hastily extend his arm, for that would be harmful.
But let him remain until the swelling comes down a second time; And where you apply the tip of the flame, keep it there until the blood that has frozen at the mouth of the vein flows out; then place some thread moistened in water and press lightly upon it.
"But if the vein is swollen, do not let go nor squeeze too hard until the inflammation has subsided."
"And if it becomes necessary to draw blood a second time, do so either in the same vein or in another one, or even in the other arm."
"The vein in the arm is opened in place of the vein in the head because it is more accessible."
And the manner of healing is for the patient to immerse their hand in warm water until the bones feel hot;
then tie it gently so that the vein appears well; then treat the swelling from the side, not from the length or width;
And let the wound be wide, and let it be cut close to the joint of the hand, and if blood cannot flow out, then place the hand in warm water, and allow the blood to flow into the water until you have enough.
And if it is inflamed, then do not place the hand in warm water, for one puts it there more often in winter than in summer.
And the cut of this vein is safer than all other veins, as neither artery nor nerve runs through it.
The incision for saving the hand on the right side has value for all diseases of the liver, and this is how:
Hold the hand, and place it in warm water until the vein becomes swollen and visible. And if you cut across the vein, and remove all of it completely, then nothing will be harmed;
But do not cut too deep, for nerves lie beneath all flesh; then place the hand in warm water if blood is congealed in the wound and cannot flow out.
"And when you have drawn enough blood, apply oil and a little salt to quickly cauterize the wound, and do this for each cut."
"The bleeding of the vein in the left hand is beneficial for those suffering from mumps, and it should be done in the same way as I have described for the right hand."
The juice of the soapwort is beneficial for all illnesses below the body, such as those of the womb, retention of fluids, and diseases of the spine, thighs, and old legs, and similar illnesses.
And the quality of his health is such that the patient places their foot in warm water and rubs along the vein until it disappears, then ties above the ankle joint. And the vein is at the ankle, and there are many sinews going up from the foot above it;
Therefore cauterize where the largest sinew or tendon is located, or at the ankle.
And if you cauterize above the foot, beware of the nerves that are below it and cut across like cutting meat;
and let the flame be gentle.
"And if blood cannot flow out, immerse the foot in water again and allow the vein to empty completely."
If the cauterization fails the first time, then repeat it slightly higher the second time because the place is burned;
do not fear the nerve, as we have said, and do likewise to the sore on the other foot.
"The location of the sciatic vein is on the outside ankle, and bleeding it is beneficial for lower back pain when caused by hot blood."
And the quality of his cauterization is such that the patient enters into a bath and holds four fingers above the ankle while twisting, otherwise the vein will not open;
And if it opens, then drain all of it in every way you can, including across. and it is better that you cut it out, for the place is dry and it responds much to many people.
and it is better that you cut it out, for the place is dry and it responds much to many people. And if you do not find it, drain any vein of hers that opens towards the back of the foot and towards the little toe, and beware of the nerves;
and draw out as much blood as you see, then untie the bandage, and put cotton on it and bind it tightly; it is now drained.
Cups are made from horns, or earthenware, or glass;
And cupping is done in two ways: either by striking and attracting blood, or without striking.
And this cupping that is done without striking is done in two ways: either with all fire, or without fire;
And cupping done by striking and bloodletting is performed at fourteen locations on the body, one of which is directly on top of the head; And the other is within the neck; And the other is on either side of the neck; and the suction cup below the chin; and the suction cup beneath each shoulder; and the suction cup above the hips; and suction cups on either arm; And suction cups on both legs; And suction cups on both ankles;
Suction does not draw blood, except for small veins scattered throughout the flesh, and therefore it does not weaken at all, unlike venesection; and it should not be applied in any disease caused bypletion, until the entire body is emptied.
And if it is necessary to apply suction cups due to illness or habit, we will do so every hour at the beginning or end of the month, and at all times.
for there are those who, when they need to apply suction cups, have a heavy head;
And those who findpletion and redness in their face, and in their head, and at the neck, and darkness before the eyes;
And those who find a drop of blood in their mouth, and have an swollen tongue, and vomit blood; And there are also those who dream, and see by nut's blood, and wounded, dead, and similar things.
"And when we see these signs, especially during the month, we will order them to be leeched three hours after noon."
The sweat of the muses helps against headache ... that comes to the eyes, and it is not necessary that this happen after evacuation of all blood;
And this ventosation is in place of the sweat of the head, and those who are cold by nature or have catarrh should not use it, for it harms them greatly;
And therefore old men should not use it, nor those with cold diseases in the head.
"And those who often bleed themselves become forgetful. Therefore, the leech should be placed a little lower to avoid forgetfulness."
And ventosation on the neck is instead of sweat from the head and basilisk, and it helps with constriction of the chest, and breaking of the channel of the lung, and coughing, and repletion;
And then a little pressure is needed, for if it holds too firmly, it can cause harm to the stomach or heart.
The winds of the second rib on the neck are useful for headaches and inflammation of the eyes, migraine, strangling, pain in the roots of the teeth.
And you must instruct the surgeon that he expresses his hand during setting so that he does not cut the artery and cause blood flow.
The winds under the chin are useful for mouth diseases, gum decay, and similar mouth ailments. And it is in place of the treatments for the second lips.
"The shoulder windings are good for diseases that come from heat and swelling."
The winds on the sides are as useful as the three veins of the arm, for they attract blood from these large veins.
And instruct the surgeon not to go too deep with the cautery, for the place is bare of flesh and lies beneath nerves and arteries.
The cupping glass that is placed on the buttocks is useful for hemorrhoids of the fundament, and for illnesses below, and it is necessary that the cupping glass be large, and made of brass, so that it can draw well. And perhaps if it were too thin, it would break; and it makes large wounds.
The cupping glasses on the legs are applied openly because they draw blood from the whole body and are useful for old pains in the loins, sciatica, and the bladder; and they reduce swellings.
And they are placed on the two hips and the two ankles, but nevertheless they weaken the body after prolonged use and cause coughing in various conditions.
The manner of applying the cupping glass is to place it first empty and suck gently, then quickly place it and move it evenly, without stopping until you see the area redden and swell, and the redness of blood appears.
Then burn, and reset the cupping glasses, and beware of the condition of the body, for there are many who have tender flesh, and clear pores. If it is necessary to strike only once, and one must make wide, somewhat deep wounds; And suck gently.
And if the blood is thick, then strike twice: The first time to refine the path of the thick blood.
And if the blood is very dense, then strike a third time;
And when we wish to draw out only a little blood at a time, one strike suffices. And if we wish much blood, then strike frequently;
And if the blood is thick, strike deep, and make the incisions so that the heart is pierced suddenly; this is necessary for those who have thick skin and hard flesh, and narrow pores, you should oil the cups' openings with aperient and dissolvent oil: If it is inflamed, with oil of violets, or sweet almond oil, or seed oil of melons;
And if it is in the ear, with oil of watercress, or lilies, or chamomile, or similar.
And if the excessiveness is thick and cold, use almond oil or balm oil or aniseed oil, and similar ones.
And if it is for one who has tender flesh and wide pores, then no oil should be put on, but it should be washed afterwards with rose water, or cold water, or water of morelle, or water of cucurbit, or water of porcellain, or something similar.
And those who have a lot of moisture should rise using this method: with myrtle water or sumac water and similar things.
And those who have excessive sweating should rise from old wine, or water of buckthorn, or decoction of anise or chamomile, or similar things;
And one should not use cupping glasses before the bath nor during it, but after the bath one or two hours.
And do not sleep after cupping; one must warm oneself when being cupped and when finished with cupping.
And beware if the person being treated is choleric, and if their blood is too thick and inflamed; Then they should take cold things, such as pomegranates, endive, lettuce with garlic, and similar foods. And minced pigeons, and castrated goat meat, and moist meats.
And minced pigeons, and castrated goat meat, and moist meats. And those with cold constitution should take syrup of honey and mid-level perfumed wine that is between old and new, and minced apples, minced pigeons and small birds.
And on the day when he expects to vomit, he should drink more than eat.
And it is necessary to give some men sometimes three times or musk before vomiting, or afterwards, to strengthen the main members; Let the blood be subtly taken, but those who are hot should not drink it.
The cups that are placed without striking are those placed on the liver, and on the side, and on podagry, and on the stomach, cheek, back and thigh; for these members do not suffer to be struck upon, and they only do it to draw blood from member to member, as we place them on the breasts when there is an inflamed breast.
To remove the dampness from the limb, as we place cupping glasses on the stomach and head to reduce it.
and relieves pain when there is congestion or stone, so it may by its attractive power perhaps remove the congestion, or dislodge the stone from its place.
And similarly it does when placed upon the liver and spleen when there is retained wind, and these cupping glasses are administered empty to suck only. And sometimes they are administered together with fire, and sometimes filled with hot water, as in cases of pleurisy, in such a way that one fills the cupping glass with hot water alone, or with water in which suitable herbs have been boiled.
The shape of the cupping glass administered with fire is as follows:
And let there be two of them with a width of half a palm and depth of one, having on the side around the middle a small hole like that for putting in a needle, made of brass, so that it does not cut the patient when placed on the limb.
And he should have in the middle a rod of iron or bronze for placing an enclosed candle upon it, and they are large and small according to the diseases and the age of those who take them.
For the cups used on children differ from those used on adults, and for thin people differ from those used on fat ones.
And one should thus place this cup upon the limb:
Light the candle wick or the linen and place it in the cup through the rod that is inside the cup, so that the flame is at the bottom of the cup so as not to burn the patient;
And then place it upon the limb, and ensure that the hole we spoke of is positioned upwards so that when one wants to, steam can escape and the cup can be removed;
And again light the linen wick as before, and repeat this process often if necessary.
Thus the cup used in cases of pleurisy with acute fever has no rod or hole and is only heated when it is full of water; it is placed upon the limb alone;
and this is the formula:
Leeches are not applied except in limbs where you cannot apply cupping glasses due to their smallness, such as lips and gums, and similar places. and in fleshless places, like the toes or nose, and other similar ones;
And the qualities of using them are that when you find leeches in clear, sweet waters without any defect, then take them.
and place them in fresh water until they are hungry and have nothing in their bellies; then let the vein and the cupping glass be sanctified, then rub the limb until it is red, and place the leeches on it.
And when they are full and fall off, if it's a place where you can apply a cupping glass, then do so, for this is very beneficial afterwards.
If not, then raise the limb gently and then with water, very carefully, and then squeeze it.
And if the wound is too close to the body of the patient, then soak the linen bandage in cold water and place it on top until the blood thins out.
And if the blood is multiplied, then apply powdered vitriol or saltpetre and similar substances until it thins out.
Or you may place half a handful of peeled peas on the wound, leaving them there until they absorb at the site; this will now stop the bleeding.
And if more are needed, take others from the patient.
And if the wounds will not close, then rub fresh blood on the wound and insert a needle until it bleeds; then apply the linen bandage, and as soon as it feels the blood, it will absorb.
And when you see that they are full, then powder a little aloe and celandine or ash on them; they will now congeal.
"Here begins the book of fractures" "This chapter is very necessary in the art of medicine, and it is the treatment of fractures and dislocations."
Know, dear son, that foolish physicians ignore this chapter, for they have never seen any of the ancient books nor read a letter from them.
And for this reason, the science is extracted from our land, as I found none of it.
I know nothing of it, except through the science of ancient books which I have studied so much that I have practiced this science, and through experience, and through habit in my life.
And I have described for you in this chapter what is contained within it, and have abbreviated it at the end, and have clearly shown the forms of the instruments that are arranged, as I have done in these two chapters before.
"It is therefore necessary that we say in the prologue of this book the contents of the words and chapters where wise men place their understanding and remain on the truth, so that those who are experienced may know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others."
I say that when any breaking or dislocation or twisting or crushing occurs to someone, you must quickly examine the patient on both sides, unless there is something preventing it entirely, such as weakness of body, or a child, or an old person. or if the weather is not very warm, or too cold;
and avoid eating cold foods, such as cold meats, and the flesh of birds and hares, and do not drink wine, nor eat any fatty foods, and do not overeat on foods that fill the veins with blood, until you are uncertain about a hot abscess or an expansion of matter in the limb.
If the patient returns to his first government that he has used.
"And when the broken bone begins to heal, it is necessary that the sick person be nourished with foods that cause good growth and are moistening, such as cooked wheat in water, rice, testicles, pears, apples, cow's milk, eggs, fresh fish, and similar things." "For with this nourishment muscles grow back more quickly and the fracture heals faster;"
And know that the bones of the old and infirm cannot be well reset or mended according to their nature due to weakness of the limbs, nor those that are too soft, such as the bones of young children;
But if there is no remedy, bind the broken bone with strong bandages that will hold and join the limb together until it heals as before; And do not expose all the points of his work, and therefore he must be fed on hearty foods, as we have said.
"And know that fractures are diverse in many ways."
"For the fracture of the head is different from that of the arm or leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all kinds of fractures." "There are fractures that occur suddenly, like falling from a horse, and others that occur gradually, like the splitting of a feather for writing."
"There are fractures that occur suddenly, like falling from a horse, and others that occur gradually, like the splitting of a feather for writing." "And there are fractures with wounds, and fractures with only a small crack."
And each manner has its own device and proper instrument in restoration, according to what the memory recalls in its place;
And it is known that the bone is broken when the joint is twisted and opens wide upon being pressed with the hand;
And when there is no twist nor sound upon touching it, and the patient feels little pain, then there is no fracture.
But he can also have torsion, or splitting, or slight fracture. "So do not move him by hand, but apply the medicines that come later and then gently immobilize him."
And know that the fractures which go inwards and have two parts separated must be aligned evenly before an abscess forms there.
And if an abscess does form there, let it remain some days until the abscess is subdued;
Then set it evenly at the movement you can do lightly and bloodlessly, for know that the restoration of this one is easier than those with fragments.
Then bind it as is necessary hereafter.
And if the bone has broken into pieces, then extend it with two parts, whether it is hand or foot, or use your hand for small limbs, or use two bands, or one band and your hand;
And align the limb according to its natural figure, so that when the parts of the broken limb are dislocated, you reset them with all your strength, putting the fragments back in their places gently, and ensure that through your work the patient suffers no injury or pain.
And join together closely the two heads of the bones according to the best forms.
And feel carefully with your hand whether it seems well joined or not:
If you reset it beautifully, and do not pull too hard or press as those who cause heat and constriction in the limb through their work, as we have seen many times.
And once the limb is set, instruct the patient not to move it, neither while awake nor asleep, nor turning or in any other manner; And make sure that the limb is secured so that the patient feels no pain. For if it causes any pain, then it has not been set properly, and you must place it in such a position that there is no pain;
And make sure that the limb is secured so that the patient feels no pain. For if it causes any pain, then it has not been set properly, and you must place it in such a position that there is no pain; And ensure that it is set correctly, so that there are no twists when it is restored.
The condition of the broken limb will be according to what I tell you
"Know that fractured limbs are diverse in size, length and shape."
For there are small limbs, such as arms and legs and similar ones: It is necessary to wrap soft and fine linen cloths around (it). And those that are thick, like thigh and calf:
It is necessary to wrap it in a wide and firm bandage, for the wide bandage encircles the entire limb evenly and holds it tightly without any gap.
Then wrap it with light bandages, three or four times according to the limb, and tighten your hand slightly on all the bandages. Then go up above the fracture and tighten less so that the fracture can separate a little from the fracture.
And loosen the bandage bit by bit until you grasp a large part of the healthy area, then take another bandage and wrap it around again on the fractured area.
Then return to the part below the fracture and tighten it moderately, not too tightly nor too loosely, as we have said in the first binding above.
Then place between the ligaments wads of linen or cloth until it is entirely even; then bind everything above with gauze, and then place well-made compresses on top if there is no abscess or swelling.
And if there is swelling or an abscess, then place on top something that cools the hot abscess and reduces swelling; leave it like this for a few days.
Then press down on your compresses with something half the width of a wide reed or a piece of wood used for hoes or palm ribs, shaped like this:
But the compress placed on the fracture should be slightly larger and wider than the others;
And let it also be as long as necessary for the limb's size or length. Then press down on the compresses just as you did in the first layer; then tie it securely with string, just as you did in the first layer over the fracture; Narrower above, always less
And the threads should be medium-sized, not too thick nor too thin, and made of soft linen.
For if the threads are thick, as I have seen in the work of some fools who make their bindings from twisted linen cords, which is a great error; for the binding cannot be even if it is too thin, and it should not have less than two fingers' breadth between each stitch.
"And if the patient is wounded by the edges of the splints after the bandaging on healthy areas, place linen bandages or wool wadding underneath them so that it does not bruise."
"When the wound is accompanied by a fracture and the skin is broken, I will speak about its treatment later on."
"And know that one should not bind all broken limbs with splints on the first day." For when the limb is large, it does not need to have stitches put in until after five or seven days, or more according to your certainty of a hot swelling appearing.
And here is the manner of ancient poultices for restoring fractures, dislocations, and twists:
And it is that you take flour that sticks to the walls of the mill and mix it with plenty of eggs; and this mixture, neither too thin nor too thick, use it for a poultice to restore fractures in many ways, especially for women and small children, because it is neither too hot nor too cold.
Another method for applying plasters that restore breaks, dislocations, and twists: Take acacia leaves, dill, wild celery, opobalsamum, gum arabic, and mastic; mix them together. Add myrrh and aloewood; mix them together. Grind aloe vera roots into a fine powder (7 parts). And grind it into a fine powder, mixing it with beaten egg yolk. If the patient's complexion is hot, this plaster should be used as it has good properties and quickly heals broken bones. It benefits many people.
Another method for applying a plaster that treats sprains: Take mastic and balsam of Peru; mix them together (10 parts). Add myrrh and aloewood; mix them together (9 parts). Acaia six (6) parts. Bole armoniac ten (10) parts, grind well, and knead with honey or beaten egg yolk; apply it.
Another way to treat dislocations and bones out of their places, alleviates pain occurring, and reduces swelling and breaking: Take new linen, moisten it with hot water and oil cooked together, then place on the location.
This plaster does not heal, but it is good for alleviating heat from an abscess, and removes pain properly.
Another way to treat that restores broken bones: Take dried fig leaves and common mallow leaves, grind them together and make a poultice.
Another manner to plaster for the healing of bone fracture and to soften the remainder of the abscess. Take equal parts of marsh mallows, chamomile flowers, violet flowers, and wheat flour;
Grind the mixture together and cook it with wine. If the limb is inflamed, cook it with moistened coriander water or water, and apply it as a poultice.
Another manner to plaster stronger than the first one, when a hard abscess forms on the healing member. Take equal parts of marsh mallow root, flaxseed, balm, meadowsweet, savin, violet flowers, and chamomile flowers; And grind, and mix with salt water, or sweet water, or with wine, according to the heat of the limb, and its rest.
"Hippocrates says in his book that one should not put anything on a broken limb to restore it except cerate made of wax and oil, and nothing else more. He says that it should be between two, neither too soft nor too hard."
"And it seems to Galen that one should put dry and slightly warm things on a broken limb to restore it, such as myrrh, aloe, frankincense, and similar substances, as we have said."
Other plaster method that is good for injury and pain Take mugwort and chopped comfrey leaves, or chicken feathers, and figs, and equal parts salt, grind them, and make a plaster with the mixture.
And then remove it after a little while, and be careful that the patient does not feel any pain, nor has the bone moved from its place. If not, leave it on for many days. And if pain comes to the place, or itching, without rest or swelling, then hurry up and remove it, and take off the plaster immediately.
And take a light cloth, and damp sea sponge, dip it in water, and apply it to the place until the itching stops, and the pain is alleviated. Then let the limb rest for an hour, then put on dry wool wadding moistened in water or rose oil, and tie it on with a bandage until you are sure of having a hot abscess.
And let the inflammation of the limb rest, and may the pain be removed, then begin again the subtle massage, with a little plaster, but do not pull too hard as before; And gently until it is healed.
And if you see that the abscess is hot and red and painful and swollen are all gone, and you need plaster and bandages again, then resume it, just as you did at first equally.
If there is no improvement in the limb from what we have said, then do not remove the plaster until three or four or five or seven days have passed; And sometimes leave it on for 20 days, according to what is seen, until the fracture becomes apparent and the flesh approaches.
Then tighten more than before, and let his flesh grow thick, as I said earlier;
And if you see the wound drying out too much, know that there can be no healing from it; Therefore apply warm water compresses each time you remove the plaster, every third day, and relax a little with massage;
Thus through this treatment, healing comes quickly to the limb, and correct immediately those foolish doctors who reset limbs incorrectly:
It is harmful, and it involves fearful operations, and I see nothing else but doubt and performing it correctly.
There are many kinds of fractures, with diverse appearances, and their causes are distinguished;
For there are fractures caused by blows from swords that break the collarbone all the way down to its attachment beneath the bone, like an axe or a tree trunk; And thus this kind of fracture is called "hachet" (axed).
Or when the sword cuts across the bone without piercing it, this type of fracture is called 'absolute'
And both these two types of fractures result in large or small wounds.
And if there is percussion that embeds, splits, or crushes from a fall onto stone, or from other similar causes.
And if there is a penetrating fracture that approaches the bone tissue beneath the bone or is above it, and this wound can be large or small
Also there is a fracture where the wound is thin and subtle like a hair, with a small crack; this type of fracture is called 'capillary'.
And if the wound is made by being struck with a stone or by falling, or by something similar, causing a fragment of bone to enter inwards, and the site becomes elevated like the bottom of a cauldron; If between the stones within.
And this happens more often to those who have moist bones in their head, such as children's heads;
and occurs with all kinds of fractures where small pieces are dislocated like stars; And I will speak about it in its place.
And we recognize all types of fractures by the displacement on them, by careful inspection, and by the corrupted flesh that is above them.
The capillary fracture is recognized because when the bone is uncovered and rubbed on, the fracture appears black.
In treating a fracture, pay attention to any accidents of illness, and if you see no evil accident, such as vomiting of bile, loss of consciousness, extension, pallor, fever with chills, inflammation of the eyes, etc., in many conditions, he cannot heal without doubt.
And if you do not see any alarming accident and hope for healing, then begin the treatment.
And when the wounded person first comes to you, especially in winter, it is necessary to remove the bone before the fourteenth day after the injury.
And if it is in summer, you should hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, so that the tissue beneath the bone does not become corrupted and the accidents we have mentioned do not occur.
And if the fracture of the bone reaches the membrane that covers the brain, then you must cut open the broken part as follows:
And take the patient's head gently and uncover the bone in all possible ways, carefully exposing the wound's appearance; if blood or pus flows while uncovering the bone, clean it with what is necessary, and fill the place with bandages moistened in rose oil. And let the wound rest until the pus is calmed, and ensure that there is no more bleeding; Then begin to remove around the bone, which is done in two ways:
One manner is thus: You shall cut narrowly before at the tip of the head; this is the shape.
"And then I add another cut, greater than the first one."
And another manner is thus: You should have many diverse cuts, some narrow and others wide, pointed, and made of steel.
and perform them lightly so that you do not wound the head.
And if the bone is hard and sturdy, then you must first bore around it before administering cuts with tartaric mixture, not too deep that they pierce through the soft bone, and the point should have a margin or circle above it to prevent the point from passing beyond the bone.
and you must have many such points so that each fits properly on the edge of the bone, so that you may have tartaric mixture for all wounds.
And this is the form of the three ways of applying tartaric mixture:
The qualities for boring around a broken bone are that you place the tartaric mixture on the bone and turn with both hands until you know the bone is bored.
Then reposition the cautery elsewhere a little later, and do so all around. Then cut with incising tools the space of bone that is between the pores, and do this more finely than you can, and gently, as we have said, until you pull out the bone by hand, or with any of the instruments you have such as forceps.
and ensure that you do not touch the brain or the spinal cord.
And when you have pierced and pulled out the bone, then you must reset the remainder of the bone with another tool resembling an incising tool, but it must be thinner and more delicate than the other incising tools;
And if any small bones or scales remain, remove them gently with the instruments. Then heal the wound with dressings and ointments as we have said.
And another way of working is that which Galien describes, which is safer; And strike it very strongly, this is his saying. "It is first necessary that you expose a part of the bone where the fracture appears more openly, so that when you have exposed this part, then place beneath the head of this lenticular knife, of which here is the form:"
And do not cut on one side alone, and if the part is acute on both sides, then the cutting will be towards the bone.
Then strike gently with a small hammer on top, so that you lightly tap the bone all around, and beware of the tissue beneath.
If it is attached to the bone, scrape it gently, for one can scrape well without harm or fear.
"And if the fracture of the bone does not reach the dura mater, and the bone is only cut on top with small pieces, then it is necessary to remove this prominence and remove the scales with a fine razor that you should have in various quantities, so as to accommodate each place according to the operation and shape of the fracture."
"So remove first with large razors, and then with more delicate ones, and do not stop doing this until it is completely done."
For each of the other haircuts and subtle breaks, you must direct the cause according to its alignment;
And this is something that cannot be answered by one who has not studied this art.
And if the wound is open, you must take one linen cloth according to the size of the wound, wet it in rose oil, and place it on the wound. Then take another cloth doubled over two or three times, wet it in wine and rose oil, and place it on top of the first cloth. And do this more gently than you can, so as not to strain the sinews, then apply one bandage above and another below, but do not draw it too tightly that it only touches the wound.
And leave it thus for one or two days until the boil is softened, then untie it and apply medications such as iris roots, almond flour, incense powder, and aristologia, and similar substances;
And grind these substances into a powder, sprinkle it on the wound, and apply healing ointments without causing pain.
And ensure that the wound is always clean, so that no ointment remains on it nor does any bowels gather there, for when bowels gather on the brain cloth they will rot and cause great harm to the patient;
For when something irritating is placed on the sinews, it causes them to wither. "Therefore be careful, if any bad accident happens to the patient, as we have said, it is doubtful without doubt."
And if blackness comes upon it due to the medication applied, which has this virtue, then you should take one part honey and three parts rose oil, mix them together in a cloth, and apply it to the sinews; Then, after explaining ways of treatments, make sure he is healed.
Know that sometimes both parts of the nose above are broken, or just one by itself, for they are two bones;
And the one below is made of cartilage and does not break, unless it gets hit hard or twisted, but then it will heal.
And if one of the two parts is broken, then you should place your little finger in the hole of the nose and align this break with your index finger on the outside, until the nose regains its natural shape. And do this gently, ensuring that the patient does not feel pain from your treatment.
"And if the break is in the upper part of the nose and your finger cannot reach it, then you must insert a small rod with a rounded end into it."
And if both parts are broken, then do likewise, and try to restore it on the first day if possible;
Otherwise, after seven or ten days, when the swelling has subsided, then apply bandages made of linen cloth to the top of the nose if it's broken on one part.
When you bend one towards another side, if there is a fracture there; and let the bandages be so thick that they fill up the openings of the nose.
And some restorers said that one must grease the tents with butter, changing each day. It does not seem to me that this is correct, but it is necessary that they be moistened in a mixture of almond oil and powdered myrrh; then leave the bandage on until the bone is firm and the cartilage hardened.
Sometimes feathers from a goose are used instead of bandages, and if the fracture stays in place, then the patient feels better. Or faire le ciel que vous voyez
"And if inflammation appears in the nose while you are working on it, then insert there wax or cotton soaked in rose oil or a little bit of diacynthion."
And if an abscess does not form, then apply a plaster made from flour of sesame and powdered frankincense mixed with almond oil, followed by light dressings, without binding the nose.
And if the fracture of the nose is small and broken into many pieces, remove them with appropriate tools, then stitch the split and treat it with things that involve skin and wound-healing, such as plasters and ointments suitable for this purpose.
And if there is no wound inside it, then treat it with hot water compresses, placing lead plates until it heals.
When the jawbone is fractured below and there is no wound outside, and the fracture is only on one side, not completely broken into two pieces, it can be easily recognized.
It is necessary that, if the fracture is on the right side, you place your two index fingers in the patient's mouth; And if the fracture is on the left jawbone, place your right hand's two index fingers in the mouth, gently push the fracture with them, and align it using your other hand.
And if the fracture of the jawbone is displaced by two fingers' width, you must apply traction forcefully until it is aligned.
And if there is movement or loosening of teeth, constrain them with a thread of gold, silver, or silk, then apply wax to the broken jawbone and cover it with a doubled cloth. And place on the cloth a well-made splint or an equal piece of leather, long and wide according to the jawbone, tying it at the point where you can. Instruct the patient to rest and eat soft foods.
And if you see that the figure has changed, untie it on the third day, then put back what was dislocated. and apply a poultice made of flour ground with abundant eggs or sesame flour after removing the cauterization.
And place a light linen cloth over the poultice, and if the poultice dries out but the patient's condition does not improve, leave it until it is healed. Often it heals in three weeks.
And if swelling appears, apply what we have said many times.
And if there is both fracture and wound together, make sure no fragment of bone has been removed. so that the fracture can be properly treated with appropriate tools.
If the wound is narrow, widen it with a cautery according to your needs.
And when you have removed all these fragments, and none remain, then sew the wound if it is wide, and place one of the bandages suitable for this, to encourage flesh growth until it heals.
A broken collarbone happens frequently near the shoulder, and fractures occur in three ways:
either it is broken and dislocated at two places with fragments, which is the easiest to reset;
or there is fracture with wound.
And the work is thus when there is no wound; you should have two assistants so that one can hold the dislocated limb steady. and the other extends the neck towards the part;
Then align the fracture with your two hands so that the form is as it should be, and there is neither appearance nor displacement.
And if you need to extend further, place under the patient's shoulder a round spear of cloth or wool, and it should be thick according to your necessity; and extend and lift the limb, holding the spear with your hand so that you align the fracture as it should be.
And if you cannot pull the blade of the scalpel forward because it has gone in deep, then have the patient lie on their side with a pillow under their shoulder and place a small cushion underneath. Then have your assistant press down on the shoulder so that the bone of the blade is lifted up.
And then adjust the fracture with your two hands, and if you find it displaced, then you must cut.
and pull the fragments gently apart, and if the bone cannot join due to some obstruction, then cut with one of the incissors you have. But you shall place beneath the forceps this instrument, to guard against dislocation.
And it should resemble a spoon, not pointed, and be as wide as necessary, according to the size of the bone and the power of the work;
And it should have two heads, as you see, one wide and the other narrow, like the outline of the wound you made when you reduced the bones;
And when you are certain of hot swelling, then close the wound, and if the outline is small, or you doubt hot swelling, cover the wound with rags and towels according to its size.
And if granulation tissue is not present, soak a piece of gauze in rose oil mixed with honey and vinegar, and apply it to the wound.
The reduction of bone without wounds or cuts is to place on the bone a plaster made of powdered millstone and egg white, then place light dressings on it, and place a splint under the ankle if necessary. Then take a very wide bandage, about a palm's width, then place a double cloth over the dressings and plaster; Then take a fine iron rod three fingers wide and long, and wrap it around that bandage so that the head of the bandage hangs down. And place the rod on the break, and wrap the bandage around the neck, and under the sound shoulder, and under the dislocated shoulder; And tighten each part, and when you see that the sling holds the break in place, and you clearly see that the rod does not move on the broken bone, then wrap it every day, and when the ligatures relax, then secure it.
And make the patient lie on their back, and put a small pillow under the dislocated shoulder while they sleep to raise it up. So that the break is eased by the lightening of the shoulder, where you bind the arm to the neck, and do not untie it except in case of misfortune, for up to twenty days;
Then restart the emplacement if you see it is necessary, and hold it firmly until it is restored.
And it will be restored in 28 days at most, and sooner for some men.
Treatment of shoulder fracture
It sometimes happens that the shoulder joint is broken or dislocated, and cannot be put back into place without touching it;
If the dislocation appears according to the shape of the break, then reset it according to its natural form in every possible way;
Then place on the joint powder of the millstone with abundant egg whites, light bandages, and a double cloth. Then place a wide and thin strip of cloth over it, slightly larger than the shoulder; if there are any hairs underneath the cloth near the shoulder joint, pack those hairs with linen bandages so that the cloth lies evenly.
And then bind it firmly with a large bandage so that the strip of cloth does not move from its place; check the binding every day.
And every time it dislocates, hold it tightly, and place the bone evenly if it is out of its proper position; then let the patient lie on their side.
and the shoulder is reset in twenty or twenty-five days.
And when this period is completed, release it, but be sure, for bone does not move out of place easily.
And if a fragment of bone sticks out and is not beneath the heart, cut it off and apply the treatment for fracture of the collarbone as mentioned earlier to encourage granulation tissue formation.
Treatment of elbow fracture
The limb may sometimes break in the middle, but this happens rarely; but it often breaks near the joint.
When it is broken in the middle, it tilts downward, and the patient feels great pain and faintness, and quickly, and sometimes vomits blood, and the marrow appears through the broken bone.
And the treatment is that the patient lies frequently on their back, and places a cushion between their shoulders, then presses their shoulders together, and brings the ribs of both sides close to each other with your hands, carefully aligning them in all ways possible so that the bone appears as it should.
then place compresses and bandages on the broken bone with salt or other light dust, wrap it in a cloth, and secure it to the broken bone so that it does not move; And wind the bandage roundly to the back, and tighten it afterwards, and check each hour to see if it has loosened, and if it has, then tighten.
And if it is necessary to untie it, due to corrosion or itching that arises at the location, or pain or an abscess, then hurry and untie it, clean the area, and apply remedies as needed.
Then reset the area, and tighten it until it is firm.
de la brisure des costes
Know that fractures of the ribs occur only in large places after the back and at the top within, and they bend only because they are slippery. And one feels it well upon investigation, as you should.
And the treatment is that you align the break evenly as it should be. Then apply a splint, and bind it with a bandage if necessary.
And if the rib fracture leans inward, the patient feels great pain and pressure, similar to pleurisy, as the bone pokes the lung. And if it is sharp-pointed, and always present, vomiting much blood, it is serious, and the ancients considered it important.
And there are some who say that one should give him foods that swell the belly, to push back the break from within.
We do not do this, lest abscesses come if they were not there before. And if they are there, then heal them.
And they said that one puts cupping glasses on the spot to suck strongly, and this is similar to reason. However, there is doubt whether the cupping glasses will draw out the excesses to the location due to weakness of disposition.
"And they said that one should cover the spot with moistened wool in hot oil, and then place tents between the ribs to make the belt equal, after which it should be treated with pleurisy treatment, flesh, and medicine."
And if the patient feels great pain that they cannot bear from the bone pressing on the skin, and there is doubt for the patient, then it is necessary to cut above the location of the broken rib, and place something underneath the instrument to protect the spleen.
And then one must cut the bone, pull gently, and afterwards sew up the two lips of the wound if it is large, and dress it with poultices until it is clean.
And if a boil that has been present comes, then put moistened cloths in rose oil on the location.
and treat the location of this with what is suitable for an abscess, and keep it constantly warm on the side where it should be until it heals.
And also to the spine of the back.
And when this happens to someone and you want to know if he will be healed or not, take note if his hands are softened and swollen and numb, and he cannot move or extend them, and when you prick them with a needle, he does not feel it.
Know that many are mortal in several conditions, and if he moves them and feels it well when they are pressed and pricked, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and that the patient will be cured if properly treated.
And if such thing happens to the spine of the back, and you want to know if it is healthy or not, take care if the feet are soft, and if there are accidents in the hands, and windiness and excretion happen involuntarily on the back.
And when it has been supported on its belly, excretion happens without control And when he lies on his back and wants to saddle himself up, he cannot do so. Know that they are deadly Do not labor in its treatment.
"And if this accident does not happen to them, then the matter is lighter."
And the treatment is that if there is a hot boil, apply rose oil or goose fat oil to it until it is soothed;
Then put on one of the comforting and drying emplastes, and the glue of a louse, and instruct the patient to rest. And do not sleep on that part where they feel pain until it is healed.
And if any bone dislocates, then you must cover on the chest. and remove the bone, then bring together both lips of the wound, if it is large, with one stitch, then treat it with ointment, cleansing the flesh until it is healthy.
And if the bone head is broken, which is called 'the cow's head,' then place your left hand pouch and make it even with the other hand at your power, then set the splint and the pin, if you need them.
Then bind it, and if there is a dislocated bone, then cut into it and remove the bone, and treat the wound until it is healed.
Here is the translation for "de la brisure de los de la hainche":
Sometimes it happens that the thighbone is broken, and if it does happen, there will be a little bit of reduction to the head. and cut from long ago, and decline toward the parting, and it comes to the patient pain in that place, and piercing, and swells what is broken.
And the reduction is to stretch your hand upwards until you are above the dislocation; and know where the dislocation is and its shape;
And if the dislocation is only at the head, then align this dislocation until it is in its natural position.
And if the break is long, or declines inward, then make the patient lie on their stomach so that the restoration of this break can be seen more easily. And once you've aligned it, place your elbow on the emplacement, then place a wooden or bone splint over it, and hold the dislocation steady so that it does not move;
and press down on the spot below the ribs until the joint is aligned. And command the patient to sleep on their sound side or on their back.
And if a hot abscess appears, do not touch it until the hot abscess has subsided, and then apply what we have said before; then return to the reduction, and hold it in place as needed, if there is no bad outcome;
Regarding the break of the shoulder blade
The shoulder joint is that which is between the upper arm and the head of the shoulder blade, and if it is dislocated, it should be reduced according to one of these two methods:
From which one is that you take a branch full of large muskroot, according to this form:
And tie two branches with two cords, hang them up high, and have the patient sit upon the seat;
Then let him throw his broken arm upon the branch until it reaches the elbow and is held in place by a fork of wood, then weigh it down with some heavy object or have the assistant pull it downwards;
Then the physician should set the break even with his own hands together, so that the break returns as it should.
And another way is to place the patient on their backrest and have them put their hand on their neck, then command two assistants to each take one end of the break with their handsthe first one taking the top part and the second one taking the bottomand extend each one towards its side.
And if you see that the extraction is too strong, then hold down the lien below the break and above it, extending each of the assistants to their respective sides.
And if the break is close to the head of the shoulder, then you must place one cord in the middle under the elbow and the other towards the side, under the break.
And likewise if the break is towards the side, one must place the cord gently, without effort, so that the break is even in its place and on the side;
Then set the fracture evenly as it ought to be, and bind it if no heat comes.
And if heat does come, do not bind it for seven days, and apply a warm, moist cloth with rose oil until the swelling is reduced.
Then bind it, and the way to bind it is thus: place the splint on the fracture, then bring the arm close to the shoulder, and place your hand on the shoulder or chest.
And wrap it, binding tightly to the shoulder and arm so that the arm is in its proper place if nothing prevents it or if the bone has not moved.
And if you doubt that the bone has moved, use splints, and place a wider and stronger one on the fracture with two spaces between each splint, and make each splint large enough to extend three finger-widths beyond the fracture on either side.
Then press upon the elbow joints, as I said at the beginning of the chapter on fractures, stronger but not pulling apart.
And if you see the socket of the elbow joints, and their tightening, as we have said, when you reset the broken limb, and you doubt the hot abscess, let it lie for seven days, as we have said;
Then check every three days during the bandage, that no itching or swelling comes to the place where the limb cannot receive nourishment because it is too tight. If the address, as we have said.
And if no such accidents occur, then do not remove the bandage until after three days or more, and let the patient sleep on their back with their hands on their stomach;
and place beneath the shoulder blade one cushion full of even wool, and watch every hour of the day or night that the shape of the broken limb does not move or that the bandages do not soften;
If the patient is treated by medical means, and given the food that we have mentioned above, then the food should be made very subtle at first. and when he begins to recover, then it should be made coarse.
It is customary that the arm and leg should be reset after 40 days in total; then one must untie it, apply baths and ointment medicines to set the joint straight.
And if the restriction is ugly and swollen, then delay untying it for forty days or two months.
Of the break of the arm
The arm is composed of two bones, called the two "fusciles," one of which is small and that supports the wrist;
and the other is large, and that is below, towards the little toe;
Sometimes only the large "fuscile" breaks, or sometimes only the small one, and sometimes both together.
When the small bone is broken, restoration is easy and healing is quick;
but when the large one is broken, healing is bad and more serious than when both are broken together.
If only the small bone is broken, it should be gently stretched out and made even.
And if it's the large dislocated joint, then it must be pulled back stronger;
And stretch it over the cushion, and hold your hand pouch higher than the others, and the little finger lower than the other fingers, and let the patient lie across themselves, and put the cushion in front of them higher up, so that the patient does not suffer any strain;
Then extend your arms below his hand or elbow, and another minister above it.
Then the physician should place it even according to its best shape.
And if there are broken fragments in the fracture, then each should be placed back in its proper position; and if any fragment is too short to grasp with forceps, and you cannot restore it to its place, then cut off and remove the bone, as we have mentioned before.
And if there is also wound breaking, I have spoken about that in the specific chapter; So take care of it.
And if in the beginning of the restoration, hot abscesses appear, then take a bandage made of wax and rose oil that is neither too hard nor too soft; and bind the bandage gently over it until the hot abscess is eased.
And then remove the wax, and apply the plaster of mill powder with an abundance of egg whites, then place the splints, and make the splint for the broken bone stronger and a bit wider than the others;
And know that he must have six supports on his arm in various positions: Whether the break is in one bone or two;
And bind more tightly above the fracture than elsewhere, and all day long lessen when aligning, as I said at the beginning of this chapter; And let the bandages that are on the fracture be soft and moist, not hard or harsh;
And let the bandages that are on the fracture be soft and moist, not hard or harsh; And let the thread with which it is bound be of linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
And reward the limb and the lien after some days. And if any bad accident comes to the limb, such as itching that comes to the limb, then you must bathe the limb with warm water until this itch is soothed;
And let the limb rest not too tightly.
And then restart the bandaging, and if the ligaments are softened and the bones dislocated, and similar things, then address it.
"And if it is observed that the bandaging cannot reach the limb because it is too tight, then you must soften it a little and leave it thus for several days until the inflammation arrives, and then apply restraint."
And if none of these things we have said come to the patient, then do not untie him for twenty days.
Or if he extends his arms around him, then let him place his hands on his neck, and let his neck be even, and guard against movement and dislocation, and sleep on his back;
And know that this dislocation can be restored in thirty days or thirty-five, and sometimes even in twenty, according to the mixtures and constitutions of the humours.
of the fracture of the hand
Know that at the back of the hand and around both wrists, there are few fractures; it is mostly dislocation that occurs.
And when the fingers of the hand are broken or bent, it is necessary for the patient to sit crossed-legged and face straight ahead equally.
Then he places his hand on a flat surface, and the ministers extend the broken bones, aligning them correctly until they are well-joined.
And applies the plaster and bandages if no abscess forms, then places a splint according to the size of the area. and wrapped in one linen cloth.
And if the dislocation is around the wrist, then make a splint of cloth and tell the patient to bind it to their broken wrist. And then bind it with a long bandage, and the splint should be as wide as the hand's length, binding it securely as necessary.
"And if the fracture is on the back of the hand, then you must place a splint above it and another below in the palm so that the hand is open and straight. Then bind it all around the hand, and make sure the binding between both wrists is secure."
And if any break comes to us from the hand, whether it's dislocated, set it right as it should be. and secure it with a splint, and if you see fit, place a small upright stick to lift the dislocation, but do not move it;
and if the dislocation is in another finger, such as the index or one of the others, set it right and bind it with the healthy finger next to it; or you can bind them all together at once, whichever works best, or place a splint on top, as in the case of dislocation.
And be careful with the restoration and placement of hot poultices, and protect those who are injured by it, as I have said.
The thighbone is often broken; you can see this when the hip turns forward and backward.
And its restoration is accomplished by binding it above the break on one side and below it on the other. And the patient lies on his face, then each servant extends his cloth to his respective side evenly;
and this is when the fracture is between the bones.
And if the dislocation is near the root of the thigh, then let one ligament be toward the knife handle, and the other ligament beneath the dislocation.
And also if it is near the knee, then the cloth should be placed by the knee, and the extension should be towards the foot;
then the physician places the bone evenly with both hands so that it is in its natural position, and then applies the splint, and the bandage, if any inflammation has come.
And if there is an inflamed abscess, leave it to cool down before returning to your work and treatment; The bandage is done in this manner.
It is necessary that you wrap the fracture with two or three layers of hard bandage doubled over it, and fold back the excesses, then rotate the leg so that the heel comes to the root of the thigh, and place a long thread between the hip and the leg, under the knee, and bring the ends of the thread upwards;
Then turn up the bandage on the leg and thigh, then place the splints on the break, and place one splint on the bone of the leg;
Then fill the empty space between the leg and thigh with soft cloth strips to hold it evenly in place, then begin binding it tightly with three or four turns around the break; and as you go higher up on the break, make it less tight.
Then take two threads that you placed between the leg and thigh, and tie three splints that are above them, then return to the bottom of the thread so that you come close to the foot;
And bind it tightly so that it does not move from its place, then leave it thus, until neither inflammation nor swelling nor anything similar occurs. And if any such thing occurs, then untie it and dress whatever has happened, as we have said many times;
and if there are fragments of bone that stick out, they must be cut off if possible. And if one cannot, then one must split the joint open and draw forth fire; And perform the treatment as we have said until he is healed.
And sometimes the hip is broken thus when one puts splints there, such as on the shoulder and arm;
However, the patient does not limp from this restoration made in this manner.
And know that the thighbone is restored in about one month or a little less or a little more, depending on the differences in complexion.
Know this: In the cruciate ligament of the knee there is little breakage, but it tears often.
And if it breaks, it is merely a crack or hole, and this happens with every wound, even without one. Everyone feels this.
And the restoration is such that one places it evenly on what is round at its two ends so that they are assembled and can move;
Then place the splint, and put a round splint there if necessary, and fasten it properly; then review all the arrangements that we have mentioned for other fractures, such as hot abscesses and similar things; And apply to each injury what is necessary until he is healed.
of the fracture of the leg
Know that in the leg there are two bones, of which one is correctly called "mastella" and the other is called "ossicle";
And such breaking occurs equally in the leg, and therefore its restoration is like that of the arm equally, and the work is all one. And if the two bones are broken together, then the leg turns completely in every way.
And if the fibula is broken, the foot turns inward.
And if the large bone is broken, one feels great pain, and it is clearly visible; and twists below.
Then provide extension, place it evenly, and tie the splints evenly
But nevertheless, if the fracture is ugly, and there are many pieces, then the extension should be smaller and lighter And align it according to your skill.
And when you have completed your work, then take two strips of bark from a tree that will encircle the leg on both sides and be as long as the leg from the knee downwards
and wrap two bandages over and under them, tying it in the middle so that the leg cannot incline to the right or left, and thus it is good.
And some apply splints of long poplar wood to the leg, and if it is made of wood, they place the leg to prevent movement, and this is properly done in fractures where there is wounding.
And move each day the leg, to see if there's heat or other accident. If the cure, then it is healthy.
of the fracture of bones of the foot
The ankle does not suffer fractures, but sometimes bones in the foot are broken and so are the toes; and there are many ways of treating these injuries.
And if there is a bone fracture in the foot, and you see these bones protruding over one another, then place this patient's foot on the ground, as if they wanted to walk, and then place your foot on theirs where the bones are sticking out, and press down until they return to their places.
Then place the splint and bandages on it, put a small table with two legs under the foot's belly, then bind the foot tightly, then wrap cloth strips around it, and other things you need.
And when three or four days have passed, then untie the bandage, for you will find the bones aligned, whether they are broken or dislocated.
And if there are any broken bones in the legs, restore them, just like we said for the hands. Then place on both breaks a bandage according to the length of the leg, and let it be a bit wider, then place underneath the foot that table which I have mentioned, and hold it firmly.
And if there are two or three breaks, or more, then place on each leg a bandage according to its size, wrapped in one linen cloth, and hold the table underneath the foot firmly. And let it be so that when placed on top of the table, it touches the sole of the foot well.
And you must not forget the other things I have mentioned for other breaks. And treat each case as it deserves.
of the fracture of the thumb bone
When the bone of a pregnant woman is broken, have her sit upright, then lean her towards the back part, and let her be held from behind;
Then fill the womb of the pregnant woman with cotton, and insert as much as one fist.
Then push down the woman, little by little lift up the back, and then the shoulder joint pops out until it reaches the entrance of the socket, and the bone returns with the socket.
And when she wants to urinate, then remove the shoulder joint, and after she has done so, reset it; do this for seven days or thereabout. If the bone is restored, then take a lamb's bladder and tie a tube to its opening, insert the entire bladder into the socket. Then blow into the tube vigorously until the bladder fills up inside: The joint will then return to its place.
Then fill it with cotton and leave it like this for a few days until it is healed.
And when the bone of the hand or foot of a man or woman is broken, restore it in the same way as we have described for the thighbone.
And these nearby fractures are not hidden from those who study and practice this art, and may they understand my book.
Because fracture indicates in many cases the right path to restoration: Then do it accordingly.
When the penis is broken, take a goose's neck and insert it into the penis; Then wrap it with bandages around, and leave it on for three days or more, and it will heal quickly.
of fracture with wound
It is necessary for anyone who has a fracture with a wound, even if it is large, such as the bone of the thigh or the arm or similar, to be healed now, according to the treatments that we have mentioned.
And if the wound heals, then rinse it with vinegar or nitre, and begin to restore the fracture at that same hour or day, provided that no fever ensues.
And if a fever ensues, then delay the restoration until the ninth day, until the inflammation is calmed, and do not attempt to touch it on the third or fourth day, lest you cause further harm.
And if the broken bone is exposed above the heart, then it is necessary for you to put it back in place quickly with your hands, with slight extension.
And if the extension does not align with your hands for even pressure, then use this iron tool that is seven or eight inches long, and its width should be according to the size of the wound; and therefore it is necessary for the physician to mark three or four points on it, according to what is needed in each treatment of a fracture;
and it should be round and somewhat thick, so that it does not bend under pressure on the limb during your operation, and it should be pointed at the front and thicker towards the middle; thus:
And it is called "palm" because the curved head must be placed on the exposed end of the bone. And reset it once until it returns to its original position, with both sides evenly aligned. And if the break is small and the instrument cannot properly grasp the bone, then you must cut off the head of the bone until the instrument can hold it.
And if you cannot reset the bone as we have said, then cut it with an appropriate instrument, such as a knife or saw, to your ability.
Then scrape off what remains on the bone's surface and remove its small splinters.
And when the bone is reset and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural position.
If it is in place then moist a cloth in black vinegar and wipe it clean if it was inflamed; And do not apply any grease or other oily substance to the wound lest it cause decay and corruption.
Then apply bandages once the bone has been reset, leave the wound uncovered, and cut the bandage all around according to the size of the wound, ensuring that the wound is not constricted by the dressing.
And many foolish doctors have done this, causing harm or death to the patient at times; And let the bandaging be softer and gentler than other bindings.
And if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that a bad outcome will occur, as we have said, and you find pain at the location, do not put on bandages. Instead, wrap it with hard cloths, and tie them in place.
And when after one or two days you see that the wound has begun to close, then remove what you have placed on it from all sides, and put on healing salve, such as tetrafarmacon salve and similar ones.
"And it is necessary that you wash the member twice a day, in the morning and evening, until it is clean and healthy."
"And the limb must be positioned in such a way that the bowel moves down easily."
"And if many days pass and it does not heal but the bowel returns again, know that there are small bone fragments, so you must clean the wound with a cloth and remove all these unwanted pieces that cause this pain."
And if a fistula appears at the site, or some other kind of corruption, then it is necessary that you treat it according to what is said in the chapter before this one.
And when the bone is broken and exposed on the limb, like the thighbone or shoulderbone, or other similar ones from large limbs, do not pull it out, for many die from this. Let it be until it rots.
Perhaps it will fall off by itself after 20 or 30 days, then treat the wound if you can.
But if you cannot, leave it alone.
We often hear questions about the health of fractures, especially when they are near a joint, and it is unpleasant to see the limb misfigured; And sometimes the limb cannot perform its natural functions.
Therefore, take heed if the bone is fresh: If the administrator applies medicines that are astringent, such as aloes, frankincense, and myrrh, and sarcocoll, ache, and similar others, then take some of these things, or all together, and combine them with astringent wine or with abundance of egg yolk or with honey; And place them on the bone in bandages, securing it well, and do not remove the bandages for many days.
And place them on the bone in bandages, securing it well, and do not remove the bandages for many days. Then dislocate it again, and begin another one, until the dislocation is removed;
Or press on a well-made splint; For the property of wood is such that it removes all swellings from the limbs;
And if the dislocation has already become hardened like stone, and it is necessary to remove it, cut above it, and remove the excess. When you apply it to any razor, until it is removed, and the treatment continues until it is healed.
"of the limb which becomes weak after the treatment
When a bone fracture has been reset, but afterwards the limb remains weak and slender, this happens due to many reasons: one reason is because it was bound too tightly, and was not bound as it should have been; or because there were too many bindings, preventing the limb from receiving proper nourishment; or due to excessive rubbing. or because of excessive movement, not done at the right time; or because there is little blood in their body, making them weak.
And the treatment for this is to have the patient eat well and exercise their body until their blood is increased within them; and administer baths, giving them joy and ease.
then apply pitch to the limb so that it attracts great nourishment, and rub it often with cold water until the nourishment reaches the limb; and return to its natural form.
"of the limb twisted after the healing" When the limb is twisted after restoration, and the bone breaks openly, even though it loses its natural shape, its function remains unchanged:
So do not believe those fools who say that one should break the limb anew, for many foolish physicians have done this in our land;
And such actions are blameworthy, and they cause great harm, and sometimes death;
However, if the joints and ligaments are fresh, they should be raised with hot water or mollifying herbs boiled in it, such as fig leaves, roots, and meadowsweet, among others;
and make a soft plaster using diacathylon or similar, and take the mucilage of figs, mix it with goose grease or sesame oil, and apply the plaster;
or you can take ripe figs, grind them with fennel seeds and similar medications that soften the joint.
And sometimes dislocation occurs due to prolonged and continuous rubbing with moist hands. And arrange for gentle movement of the limb every hour.
And if the crookedness is hardened and made rigid like stone, it must be cut out with iron; thus one should cut down to the bone gently with a fine incision tool. And put effort and skill into the treatment.
Dislocations occur when a joint is displaced from its proper place, so that it cannot move, and the limb is misshapen, and the sufferer feels great pain and great injury.
When dislocation occurs in someone, it must now be reset without delay.
But if one delays, the area swells, and perhaps it is not reset properly.
So one should not move it until the swelling has subsided: Many times this causes pain and other discomforts;
Nevertheless, when this happens, make the patient sweat, then let him rest until the inflammation has subsided;
then raise the limb with warm water and oil, gently reset it, and care for each limb as it comes back into its place.
I have arranged chapters on dislocations from head to toe.
It sometimes happens that the lower jaw becomes dislocated inward, and the dislocation of both jaws occurs in two ways: either they are slightly displaced from their places and softened; If they are entirely dislocated, and hang towards the shoulder, and saliva flows from his mouth so that he cannot hold it in or close his mouth, and wraps his tongue with speech.
When a dislocation is small, it returns by itself with more dispositions.
And if it is complete and full, then you must reset it quickly, without delay.
and do it in such a way that the assistants hold the patient's head, and the doctor places one hand behind the root of the dislocation of the jaw inside the mouth if the dislocation is on both sides. And let his other two hands be free to apply pressure evenly;
and instruct the patient to soften and move his jaws in all directions. And the master will put it back in place until it returns to its proper position.
And if the reset is painful, especially if both jaws are dislocated together, then heat them with warm water and oil until they can be reset easily.
Do not delay in resetting them, as we have said.
And when they are reset evenly, and the patient's mouth closes well without softening, then place moistened cloths made of a poultice of rose oil and wax on top, then bind it gently with soft linen.
and let the patient lie on their back, with two pillows supporting their head so they do not move to the right or left nor try to chew, but rather consume soft food until the pains are gone and the jaw is healed.
and then they may eat what they wish easily, and need not exert themselves to open their mouth for eating or drinking until the jaw is fully healed and sound.
And if both jaws cannot be put back in place within an hour and are not returned to their proper position, then fever and chills will ensue, and sometimes diarrhea, and sometimes vomiting of bile alone.
And when you see this, know that it is useless. and many have died from this in nine days.
The jaw cannot be dislocated on the side towards its continuity with the ear, and sometimes it is dislocated backwards, which can be felt distinctly.
And the treatment is that the patient lies often on their back with arms extended; Then press firmly with your palm to the spot, and it will return
then place over the emplacement and wrap with bandages, and bind it tight;
And the head that faces towards the side cannot dislocate; if it does not, and if it dislocates even once, then reset it to its place as we have said
then place over the emplacement and wrap with bandages, and bind it tight, and instruct the patient to rest until they are healed
And likewise, the head of the shoulder is reset when it is dislocated from its place
of shoulder dislocation
Know that the shoulder dislocates in only three ways:
the first way is when it dislocates towards the part of the hip below; and the second way is towards the side of the breast; and sometimes it may dislocate upwards, but this happens rarely
and the shoulder does not dislocate backwards nor does it dislocate inwards for the nerves
And often dislocated downwards towards the buttock, especially for those who have flesh on their bones, as it happens suddenly.
For those with sufficient flesh, it scarcely happens and scarcely goes back in place.
And sometimes in certain men there is injury or fracture, and the shoulder becomes inflamed with heat and swelling, and they believe that it has been dislocated by this.
You must therefore examine it until you are certain; And then begin the treatment.
And it is known that dislocations are when they are downwards towards the buttock, and there is a distinction between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, which you will find clearly different; And at the head of the shoulder you will find a hollow, and below the buttock upon touching the head of the shoulder it will feel like an egg; And the patient cannot bring their hand close to their neck nor move it in any way.
Also, if it is dislocated upwards, it is not hidden because you will find it clearly upon touching;
And this manner of dislocation cannot be reduced, especially when it is recent or if the child is ill.
And the manner is that the minister lifts the patient's hand upwards, then places his fingers under the shoulder blade, and lifts the joint with force upwards to its place; and the minister lifts up the hand and extends it outwards, then places it underneath. it will come quickly.
And if it does not come as we have said within several days afterwards, then the patient must be bathed in warm water; and the minister should apply gently softening and soothing ointments, such as a decoction of ale and fennel and melilot in water, and it should be applied;
then the patient should be placed on their back, and under the shoulder blade a pillow of even linen, not too soft nor too hard, then the master places his heel on the pillow, lifts up the head of the shoulder gently, and draws out the patient's hand;
and another minister holds the patient's head so that it does not move downwards. This shoulder has returned entirely dislocated, and if you see it, reset it according to this manner:
and make sure that a man who is taller than the patient is present; and let him stand straight beside the cost side, and place his shoulder beneath the patient's hip, lifting the hip upwards so that the patient hangs by the armpit; And another servant pulls the patient's hand down towards the belly. And if the patient is too light, hang something heavy on him, and the dislocation will return.
And it is also reset in this other manner:
and it is that one places a long stake in the ground, such that the head of the shoulder is as high as the fist, and not too thick nor too thin; then one places it beneath the patient, but let there be soft cloths underneath, and the patient stands along the length of the stake
then stretch his hand down on the other side properly, and the joint will quickly return to its place.
And if it does not want to return because of all these things that we have said, do this treatment: Take a splint of 2 cubits long and 4 fingers wide, which has a round head so that it can enter deeply under the armpit, as follows:
Then wrap the splinted wood around the shoulder below so that it does not burn or harm the patient. Then place it under the armpit of the patient.
Stretch out the arm on the wooden support and tie the shoulder to it. Then put the arm on a sling made from a cloth of suitable width. Let the hand hang downwards and let the body hang freely on the other side. The joint is now in place.
And when it is in place, whatever way this may be, then you must put under the armpit a wad of wool equal in size; then place on the shoulder the emplastrum prepared with powder from the millstone, with incense and albumen of egg all around; then draw it under the armpit gradually, and turn the bandage over the emplastrum, and wrap the hand around its neck, and let it remain thus.
And he should eat little until the limb is comfortable again for it will heal more quickly.
Then eat more after five or seven days and move the arm. If it is firm and softened again, then it has healed.
And if the joint is removed from its place due to moisture that has come there or for another reason, then you must administer cauteries with three holes, as it is shown before in the chapter on cauteries.
And if you do all this and after seven days the dislocation still occurs, and he cannot lift his arm up again, know that the nerves of the shoulder head are either cut or stretched or softened. And know that the joint will never again be set right.
The dislocation that occurs toward the arm and breasts or behind is caused by forceful impact and extension of limbs, whereupon one applies another restraint.
And treat it until it heals.
And if after healing pain comes to the member and slowness in movement, then the sick person should take many baths until that pain is alleviated and returns to its original state.
Of dislocation of the neck
Know that the shoulder joint is dislocated easily and easily returns to its position.
And if it has been dislocated in all directions, especially front and back, the dislocation will not remain unseen or unnoticed. Dislocated according to each position. And when you join the sick limb with the healthy one, so you can see it clearly. For the joint is dislocated, and cannot bend the arm, nor touch the shoulder completely.
And you must reset it before an abscess forms there, for if an abscess were to form, it would be difficult to reset.
Indeed, it may not always be possible to fully reset it, especially when it is dislocated behind the back. So this dislocation is worse than others and causes more pain, and sometimes death occurs.
And its restoration is such that, if it can be reset, you stretch out his hand with both of your hands; And his arms should be spread out, and the hands of the surgeon placed along the elbow on top and bottom, and push the joint into his fingers together, or at the root of his palm, until it returns to its place.
And if the dislocation is forwards, then it returns when he bends his hand towards his hand, and pushes the neck that is dislocated from the root of the palm.
And if it does not want to return to its place, administer strong extension;
And two ministers should extend the arm, and two ministers should hold it so that it does not move during the extension;
Then twist the arm in each direction, after you have wrapped a long and wide cloth doubly around it;
And when the surgeon has joined the joint with his hand, then he should anoint it with some oil to soften the joint, and then forcefully push the joint until it returns.
And when it is in its place, then put on a dry compress with egg yolk, and bind it tightly, and hang the arm around the neck of the patient, leaving it for some days before removing it.
And if the joint is firm in its place, then untie it and leave it.
And if you see that the joint is not properly aligned, then recommence the emplacement and untie it, leaving it thus for a few days until it is firmly set. Then untie it.
And if there is great pain after the resetting of the joint and it moves, then bathe and gently rub it and press until it is soothed. Or you put on the joint a poultice of fat mutton, then leave it for one day and one night, then remove it, and make it enter into a bath. And when it sweats, if you gently rub the joint, then put back on the poultice and then enter the bath. and do thus twice or thrice until it is healed.
And if you see that, then put on fine wet hay heated with butter and bind it.
If it returns to its position
Dislocation of the hand
The dislocated shoulder joint, and its return is easy, more so than other joints. Nevertheless, it must be reset promptly to its place, in the very opening where it was dislocated, before the area becomes inflamed or an abscess forms.
And the resetting is thus: place the affected hand on a table, extend the minister's hand, and the physician places theirs evenly, so that their palm presses against the front of the joint, pushing until it returns.
Still, you must ensure it is properly in place; Then the patient places the back of their hand on a table for extension and resetting. And if the dislocation is at the back of the hand, then the patient places the back of their hand on the table, and the physician places his hand on the surface of the joint.
If it returns now, that is good. If not, apply cold compresses to soothe any heat and swelling, and allow it to rest without beginning again.
And if the patient cannot bear it, and you are unable to put it back into place after several days, then the joint remains dislocated;
And let not even fire harm the patient unless his hand is weakened, and he cannot grasp anything entirely. Then know that the nerves are cut or the artery.
If there is no other means of heat than to burn with fire nearby the case, and sometimes nothing else may help.
"And when the hand is in place, put on the splint that we have mentioned, then bind it and leave it for five days, then remove it and leave it so."
"If he cannot move it well, and there is some stiffness, then apply warm water poultice, and rub it until it becomes flexible."
"On the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Sometimes both hands are dislocated at each end, sometimes at the back of the palm or the front.
Then stretch out your hands, and push the dislocation back into its socket until it returns, then hold the head of the hand, and bend it towards the side where it was dislocated.
And leave it for two days, and on the third day make it even.
And withhold the food as we have said, both during the day of the dislocation and the following days, but do not move it and tie it up.
And do this often until it is tight, and do the same if it is dislocated at the front of the hand, until it is healed.
And likewise when it is dislocated elsewhere.
"On the dislocation of the shoulder blade of the back"
"If the shoulder blade of the back or neck is dislocated, or if there are several dislocations, then there is no remedy, for death quickly ensues."
And the sign of this is that the evacuations come forth involuntarily and cannot be retained, and often some limbs become softened, especially the two thighs or the two arms.
And oftentimes the backbone moves in four parts;
that which moves at the rear is called 'gilbositez':
The treatment is: if the gilbositez has come from childhood: There is no remedy nor healing for it at all.
And that which comes from a fall or blow or similar things, the old authors spoke of various treatments with grand words, but they have little benefit.
But I have summarized it according to my intention and have formed instruments in diverse ways.
I say that there is no remedy nor healing for the gilbositez that comes at the breast before;
And also that which comes straight into both sides, and one cannot cure it except for that which comes properly at the back, as I say;
It is necessary for the patient to lie upon their back on a flat surface, with something underneath them so that they do not bruise themselves.
Then firmly plant one poker at the head and another at the feet on the ground, bind a rope tightly around the patient's thighs, then at the hips, knees, and ankles.
And two assistants hold the ropes, one at the head and another at the feet, between the two pokers
and they should be securely closed with the poker as we have described, then the physician places their palms firmly on the spine until it yields.
And if the spine does not yield with this treatment, then take a board three spans long and place it under the patient's back while they are on their side, and put one end of the board under the spine, then place the middle of the board on the spine and the physician places their feet on the other end of the board and presses firmly until the spine yields to its proper place.
And if you see one, do it on the shoulder that rotates towards the hand. And it is necessary that you insert two stakes at the head of the sick person's arm, and towards the feet two others; and there should be between each stake, above and below, a palm's length of space.
and let there be one hole in each stake where the shoulder rotates, and let the stakes be firmly fixed in the ground so that they do not move.
And between each of the two stakes let there be one turning stake, over which the sling rotates, and let there be in both turnings two small stakes a palm's length long, for turning the shoulder.
And then tie the sling that is among the stakes to the shoulder stake towards the head, and the other sling towards the feet at the other stake; and each of the assistants should turn their stake for all the sling, and the master shall place the sling evenly as we have said.
And when it is even, then place a drying plaster with plenty of egg on it, and then the compresses, and then the pestle of a tablet three fingers long, which should press upon the location of the gibbosity and the healthy part of the spine, then tie it with a linen bandage, as we have said, and let the patient use gentle nourishment until they are healed.
And if something comes to prevent recovery at the end of healing, then one must administer softening and soothing medicines with the pestle that we mentioned earlier. And sometimes one administers a piece of flax, and sometimes the appearance comes in the back spine of the back, and it is thought that this may be dislocation. And it is the bone which opens, therefore one must not presume there. Perhaps it would bring death.
Know that in the joints of the hip and the joints of the shoulder, there come forth only dislocations, not like other joints.
And the articulation of the hip is dislocated according to four parts: Inside and outside, front and back;
And more so inside than others, especially the dislocation before and behind.
And the recognition of its dislocation inside is that when one joins the sick leg with the healthy one, it is longer, and the sick knee opens more than the healthy one, and the sick person cannot bend their knee in front of the fire; And the place that is near is swollen with hot abscess because the head of the thigh comes there.
And the sign of one whom it happens outside is that this accident is opposite to those in front
And the sign of one who has it in front is that their leg is well stretched according to its completion; Nevertheless, he does not bend his knee without pain, and if one wants him to walk, he cannot move forward, and he retains his urine, and the angle swells, and when he walks, he drags his heel.
And the sign of one whom it happens behind is that he cannot straighten or bend his knee, and this leg is twisted compared to the other; the ankle is softened, and the bone of the thigh is located below the ribs.
The reduction of this kind of dislocation is that you wait if the dislocation is ancient, and it remains according to its position, so there is no treatment; And there must be no presumption.
And in the case where the dislocation is fresh, and there are four kinds of dislocation, you should quickly reposition the joint, stretch it inside and outside, and move it to the right and left. Perhaps it will return, and no other treatment is needed.
And if it does not return in this manner, you must prepare a strong assistant, and stretch the leg strongly with both hands, or tie it to something above the knee. And another assistant extends his hand in such a way that he places his hands under the buttocks, then tightly binds it with a soft rope above the hip. And another holds the end of the rope.
Then everyone pulls up and down at once so that the patient is lifted off the ground all at once and remains hanging.
This method of stretching applies to four types of dislocation. If the dislocation has returned [to its normal position], as we have said, that is good
If not, then treat it according to its similarity.
When the dislocation is at the hip joint, you should lay the patient on their healthy side, then place the rope at the root of the hip and under the angle, then pull the rope up towards the angle and towards the thigh.
Then take another helper's arms, and embrace the hip bone of the sick person tightly, and stretch it towards the front strongly: And now it will return to its place:
This manner of dislocation is easier than others.
And if you cannot hold it in this manner that we have described, then you must tie the two feet of the patient together with a soft rope at both heels and knees, and let the sick leg extend two fingers more than the other:
Then hang it over the top of a stick, and raise it two arm-lengths above the ground;
Then command one helper to embrace the top of the hip bone, and have another helper hang with the patient, embracing the hip bone strongly, for the joint will now quickly return.
And when the dislocation is forward, have the patient lie down, as we have described for those with dislocations of the knee, and remove the rope from the sick leg properly, and also from the foot;
Then place two torches, one at the head and another at the feet, then insert one torch between the thighs of the patient in this manner; And have moistened cloths ready to tie around it so that the patient does not burn, then each minister extends towards him, and the physician places his hand evenly on the dislocation.
If it returns, that's good.
If not, then place upon [a] table, and press as we have said in the case of kyphosis; let the patient lie on their sound side.
And when the dislocation is before you, then quickly extend the patient's affected leg, as I have said; And the physician places his knee over the patient's thigh, then presses with his other hand, and extends down towards the knee.
And if the dislocation is at the back, then it should not extend the patient downwards nor lift them up from the ground; rather, they should be positioned as if the hip was dislocated at the back, just like we have described for childbirth on two hips. and they should lie face down, and the ligatures extended as we have said before, and all must press upon the joint with the table; And the condition will improve when the patient extends their legs, with them being even. Then join the thighs, place the splint, and secure it with a bandage so that the hip does not move. And after three or four days, remove it, then place the splint on top;
If you see that they are even, then secure it again as before and leave it for three days.
Then remove it, and let him walk gently until the limb is comfortable.
Chapter on dislocation of the knee joint
The knee can be dislocated in three ways: That is to say, inward, outward, and behind;
And it does not dislocate forward.
The sign is this: have the patient bend their leg towards their thigh, and if it does not reach their thigh, then know that it is dislocated;
And the reduction for all of them is this: have the patient sit upright, extend their leg if they can, place your back against their face, and put their foot on yours;
Then take his knee in your palms, and withdraw it between your thighs, then bend both sides of the knee strongly. And another assistant extends his foot until the knee returns to its place, and the sign that it is correctly reset is when he can move his leg easily at the hip.
Then apply the plaster on top and secure the leg to the hip with bandages, binding them tightly for three or four days, then untie it.
And let the patient not walk at all until the member is healed.
**And if the limb is not completely healed, then administer strong extension, as we have said in the treatment of dislocation of the hip, until it is fully set.**
Chapter on dislocation of the heel
"The heel can sometimes be wry and sometimes completely dislocated, both inward and outward."
The sign that it is dislocated is when the ankle is swollen and sticks out on the side where it is dislocated.
The reset should be easy, and one can easily extend the arm with their hands when it is only slightly dislocated.
And when it is completely dislocated, then you must make the patient sit upright and have one assistant hold him firmly by the leg above the ankle.
Then draw the foot towards you with your right hand, then with your left hand twice, then lift it up high and place the foot well up high;
and do this twice, as we have said, lifting and drawing the foot.
if it returns, that's good;
If not, then start again the operation, for it will return.
And if it still cannot return in this way, then have the patient lie on their back on the ground, and firmly plant a post into the earth between their thighs, and tie the ropes around to prevent injury to the patient.
Then the ministers take hold of the thigh, and another minister extends the foot with their hands or with a rope so that it lies on the collarbone of the foot. Then each minister stretches equally, and let the post always be between the patient's thighs to hold the patient steady when lifting him.
Then the doctor puts his hands equally on the dislocation, and another minister holds the healthy leg below, and the dislocation will quickly return.
And when it has reached its peak, then place the plaster and swabs on it, press strongly, and bind the foot to the leg, and watch carefully the nerves that are above the ankle behind, so that the binding is not too tight.
Then let it be for two or three days, and if the binding loosens, then press strongly.
Then untie it on the third or fourth day, and forbid walking to the patient for four days; And if he walks before this time, there is no certainty that it will not dislocate again.
"If inflammation occurs around the dislocation, you must calm it as we have described elsewhere until it is healed."
Chapter on dislocations of the fingers "When the fingers are dislocated, they should be gently extended without force, which is easy to do."
And if the dislocation is in any of the joints at the back of the foot, then have the patient sit on a flat surface or on a stool completely upright, and place your foot on what opens up from these joints, then press strongly with your foot until it returns.
and when it is aligned and nothing opens up, then place under the sole of the foot a two-legged stool, then press strongly, and let it be for three days, then untie it; And let him rest until he is healed.
Chapter on wounds accompanied by dislocations
When an injury occurs with the dislocation, and it is reset, many times the patient dies:
So do not be presumptuous in the treatment unless you are wise in the art and have practiced it extensively, and if you are compassionate, merciful, and cautious, not hasty.
And use soothing remedies for a hot abscess at the beginning, and leave the patient in God's hands if you see no hope of recovery But when you do see hope, reset the limb now before the hot abscess comes
And when the limb is in place, administer remedies to cool the inflammation and treat the wound with drying ointments
And if there is also fracture or small bones dislocated, set them, and do as we have said in simple fractures
And guard against entering into fear, according to what I have said, for it benefits you more to move according to your Creator, and for the salvation of your soul and body.
