O thou, dearest son, I have completed this book which is the last of medical knowledge together with its fulfillment; and have brought it to an end by its explanations and declarations. And there came unto me in vision that I should complete it for thee with this treatise which is part of the work of hands, namely "surgery".
And because the work of hands is neglected in our region and has been entirely destroyed throughout, therefore its science has perished and been cut off; and there remains nothing but small descriptions about it in books which hands have moved. And from this ignorance and vanity have come, and intentions are closed and the science has been forgotten.
Now it seems to me that I wish to enliven it together with the arrangement of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation. And I will bring together the shapes of the iron tools for cauterization, and other instruments of this work with the arrangement of their declaration and preparation as necessary.
And because no good masters of hands are found in our time, the art of medicine has been neglected. And he who engages in this must rise up in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, so that he may know the judgment of the members and their forms and conjunctions and separations, and have knowledge of bones and nerves and sinews and the number of joints, and the movement and the moving and resting veins, and the place of their exit.
And therefore Hippocrates said that a name with a name is much, but with a deed it is little. And especially in the art of hand.
We tell you at the beginning of this book that whoever is not knowledgeable about the things said before should beware lest he fall into error and kill men.
Thus, I have seen many times those who meddle with this science and yet lack both knowledge and experience.
For I saw a foolish surgeon who cut the abscess of scrofula on a woman’s neck, and he cut the arteries of her neck So that so much blood flowed out that the woman fell dead in his hands.
And see also another physician who drew a stone from a man's bladder, and the stone was large; and he took with him a piece of the bladder, and the man died within three days.
And I had already been called to him to remove it, and saw the condition of the sick man and the greatness of the stone; and knew well that if it were cut into he would die.
And see also another physician who took in charge the Duke of our land who had his leg broken, and with the breaking there was a wound;
and the physician, full of ignorance, tied the fracture upon the wound with strong bandages, and did not leave any lint to the wound, and thus left him.
And he commanded that it should not be untied;
and so remained until the leg was entirely swollen and the foot came to ruin.
I was called to come to him, and I hurried to come unbind the leg; and when I had unbound it, he was at peace and felt no pain.
But all paths were already corrupted in the limb, and it could not be healed;
And corruption did not cease to travel through the limb until the whole limb was lost.
And I saw another surgeon who burst open an inflamed carbuncle and then burned it through his own wickedness.
For a carbuncle, when it is free from melancholic humor, ought not to be touched with iron unless it is in such a place that all that is corrupted can be entirely removed.
And therefore, dear son, you must know that manual labor is divided into two parts: namely, work where there is danger in many circumstances;
And I will show in each place of this book where there is fear and peril.
Therefore, you must be careful so that foolish doctors cannot speak ill of you.
Take up your arms with caution, and undertake your patients lightly and firmly, using the best method so that through God's grace you may come to safety and be praised;
and leave fearful diseases to those of great skill;
Remove your arms from that which causes you doubt, and have faith in yourself so that you may pass from this world to the next with glory.
Galien says in some of his admonitions: Do not undertake serious illnesses lest you be called a foolish doctor.
This treatise has been devised according to three chapters.
The first chapter is about fire cauteries and medicinal ointments, from the head down to the feet.
and about the shapes of instruments, and iron implements for cauterizing, and everything necessary for the work.
The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, bloodletting cups, wounds, arrow extraction, and similar procedures.
and the chapter is organized with the shapes of instruments.
The third chapter deals with restoring dislocations and twisted injuries, and similar conditions;
It is organized from the head down to the feet, along with the shapes of instruments.
Before we remember the work, it is necessary for me to tell you about the quality of the temperament and the harm of each complexion.
I say that the qualities of a helper and the harm caused by them are lengthy discourse and subtle knowledge, including secret responses
and about this most wise men spoke at length, and agreed upon it.
They spared few words with me, for I fear lengthiness.
I say that cautery helps universally in all complexions where there is matter, whether they are hot or cold. It means that it is to be known as: hot complexion without matter, and dry complexion without matter.
In a hot and dry complexion with matter together, some said that cautery there is great help; and others said the opposite: that cautery is of no use in diseases that come from heat and dryness. For the nature of fire is hot, and it should not be used to treat hot diseases with heat or dryness;
and he who says the opposite claims that cautery greatly helps hot and dry diseases found in men's bodies. For when you compare the body of man and its moisture to the temperament of fire, you find the body cold.
And I agree with this word. For I have found it many times through experimentation.
And in any case, do not meddle with it except those who have tried it and know through long experience the chapter on cauteries, and the diversity of human complexions, and the dispositions and causes of their diseases, and the seasons and the spacing of time.
Of other constitutions we have no fear, especially in cold and moist diseases. And all the physicians assembled and agreed upon the cautery.
Know, my son, that fire alone is the secret of remedies and has greater efficacy than a cauterizing medicine.
For fire is simple and acts only upon the member which it burns, and does not harm other members if one takes care.
The burning medicines spread from member to member, causing severe diseases; And sometimes they kill the patient.
Fire alone and its goodness do not harm unless there is excessiveness.
And this I have found by experience and through the length of service and study that I have put into the art, which was based on the truth of things;
Therefore I excuse the length of my speech, as it is not my wish to conceal from you the secret that lies in fire and the quality of its work, how it overcomes bodily diseases, as philosophers demonstrate; So receive this in your thoughts.
And know, my son, that they agreed upon the time when cauteries should be performed and chose priests.
I say that cauterization is suitable at all times, because the harm underneath is removed with the help of cautery; And especially if cauterization is necessary for sharp and sudden pains that cannot wait until a greater harm comes to the limb.
And never think, dear son, as foolish physicians do; for a disease healed by cautery has no recurrence; They say thus:
They say thus: But it is not so as they think, because cauteries are not medicine that changes the complexion and dries up the humors that cause pain; their value lies more in their speed of action than in their power and virtue.
And it is possible for disease to come sometimes according to the patient's complexion, where the disease occurs and its strength;
and excesses are gathered in him through the acquisition of foods and similar things; except for cauteries administered where there is little excess or moisture, such as dental cauteries for pain, and similar things, and such pain does not return; But this happens little.
And many people do not understand why cauteries are called the surgeons of medicine, and that is true;
But they do not believe that cauteries are worth using after medicine, but their intentions are mistaken, and cauteries are the rear of medicine because when we administer ways of treatments in any disease and they do not work, then we apply cautery, and it works.
Therefore it is clear that cauteries are the last resort of medicine, not according to the intention of foolish physicians.
The ancients said that cauteries made of gold are gentler than those made of iron, and they said this only because of the quality of gold and its high value.
And they said that the place cauterized does not cause corruption, but this is not true, for I have tried it and found that in some people it is indeed so.
And cauteries of gold are worth more than those made of iron, as they said. And yet when you heat a tool made of gold, you cannot know for sure how hot it is just by its color, and it cools quickly;
And if it is heated too much; If they put it in the fire; Thus, there are enough obstacles.
I have arranged this chapter from head to toe so that it is easier to find the way.
This cautery is useful for moistness and coldness on the head. There are two types of it made due to the cause of an illness called "soda," and also because of many humors that flow down from the head to the ears and throat, causing numerous dreams, toothache, sore throat, and especially all illnesses that come from coldness like paralysis, sciatica, apoplexy, and similar ailments.
The shape of this cautery is such that the patient should be purged by a softening solvent medicine for three or four nights, according to what the strength and age and habit of the patient can tolerate; And then make him sneeze.
And then have him sit cross-legged between your hands, placing his hands on your shoulders;
then place the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his two eyes; And where your middle finger comes to, then press and heat the cautery called 'olivare', of which this is the shape: Place it on the marked spot, and move downwards and outwards, turning your hand bit by bit; then lift your hand gently, and reward yourself if you see a little of bone II emerging; And if you do not see [the bone], then recommence the cautery until you see it as I have told you.
Then take some boiling water, and put soft cotton inside, and place on the location [of the wound], and let it stay for three days;
Then place soft cloth soaked in butter on top. And leave it on until the inflammation is gone. Then treat the wound with the ointment called 'tetrafarmacon', until it is healed.
And as the ancients say, the longer a wound remains open, the more it purges itself; And for this reason, nature aids wounds.
Some also say that one should leave the cautery on until part of the bone is burnt, and then scrape off what has been burned from the bone and heal it.
And others say that the cautery should be left on until it burns away bone as wide as a skein of wool used by women for spinning, so that the humors can exit more freely.
and one must leave the wound open for an extended period. After the wound, one must dress and heal it.
And these two types of cauteries seem not to be entirely good except in certain men where there is a matter of fear;
And it seems to me that I should leave them alone;
For the head is weakened by prolonged solutions of nature, as we witness in other limbs;
And even when the head of the patient is weak by nature, the first appearance of a cautery seems to me more harmful and dangerous; but I now use this one in common practice with safety.
When the head suffers from chronic pain that lasts a long time, the patient should use ointments and pills called "cochies," and perform purgations of the head using oils and plasters; And even if one applies the cautery we mentioned earlier, it will not help. Beware that if the head of the patient is strong by nature and not too cold; Then cauterize with this cautery a little below what we have said above. Afterwards make cautery on each horn of the head up to the bone, as we have said before, and make a cautery at the place called 'vessels'. And this is where cupping glasses are placed; and lift your hand so that you do not see down to the bone: The patient feels much greater pain from this cautery than from others, and I will speak of it elsewhere;
And the cauteries on the horns must be more subtle than those used to cauterize the middle of the head, and this is the form:
"Of the cautery of the head," When sudden pain comes in one part of the head, and the illness extends to the eye, and the head is purged with medicines that dissolve impurities, and all the other treatments I have mentioned in the section on illnesses are performed, but none of them help: then he applies cauteries in two ways: that is, of medicine and fire.
The cautery of medicine is such that you take an aloe stalk, remove the skin and chop it into two pieces, then place them on both temples where the pain resides in such a way that you can place the aloe stalk beneath the skin;
and when it has been placed there, let it stay and hold it tightly for twelve hours; then remove it and wipe the aloe stalk with garlic, leaving the wound alone for two or three days. then place cotton soaked in butter on it until it sticks out.
After the treatment with ointment until it is healthy;
and if you see that, then apply some burning medications that I have written about in the twelfth chapter on burning medications.
The iron cautery follows this manner. Heat the cautery with which is the form:
And it is called "closed" because its head is shaped like a keyhole with a slight curvature at the tip, and in the middle there is a small opening;
And place it on the painful spot, keep your hand there and slightly twist the iron a little, until half of the edge of the heart-shaped knife is burnt.
Then lift your hand so that the artery does not burn; this is necessary, and there should be an abundance of blood flowing.
Afterwards, place cotton wool soaked in sulfur on the spot for three days; then place cotton moistened with butter, and then treat the wound with ointment until it heals.
And if you wish to cauterize this migraine with the cautery called 'cultellare', do so at its tip, but be careful not to touch the artery in this young migraine.
de migraine
When you treat a migraine as we have said before in the division of illnesses, and it does not improve, and you see that the previously mentioned cauteries of medicine and iron do not help, then you must heat the cautery called 'cultellare' until it is white;
And hold steadfastly on the spot a line half as long as two fingers, and lift your hand once, ensuring that you do not compress the artery, and do not go up to the bone.
And guard against the mandible that moves when one chews, and ensure the nerve has no regard for the movement, and spasms do not come upon the patient, and guard against the loss of blood from the artery once it is compressed, or compression causes great fear, especially to those unskilled and inexperienced. And leave the work in mid-course;
But I will tell you how to stop bleeding when an artery is cut, and I will show you where it is relevant in this book.
And if you see that these cauteries are not sufficient for the illness, and the patient is suffering, then cauterize around the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it is healed.
And if you see it, administer the cautery that we have mentioned in the chapter on the extraction of the artery, with the cautery that has two blades; And this cautery is better and more helpful than the one without.
Chapter 49: On the Pain of the Ears Due to Coldness
When cold pain comes to the ear and one has opened medicinal solutions there and other treatments that we have mentioned in the division, but the pain does not cease, then heat this cautery called "point":
Then prick all around the painful ear, or both ears if pain is felt on both sides, and mark the spot a little away from the root of the ear where you will begin; And make ten pricks around each ear;
Then treat the area until it is clean.
Of the Torture of the Mouth
The torture that must be cured by cautery is only that which moves with the pulse flow, as we have mentioned in our discussion of diseases;
and do not perform cauteries on those that come from heat and dryness of nerves.
When you treat this type of torture that moves with the pulse flow and has been cleansed by hydrides and purgations of the head and gargling, but it is ineffective, then you must cauterize the patient with three cauteries: The one at the root of the ear, and the other a little behind the temple, and the third at the junction of the two lips.
Place the cautery on the healthy appearing part, and perform cautery near the top of the ear slightly below the horn of the head, and another at the temple as long as a pea. And leave the cautery until half of the coal is burned.
This is the form of the cautery:
And it has a similar shape to the scalpel we have placed before, but it is slightly more refined, and the blade should be slightly thicker.
After treating the spot as I said before, until it is healed.
When apoplexy is advanced and you treat it as we have said, but it does not improve, and the patient has no fever, then perform four cauteries: Two on the two horns of the head, and one in the middle of the head, and one where it is called "vessels" as we have said before, and the last cautery on the mouth of the stomach.
And let him be treated as we have said before.
de la litargie
For this illness, it is necessary to give the patient large ointments and pills made from mignonette for the head;
Then wrap the patient's head entirely, and place on the back of his head the plaster of mustard that is described in the treatise on plasters;
And this is the manner of the cautery: Thus do as I have said.
If he is healed thus, that is good. And if he is not healed, perform three cauteries on the sides of his head down to the neck, with two fingers' breadth between each cautery.
And treat him as before, and if you see that he does not improve, perform one cautery in the middle of his forehead; And if necessary, two more on the two temples, and treat until he is healed.
And let the cautery called "olivary" be used, as I have said before.
It is necessary that the head be cleansed of years and of those things we have mentioned before;
After this, raise the patient's head, then make a cautery mark on the top of the head and on each horn, and two marks behind and three on the nape of the neck;
And if you need more, and the body is moist and the patient is enduring, and the disease is severe, then make four cautery marks on the nape of the back; and let it burn until the most of the heart is cauterized, then raise your hand. After the treatment, once it is healed, use the cautery that is called "olivare" which we have mentioned before.
Of epilepsy
Epileptics should not apply cauteries except for the phlegmatic type. First, cleanse the brain of hairs and other treatments that we have mentioned in the division when the patient is large and capable of taking medication.
And if it is a child who cannot endure this, perform gargling and chewing to cleanse the brain often with good foods;
Then raise the child's head in mid-air, and make one cautery mark according to what we have said before, one on the vessel, and one on each horn; And if the patient is strong and enduring, perform cauteries as I have said on those who have paralysis and weakness of body, on the spine of the back and neck, using an olive oil cautery according to the method that I have described.
If the patient is a child, apply one subtle cautery in this manner:
When the cause of melancholy is the presence of superfluities or corrupt humors and thick phlegm, then apply cauteries as we have said for those who have paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is that superfluities tend towards melancholy, and the body of the patient is moist, then give him to drink something by which the brain may be cleansed, according to what is said before in the division.
After binding the head of the patient; Then make a bandage of well-made linen, like a circle, and place it around the head;
And the patient sits crossed-legged, and is held firmly on all sides;
Then present the linen, melted with old sheep's butter; Heat it gently over fire until the dough can bear being placed upon it; Then remove the circle from inside the head, and let it cool;
And do this to the patient once each week with another good treatment until they are healthy.
Or if you wish to cauterize a wound by making several pricks all over the cautery.
This method of cautery moistens the brain greatly;
And then place cotton soaked in butter and goose fat on top.
For the treatment of eye pain When pain first comes to the eyes due to the signs that I have mentioned in the division, begin by giving the patient something to drink that cleanses the head and guards against all moistures. Make him sweat or take baths several times while fasting.
Afterwards, instruct him to raise his head and make a cautery mark on the head. If both temples are affected by eye inflammation together or if only one temple is affected, apply two cauteries on the two temples or one cautery on the one affected temple.
and cauterize all the veins and arteries that are below the heart, ensuring that the cautery mark is as long as it is wide.
And beware of excessive bleeding; if too much blood flows out, stop it with the power you have.
And I will teach you about extracting arteries and how to incise and cauterize them.
And sometimes, one makes a cautery or incision below the two rear bones.
and it is seen that they are caused by cold humors, then perform the cautery mark I mentioned earlier for treating eye inflammation. For cautery on the head, apply two cauteries above both temples, and two cauteries behind below both cheekbones. And if more is needed, cauterize bloodily above the eyebrow at each small cautery
When you treat according to what we have said in the section on division, and it does not help at all, then give the patient three nights of pigeon broth to drink After that, shave the head and apply a cautery in the middle of the olive-shaped cautery And apply two cauteries called 'clavilis' above both eyebrows, slightly below the eyes
Be careful not to touch the artery
And this is the shape of the cautery called "clavilis":
When the paper of the oil is softened by disease and moisture, then cauterize it with this cautery which is called "olivary". with which is the form
And if you see fit, apply two cauteries above both eyebrows as long as the eyebrows themselves
And do not leave your hand there until a third of the paper is burned, according to the manner I have described
Regarding the hair that points at the eye Sometimes it happens that the eyelashes turn inward and prick the eye, in which case cauteries are applied in two ways: This is to know of fire, or of burning medicine.
For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Once they have grown and are even, then place the patient in your hands; After placing a figure on the paper like the shape of a mirror on the mint, and let it be the beginning of the sign near the hairs;
Then put moistened cotton on the eye with gum Arabic and powdered peppermint, then heat the cautery of which this is the shape:
After cauterizing on the figure that you have marked several times gently, so that the skin is burned there;
And the sign of health in this work is when you see the paper withdraw, and the hairs stand upright at the point of the eye;
Then lift your hand, and leave it thus for three days, then place cotton moistened in butter until the burning sensation is relieved. After the ointment treatment until it is healed.
And if afterwards hairs come and the paper becomes soft then recommence the cautery on that same spot, just as you did first;
And if the hairs are missing, then cauterize until the paper is lifted to its natural place, and is even, and the hairs do not prick the eye.
The medical fire cauteries are that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even, then make from parchment the shape of the laurel leaf;
then take some French soap and live coals, each one-third part, and grind them well together; and do it quickly so that it does not cool, then pour it onto the shape you have made like the laurel leaf, and place paper over the eyes; And if the patient holds it with one eye only, then operate on one, and if both also. And place moistened cotton under the eye like a wick.
And place the patient's head in your lap with both hands over the medicine, and press the pouch until all of the medicine has been applied every time the patient feels biting pain, for they feel as if it were fire.
After you have done this for some time, then remove the medicine from your hand. And when the biting pain has passed, then raise the lever up and observe if the paper lifts as if it were raised by force of fire or by incision. So if it is so, then it is well.
If not, apply more medicine to the lever where the medicine did not act, until your work is even and your eyes are fixed.
Then place moistened cotton in butter until the heartburn has settled, afterwards treat the wound with ointment called 'diaphoresis' and others until it is clean.
And if it is necessary for you to take great care with your work, so that no error occurs in administering medicine to the eyes.
And if the paper becomes soft afterwards, and the hairs prick in the eye, then recommence the cautery on that spot softened by the paper itself, even as you have done before. after the treatment until it is healed;
And this is the form of the mold for the mirror:
Know that human eyes vary in size and smallness, and adjust your constraints accordingly.
And let not the straight path be blocked for him who studies this art.
Regarding the treatment of fistula by cautery
When you are treating a fistula as we have said in the division of diseases, and your treatments do not help, then it is necessary that you perform a cautery on it in this manner.
Instruct the patient to put their head in your hand; And the master should hold their head between his hands in such a way that it does not move nor bend its head;
Then put moistened cotton on egg white or in colchicum juice onto the eye;
Then heat the cautery that is thus shaped:
And is raised at its end like the shape of a pigeon's feather, together with which the cautery should be;
If you see it, let it be marked from one end to the other, and if you see it, let it also be like a tent.
However, the one that is raised is useful for your work.
After pressing the fistula if it is open, remove the pus and dry it; And if it is closed, open it, and draw out the bowels from behind
Then place a hot cautery on it and hold your hand on the cautery at the part near the nose above the eye, so that your hand does not become foolish. And put the cautery into the fat of the eye, and burn it.
If you reach the beginning of the cautery up to the bone, that would be good. If not, then repeat the cautery once more, and a third time if necessary, and leave it for three days;
Then put moistened cotton in butter on it, and continue the dry ointment treatment until it is healed. If after forty days it is not healed, apply a corrosive medication until the bone is exposed. And the king according to what he would come to his chapter.
And there is one manner of fistulous cautery which some of the ancients spoke of. Understands that it is a fistula, and opens its path; Afterward puts into the opening a subtle thread of which this is the form: And they make it to the quantity of half a pennyweight. Hold your hand firmly on the thread and do not move the patient's nose so that the molten lead does not run into his eye;
And it is necessary to put onto the patient's eye moistened cotton in an egg shell or in a sieve:
The lead thus seals the path of the fistula and the sore heals miraculously.
And if the fistula is healed by the cautery that we have spoken of, it is good. If not, then you must administer a puncture to the nose and return the fistula to its proper place within the nose.
Regarding cracks in lips Many times, cracks appear on the lips which are called "cracks," and especially on children's lips.
When you treat these cracks as we have mentioned in the division of diseases, and the treatment does not help, then heat a small cautery scalpel according to this shape:
And quickly puts it into those cracks until it comes to the front;
Afterward, treat the wound with wax until it is healed.
When an abscess appears at the root of the throat or in the eye, or on the palate, or at the roots of the teeth, afterward it becomes putrid and round and inflamed and becomes a fistula; And you treat it as we have said in sections, but it is of no benefit: Then it is necessary that you apply a cautery according to the size of the fistula. After the cut or puncture of the fistula, hold your hand there until the iron becomes hot at its base and behind it;
And do this once or twice, after treating it as we have said in treatments, until it is healed.
If it is cured thus, that is good; And if not, then the site must be opened and the rotted bone removed, according to what you will find in its chapter.
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medications but this does not help, then place the patient's head in your lap; After heating the cautery whose shape will be shown below, so that you can place it on the tooth;
And put hot irons quickly inside the cautery, and hold your hand there until the patient feels heat reaching the root of the tooth.
Then remove your hand and resume the cautery as you wish;
Then the patient fills their mouth with salted water, holds it there for an hour, and rinses it out thoroughly.
And in this way the tooth that was loose is made firm again, and the softened gum is tightened, and the corrupt moisture is dried up.
on toothache
When tooth pain comes from coldness, or there is coldness or dampness present, and medicinal treatments are ineffective, then cautery is needed in two ways: And cauterization with butter and cauterization with fire.
Cauterization with butter is done by taking cow's butter, and placing it on an iron or brass spoon; Then take cotton, wrap it around the tip of a tent stake, dip it in melted butter, and apply it quickly to the aching tooth. Hold it there until it cools.
And repeat this often until its effectiveness reaches the root of the tooth. And if you see that the wool and cotton become soaked in cold butter, place it on the aching tooth, and apply hot iron until the fire reaches the tip of the tooth.
The cautery with fire is thus made: Take an iron or brass tube, and make it thick so that the fire does not reach the patient's mouth.
After heating the cautery, of which the form will come later, place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery is cooled.
Do this often, for the pain will be relieved on that same day or the next.
And the patient should fill their mouth with good butter during the application of this cautery, then remove it.
And this is the shape of the cautery:
Make the cautery according to the size that you desire and according to your ability;
And this is the shape of the tube:
"of scrofulas" When the boils are filled with phlegm and cold moisture, and do not yield to digestion by medications, then heat the hair cautery of which the form follows, and let it have two openings for the smoke to escape from the other side.
Place the hot cautery on the abscess once or twice, depending on how deep it is.
If the abscess is small, apply the cautery according to its size, and leave it on for three days; And place moistened cotton soaked in butter until the burn is healed;
Afterwards, treat it with ointments and bandages until it is healed.
When moistures gather in the channels of the lungs, especially when it is due to a cold condition, then the patient should first be treated with dissolving medications.
Then perform cautery at the root of the throat, taking care not to go all the way down to the throat and not to burn too much of the heart.
Then perform another cautery at the junction of the neck and the head of the spine, using the cautery called 'clavile', the shape of which is shown above.
And heal the wound as we have said before until it is clean.
When all diseases of the lung are due to cold moisture, and the patient has no fever or shortness of breath, and the disease is chronic, then apply two cauteries on the bladder in suitable places; And place another cautery between the two breasts.
And let the cautery be of the type called "clavile," according to the form described earlier.
And if you wish, perform cautery by pricking with all of the cautery called "pointe," the form of which is described earlier in the disease of the ears.
And let there be up to thirty points, or as many around it.
Afterward, heal the place according to what is said before, and let there be three rains of cautery according to this form:
And because these cauteries are easier to perform, you should make three incisions at once.
de la dislocation de l'épaule
When the head of the arm bone is dislocated due to moist humors and is repositioned but keeps slipping back and becomes dislocated again even with slight movements, as we have experienced, it is necessary to first reset the dislocation. Then have the patient lie on their back and side; then lift the heart which is inside the titillate with the two fingers of your left hand;
and if the joint is dislocated inside, then heat the cautery that has two points until it is red hot.
Burn the heart with a cautery until it pierces to the side, and bring together four cauteries at once.
And for this reason, cauterize with the cautery that has three openings, so that there are six marks of cauterization.
The nerves are as fine as a thread, and it is the shape of the cautery with three openings:
"And sometimes it is attached above this one nerve, for which there are eight cauteries."
Next, apply powdered purslane seeds with honey; Then let the patient rest, and do not move the limbs for a long time until they are well comforted.
And if it is dislocated upwards, which happens rarely, then apply cautery on the thickness of the cautery clavile, or many cauteries by pricking.
For once the joint is closed, and moisture removed, the patient is healed
When coldness and much moisture come to the stomach causing it to lose its temperament, and there is an increase in phlegm that does not benefit from usual treatments, then the patient must be turned onto their back, extend their legs and arms. Then apply three cauteries beneath the armpit of the arm on each side with the quantity of two digits, so that each cautery is like a key, and two cauteries outside the two sides so that the marks of the cauteries are at three angles, and have such space between them that they do not join together when they discharge pus.
And let the cauteries be so deep that they pierce both parts of the heart, and let the marks of the cauteries be in this shape without irregularity:
And if you see a large cautery branding on the stomach in this manner;
and whoever fears this cautery should brand with a prick and press it onto the stomach once, according to the size that you see there. then cauterize with the entire cautery called "the point.
**After the treatment of the cure that we had before, until it is healthy.**
When pain in the liver comes from coldness, moisture, and excess windiness, so that its natural composition is impaired by excesses; and the patient is treated as we have said in divisions, but it does not help them, then the patient should be bled from their heel vein. and apply three cauteries according to this form and figure and quantity onto the liver, avoiding the hypochondria, where the rib of the man comes.
and keep a space between each cautery equal to the thickness of two fingers. and let the cauteries be long and thin, and do not press your hand too hard onto all the cautery.
And let only half of the cautery burn, and let the patient lie on their right side.
And if he cannot do so, then he should lie down, extend his legs, and raise his arms.
And if it is your will, then cauterize these cauteries of the scalpel, if you are skilled and wise in the art, but beware that you do not burn all the heart, for you would dry out the whole body. and let it not come near to the belly, for the heart is very subtle there, and the liver knows for certain.
When he has an abscess on the liver, and you wish to know if it is in the flesh of the liver or in the membrane: If it is in the flesh, the patient feels pain but not too strong.
And if it is in the membrane, he feels insane pain.
Then when this treatment is undertaken by the physicians, the patient must be made to lie on his back.
And then place on top of where the abscess is, and then heat the cautery which resembles a branding iron; here is its shape: And cauterize with the cautery until the flesh is burned and bring it up to the skin so that all the pores are opened.
After treating according to the treatment of ulcers until it is healed;
And only those who have studied at length in the art of medicine should use this cautery, and by whose hands these illnesses have often been cured.
Therefore he can boldly work, although it seems better to leave it alone.
"of the cautery for pleurisy"
The ancients said that for pleurisy one must make cauteries with the roots of aristolochia in this manner: Take a long root of aristolochia, as large as you can find, dry and also as thick and as long as your two fingers; And soften it in oil and take it to the fire, and cauterize with the cautery between the navel and the neck, and make two small cauteries a little way down towards the part below the beard.
And place two cauteries between the fifth rib and the sixth, sloping slightly downward. And place one cautery in the breast, another above the stomach, one between the two shoulders, and two on either side of the breast, below the cautery between the shoulders.
Press your hand not at all, but hold it gently, as when smelling something.
And some ancients said that certain people used to use a fire cautery resembling a razor, heat it and place it between the ribs until it reaches the boil. When there is pain, as we have mentioned in the case of a liver abscess.
But in this work there is fear where the patient dies now, or a fistula comes which cannot be healed.
"of the mouse"
When you treat the disease of the mouse as we have said in the sections on treatments and it does not improve, then there are three methods of cauterization that are all beneficial.
Of these, one method is to make three or four cauteries in a line following the length of the spine, according to the shape of the liver cautery we have described earlier.
And do not press your hand throughout the entire cautery process, and let the patient lie constantly on their back;
Another method of cautery is to heat the cautery that has two edges, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder;
and raise the heart which is located at the middle, where the rib of the patient comes towards the left, and let the elevation by which you raise the heart be according to the length of the body, and the cautery should be according to the width of the body.
Afterwards, insert the two inflamed edges until the heart is pierced from the other side, and then pull out the cautery, and thus there will be four.
And if you wish, cauterize with all three edges of the cautery.
After the treatment has cast off corruption after a long time, it is better than the other treatments mentioned earlier.
Cautery is not useful for hydropics except in the manner called "ascites".
When you treat according to the methods that we have said in divisions, and your treatment does not help at all, then it is necessary for you to make four cauteries around the neck, one on the stomach, one on the liver, one on the middle of the belly, and two behind the back on the spine, and one on the chest; And let the cautery be placed close to the point of the spear.
And then leave the cautery open for a long time to expel decay, and do not neglect the care of the patient after the cautery. And healing will hasten, and both intentions will be together with God's help.
The shape of the cautery for the belly is the keyhole that we have shown before. And that for the back be olive-shaped, as it is depicted herebefore.
When the feet of someone with dropsy are swollen and full of yellow water, you must cauterize on the back of the foot between the little toe and the ring toe. And lift your hand with the cautery without turning it.
And do not go in too deep, otherwise you might spill out the yellow water, and the cautery should be made according to this shape:
Then make two cauteries in each leg at the tip of the shinbone. And let the cautery be long, one below the knee in front and the other behind, on the calf.
And leave the fire cauteries on for a long time without dressing them, until they close up.
After the treatment of other treatments that we have mentioned.
When abdominal pain comes from coldness and moisture, to the point that the retaining and digestive virtue that is in the stomach and intestines is weakened, and cannot be cured by any means of treatment; And if you see the patient suffering greatly and with strong virtue, then perform a large cautery on the stomach according to what was spoken of earlier regarding the cautery of the stomach, at the circular cautery. And four subtle cauteries around the mouth of the belly like one subtle clavicle cautery, and two cauteries on the hips.
"And if you see that there are abundant moistures and the patient is suffering greatly, then make a cautery on the point of the chest, one cautery on each armpit, and two small cauteries near the large one on the stomach, for the treatment is profitable when there is good help."
"of the treatment of hemorrhoids"
When hemorrhoids are in the fundament, one or more, and are old and made up of thick cold and moist corrupt humors, and have been treated with division as we have said without benefit, then perform cauteries: On the spine of the back, that which is entirely below the neck should be cauterized little by little in a triangular shape, and on both sides two cauteries should be applied underneath the jaw.
And if you think that his stomach is cold, and the flesh does not cook, and one sees the face swell, then on the stomach one should apply one large cautery as it is said before, and another on the liver, and another on the navel with all four cauteries done at once. and let the cautery remain on for a long time. After treatment, heal until it is whole again.
When you cut the head of an ulcer, first heat the cautery that resembles a razor and then place it burning hot onto the cut ulcer. and hold your hand there until the cautery reaches the base of the vein, so that the blood may flow.
Do this once or twice; and if there is much ulceration, then cauterize each one as we have said. After applications of ointments benefit until they are clean;
And if you cauterize with a large cautery on the bladder, it will have more help.
When the patient cannot endure being cut or opened, which we will describe in its proper place, then comes such an illness that it can only be healed by cautery.
If a fistula occurs and it is inflamed and poured out with rottenness and corrupted moistures, then probe it gently all the way through, ensuring that you know its full depth.
After heating the cautery that resembles a razor, insert it into the fistula according to how much of it has entered, and begin again with the cautery until the rotten and corrupt flesh is burned away once, twice, or three times depending on what is needed.
And be careful not to burn the nerves that are nearby, and large veins.
If the fistula goes to the body of the bladder and the intestine, be careful with these areas, and only perform this procedure in fatty flesh, thinking that it is not easily pierced.
Then treat the area until it is clean; and if the area becomes dry, and the materials have been removed for a long time, then know that the area is entirely healed.
And if the substances are not removed, know that the place is pierced, and the bone is broken at the front. And thus as one of those things that we will mention in its proper place.
When pain of cold comes to the kidneys, and with great windiness, and she does not have her monthly period, then you must perform a cautery on her kidneys on both sides with the cautery called the "cautery clavile" that we mentioned earlier;
And if we cauterize it in the middle, there will be three cauteries in a row, and they will provide greater help.
From the bladder When the bladder is weak and cold with moisture so that the patient retains urine, then perform two cauteries on the front part of the bladder, where the pubic hair begins, one on the right side and one on the left, and let each cautery be as long as a pea.
And perform one more cautery on the back if necessary;
And let the cautery iron be of the shape previously mentioned.
When the womb is cold and moist, and does not allow conception due to this, and the flowers are corrupted with their endings delayed; And when they come, there is great pain: Therefore it is necessary that three cauteries be made around the navel, as we have said concerning the cautery of the bladder, and two cauteries behind the back;
And let the cautery iron be, as we have said.
When viscous humors descend to the box of the groin, and because of this it moves from its place, and the sign is that one thigh appears longer than the other when measured together;
and if the place of division is found empty, then you should cauterize the patient around the box of the groin with one cautery shaped like a circle, and cut in front of the place before the box turns, so that the box is inside the circle;
Therefore, let the cauteries used be like those employed to cauterize the stomach.
And if these cauteries are not present, make three large olive oil cauteries, and let the cautery be as deep as all the hearts.
and continue until it is healed.
Of the pain in the beard[TOOL_CALLS]Quant tu sentirás grant dolor en la boiste de ta hainche, si prent une plume de penne de galline et la met sus la boiste de ta hainche, et le meins que tu puedras souffrir; et quant tu auras ainsi soffert tant qu’il te puisse plaire, tu laisseras cheoir hors de ta boiste de hainche une gotte de ton sang. Adonques covient que tu fache .ij. cauteres environ la boiste de la hainche, si com nous avons dit ou cautere de la vessie. When pain occurs in the hip joint due to cold and moisture, and the patient has been treated with what we have said in the section but the treatment is ineffective, and the condition is chronic: then you must purge the patient of thick humors using foul-smelling pills or similar good pills. Then apply a cautery;
The method for applying the cautery is in two ways: That is to say, using hot medicaments together with fire cautery.
There are many kinds of fire cauteries, one of which is:
you should cauterize over the hip joint three triangular cauteries of this shape, with good depth and width, each having a space between them the size of two fingers, using olive oil.
No cautionery should be applied midway upon the head of the hair shaft; thus there are four such cauteries according to this form:
And if you see it, cauterize with the circular cautery that we have mentioned earlier in the case of hair dislocation.
But do so in such a way that the circle encompasses the entire hair shaft, and all the hairs are burnt around the root.
And this is the manner in which it is done for sciatica, when pain holds in the neck and does not reach the thigh or leg.
And if it extends to the thigh and leg, apply two cauteries where the patient feels pain, and one cautery above the ankle four digits on the left side.
And let the cautery be of the type that cuts into the hair shaft; and let the thickness of the hair be burnt.
And if the patient feels that the pain extends to two digits from the foot or near it, cauterize where they feel pain with three or four points using the cautery called "points". If necessary, apply more cauteries.
And if he knows that the pain is below the knee towards the thigh, then let him perform a cautery with a cutellar or circular cautery, and make sure in all your cauteries that you do not let the cautery burn too much so that you harm the nerves and large arteries, and cause greater injury to the patient.
And I myself have seen many who performed cautery on the ankle of the foot, and they left it so that the leg became entirely swollen, and also the foot, and it was pierced and rotted all over. After a bellyache from which he died.
And if the pain is in both parts together, make cautery on one and on the other, according to this manner.
And the wise say in the cautery of the hip, concerning which is this manner: make such iron and let it be at its head as thick as a hazelnut, or somewhat less, and let it be perforated and let there be between each perforation a space equal to the thickness of a barleycorn.
And let the perforations be two parts open, and let them be like nuts, and there should be one made of good iron;
And this is the shape:
And let it be heated until it is entirely red-hot and glowing, then place it on the hip bone of the sick patient, and turn it towards the healthy side;
And the cautery once applied, let it remain for three days. Then make an embrocation of butter and leave the wound open for a long time. After applying the ointment until it is healed.
Albucasis says that we rarely use this cautery due to fear of its heat, and few use it.
Yet it is one of the good cauteries for those who can endure it, and where it strikes.
The burning cautery is made thus: Take an instrument with teeth in which the edges of the door descend, and it should be of bronze or iron on one side long, and at the top there are two nuts, each having between them the quantity of the thickness of a finger. and they are opened wide and above, and join together according to this shape:
After placing the box of hot coals next to the patient lying on their healthy side, then press your hand strongly onto the box of coals; After placing it between the two circles of hot water heated with one handful of earth, leave for an hour's time, and let the patient endure the heat and burning sensation.
For he finds there a biting like that of fire;
And when the biting sensation has passed, lift your hand with the instrument and remove the hot water, leaving it thus for three days, and apply butter until the blackness from the burn is gone; And leave it for three more days until putrefaction ensues;
And this would be the final aid after treatments with ointments, as long as it is healed.
And if the pain has spread to the thigh or leg, make another poultice like you did for the groin area.
And this is how hot water poultices are used, and I have written it here in treating medicinal remedies. Take quicklime and live coal, as much of one as of the other, grind them together, and place them in nine pots. If there is a small opening where even the point of a razor can enter.
If there is a small opening where even the point of a razor can enter. And place another pot underneath, well-plombed, and put on it alkali and hot water and sweet oil until there are two layers of powders that you can grasp firmly in your hand.
Then let it remain thus until water and sediment descend into the lead pot, then take all that water, and pour it onto hot alkali as before.
And then it will be very thin and usable in many medical works and cauteries for other limbs.
For it performs the same work as fire, and has other medicines with which one can cauterize well the hair, such as tassel and honey of cardamom and hot water with soap, all mixed together.
Galen tells us of a treatment whereby a man was cured of sciatic nerve and hip pain, greatly praised it, saying no other treatment was performed, and that he was healed immediately upon doing this, and afterwards bathed as instructed below.
And do in such a way that you take fresh and dry green verdigris, grind it much with a handful of fat, and put it on the hair and thigh and leg where the pain holds, and let it stand.
Let it remain for three hours until the patient no longer feels the burning sensation.
And then make him enter a bath until his body is slightly warm, and lay him in bed, and the pain will all depart and he will be healed.
And know that no one should use a cautery with such medicine unless it is after an evacuation of blood.
And Dioscorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with goat bile, it helps greatly;
And this should be done in such a manner: Take linen, soak it in old oil, and place it on the hollow between the thumb of the foot and the one called "foscile".
Afterwards, take dried goat bile and burn it to coals over fire. Then place the bellows on the wool, and leave it until it is extinguished;
And do this again in the same way, continuing thus until you believe that it has reached the hairline and the pain has ceased;
And this type of cautery is called 'goat cautery'.
for the pain in the back
When pain comes to the back, whether from falling or from percussion or from too great an evacuation or from similar symptoms of spread-out cold matter, none of these symptoms warrant cauteries except that which comes from an infusion of cold matter.
It is then necessary to make the patient void themselves of fetid pills or similar ones. Then perform three rows of cauteries marked with incisions on their back where the pain is felt, with five cauteries in each row or more depending on the strength and amount that the patient can withstand;
And the cautery shall be performed according to the cautery called 'poins'.
If you see, make three or four cauteries on the middle of the shoulder blade in this form:
Often this illness affects young children, and its initial sign is that they have difficulty breathing when they stand up, with fear; And you will find in the lower back of the spine, and our appearance appears above other spines.
When you see this and you wish to cure it, then cauterize with the cautery of the navel according to this shape: So that each part of the spine receives the cautery evenly.
And if you wish to do so, cauterize around the spine with points two or three lines apart, keeping them close together.
Then heal the wound until it is clean according to what we have said, and be sure not to apply cautery to any gibbosity near a nerve.
for the pain in the joints
When pains of the joints are due to moistures that spread throughout each limb of the body, and when pain comes in the feet which physicians properly call 'podagry,' and when it is caused by coldness and cannot be cured by medicines, then it is treated with cauteries in this manner:
Make many cauteries around the ankle joint, and let the cautery be olive-shaped according to this form:
And if there is need for you to press on the face of the foot, perform cauterization at that location called 'point'. And if the pains extend to the knees and other joints, which often happens, then make three or four cauteries on each knee cap, all olive-shaped.
And if you need more, then do more, but do not hold your hand outside so long that the blade of the heart is burned.
And if pains descend to the knee and back, administer the cautery that we have mentioned in this chapter.
And if pains are in the hands, make two punctures around the fistule.
and if there remains no pain in the toes, then make punctures on each joint and on the hair of the hand;
and if pains come up to the hips or shoulders, cauterize each part and make good care for the patient and give medicines.
Because if you give him good care and purge phlegm, he shall be healed with God's help.
When rupture occurs in the groin, and the bowels descend to the thighs and it is recently happened, then when you see to cure him, he should not eat that day; and he should use things that leave the belly, so that the wind descends from his belly;
then make him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to hold his breath until the bowels are replaced, and tie them with your two fingers, and press firmly below the rupture onto the bone of the wrist, and there is one sign that is like half a circle above the body;
Then heat the cautery of which this is the shape:
until it becomes white and casts seeds Then reset the bowels to their place; and the attendants shall hold his hand so that they do not return backwards.
Open the patient's thighs widely and place a cushion beneath him, then one servant on each thigh and another on the stomach to hold his arms.
Then place the cautery on the sign with your whole hand and hold it there with your right hand until you reach the bone; if you do not reach the bone the first time, then repeat it again until you do so. And be careful that the bowel does not spill out while performing the cautery. That you may not burn it. And so that the patient does not die or suffer other harm.
And know that if you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your efforts are worth nothing.
The cauteries for children should be thin according to their bone size, and those for large people should also be large according to their size.
After three days, treat the cautery wound with butter until the burning sensation is gone;
After other dressings are applied until it is healed, let the patient lie on their back for forty days until the wound is fully healed.
and his bindings must be left loose for a long time so that his eyes do not bulge when he tries to go to bed at night.
And after forty days, when he wants to get up, let him be given a well-made bandage, and apply it for another forty days;
and let him have good rest, working little and guarding against excessive drinking and eating, and raising his voice too high;
And when he follows this instruction, he will be completely healed.
And I shall tell afterward the treatment of cutting in its chapter.
When ruptures come in other bellies and are visible, and you see that they do not grow any further, apply the cautery with a hot iron according to its size, and burn the third part of it near the heart. after the treatment according to what we have said;
And some of the ancients have said that it should be cauterized with a hot iron at three angles in this shape:
But first mark the entrance point and draw a line along the width above the rupture, and another below it, and hold your hand within throughout the fire cautery.
But the first cauteries are lighter and gentler.
"Of old pain in some limb" When pain comes to any limb, either from falling or striking, and this pain persists for a long time, despite medical treatments being ineffective, then it must be cauterized with the cautery called "poins," and the cautery should be done according to the length of the limb, its smallness and weakness, its strength and virtue, and its location regarding twists and its pain.
If he is without pain from the first cautery, that is good;
If this name does not improve, recommence another cautery upon it, for such is the custom that it should be changed in the member that lies nearby; therefore you must make the cauteries until the patient is cured.
Wounds are often greatly helped by cautery with great benefit, especially those that come from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
If you can cauterize the wound, be careful if the disease is at the beginning; and if it does not heal according to what we have said in the division, and neither swells nor stays, and you doubt that corruption will spread throughout the patient, then make five cauteries on top of it: One at the nape, and another towards the forehead at the end of the eyebrows; And two on each horn [of the eyebrow], and one behind on the small lock of hair at the back
And leave your hand there until the cautery reaches the bone, and until the scabs come out so that the fumes of the thick humors can escape.
And cauterize the mouse according to what is written before.
And if the blackhead is scattered everywhere; and it clearly harms, then you must cauterize it with these cauteries that we have mentioned above: one at the head, and one near the neck, and two on the spine of the neck, and six on the spine of the back, and one large one on the chest and another nearby, and two on the two shoulders. and two on the ribs, and two on the tendons of the arms, and one on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands.
And beware of the nerves that are behind the heel bone, so you do not burn them;
and sometimes one makes a cautery on the bone of the wrist, and another on the bone of the stomach, and another on the liver.
And know that the more cauteries you perform, the more help you give, and the greater the benefit.
And know that the patient feels no pain from the cautery as the healthy do, because the body is already completely corrupted.
And it is necessary that the cauteries are large and small according to the limbs and joints as you will find them in the methods of iron tools.
After applying flour of wheat with honey, and other treatments until it is clean.
When swelling occurs in any limb and is treated with medications, oils, and poultices, but it is not healed, then apply cauteries to the limb according to its size.
And let the cautery be a little deep into the flesh of the heart; then treat with oils until it is healed.
And sometimes cautery is performed on the hand and foot and back, at the exit of the nerve that moves the limb, and thus if the swelling has been removed;
And nonetheless let no one meddle with it unless they are knowledgeable about limbs and the exits of moving nerves in the body.
When the disease called "albaras" is established and medical treatment does not work, then cauterize it with a slightly deep cautery according to the thickness of the heart's flesh until the whiteness is removed and its color changes.
Then follows the treatment with fine flour of vetches and lentils mixed with rose oil and plantain leaves, and pigeon blood and eagle blood, each one part. And all should be mixed together, tied up in a cloth, and applied to the place until it is hot.
The treatment of chancre by cautery
When a chancre begins and you see it stopping, then cauterize it with the cautery that seems like a circle, all around the edge of the chancre.
Moreover, wise men said that one should also apply cautery to the center of the cancer.
But I do not think this is good either, for I fear that it might become ulcerated and corrupted, as I have seen it happen before.
And the more appropriate thing is to cauterize around it with a cautery called 'circular', as we have mentioned in many cauteries.
When someone has an illness called 'adubelati', and it is delayed in dying either due to the excess it produces or due to the weakness of the patient when they are elderly (that is too old), and they have little blood, or due to the season; And you must hurry to die. Then cauterize around it with many small cauteries, pricking [the area]. Leave it like that afterward. For it will hasten its death.
And if you see it pierced all through the cautery, then heat the cautery which is shaped like this:
And place your hand in the middle of that illness called "adubelati" until the cauteries have pierced the heart, and let the cauteries be such that the patient feels them so deeply that the course of the corruption is alleviated.
After its treatment, until it is perfectly healed.
Another condition called "corrodens" exists, which is nothing but a rotting of limb, for it consumes limbs as fire does dry logs.
If you see this illness in a place that can withstand cautery with fire, then heat the cauteries, small and large according to what is needed for the location where the illness is.
Then cauterize all around until you remove all corruption, and nothing remains of it, so that everything that is corrupted is destroyed.
And then let it rest for three days, and apply a poultice with oil on the cauterized places until the burns of the fire are gone, and all corruption is removed.
After treatment with ointments producing flesh.
And if after three days no healthy flesh appears, then it is good;
But if not, then begin the cautery again on what remains of the corrupted areas.
And this manner has sometimes been cured by medicine alone instead of fire cautery;
But nevertheless, fire cautery is more helpful, and I have already discussed the cure of medicine in the section on division: Take as much as you need.
Of the moles that come upon the feet Often, a disease called "clos" in our language arises at the feet, and it is a large broken thing that wounds the foot.
And the cautery for this disease is according to two methods. That is, fire cautery and hot water cautery.
Fire cautery should be heated like a bellows iron and made of good iron to fit the size that can grasp the nail on all sides, with sharp edges.
After placing it hot onto the nail, turn your hand completely around the nail until it reaches the head of the nail; And leave it like that for 3 days until it begins to exude pus. Then make a poultice of wild mallows crushed with salt, and leave the poultice on all night, and the nail will fall out and be removed from its roots.
Then heal the joint with ointment made from flesh until it is clean.
And if they are turned away from the body, which often happens in hands and feet, then you must bring a cautery of hot water. And it is done in this way: Take a clay pipe or an iron rod, or a bellows iron, and place it on the nail and the surrounding flesh, that is to say for warts. And place the cane above so that it encircles all around, then put a bit of hot water there, and hold your hand firmly, pressing your hand while turning so that the edge of the cane reaches the root of the nail, and finds the deep warm water pathway to the root.
And let the patient endure a little the biting of the hot water for an hour; Then leave it thus, and it will uproot itself entirely with all its roots.
Thus one does after another, until you remove all those on the body, then treat them with oils that generate flesh.
When someone trembles with cold from the nerves, or from quartan fever or another, then you must perform four cauteries or five on the spine of the back, one cautery between each spine; And one cautery on the foot, and one on the stomach at the olive-shaped cautery;
So it will stop trembling, and the warmth of health will return from the cold illness.
Never do sores appear on the body's surface or pus-filled pimples, which come from corrupted thick matter.
If you see that pustules are appearing at first, then you must perform a cautery on each head; A subtle cautery of myrtle wood, whose tip is heated in fire, or of long aristolochia root, or the lenticular cautery.
And sometimes they cauterize at the beginning when it appears in this manner, and it cannot grow afterward from there, but the excess from which it comes is broken off, and it becomes clean.
But it is necessary that this be done after the evacuation of blood.
Often there are great flows of blood from the artery that is cut at the wound that comes behind, or at the incision of the abscess, or at the cautery of the limb, and similar things; And it is very difficult to stop.
And nevertheless when this happens to anyone, quickly place your two fingers on the wound of the vein, and press hard until the blood is appeased under your fingers and no more drops come out;
Then place on fire olive oil cauteries of various sizes, small and large, until they are all red.
Then take one [cautery], either large or small according to the wound and where the artery is routed, and place it on the vein where you hold your two fingers, holding the cautery until the bleeding stops.
And if it happens that when you lift your finger from the vein, and the cautery is spent, then quickly take another one of the cauteries that are in the fire.
And do not cease doing this one after another until the blood is stanched.
And be sure that you do not burn the nerve nearby, and that no other harm comes upon the patient;
And know that when blood flows from the artery, it cannot be easily stopped, especially when the artery is large, unless by one of the four methods we have mentioned: Either by cautery, or by extraction when it has not been treated, or by tying tightly with thread, or by applying medicines that have the power to stop bleeding. And let it be bound and restrained properly.
And those who bring about stopping of bleeding by tying very tightly with cloths or putting hot things on top, or other similar things, do little good if any at all.
And if this happens to anyone and he does not have a physician or medication nearby, then he should place his index finger on the vein wound as we have said, and press firmly until it becomes reddened above the wound and the vein. and do not move his finger but moisten it with cold water often enough that it becomes very cold until the blood is frozen and thickened.
And make haste to provide what is needed for cauteries and medications.
We have told you in the first chapter all diseases for which a fire cautery or hot medicine is needed, and the cauteries used for them and their causes, tools, and forms.
I have placed this chapter on cauteries from head to foot, and in this chapter I will follow the same path so that one may more easily find what one seeks.
And before I begin this chapter, dear friend, you should know that there is more danger and fear in this chapter on cauteries than in the first one, and therefore it requires greater caution.
For in the practice of this chapter, there is often evacuation of blood when opening a vein, incising an abscess, treating wounds, extracting arrows, cutting into stones, and similar things. Where there is doubt and fear, many people die.
And I warn you not to attempt anything foolish. For many kinds of people come seeking treatment. Such cases often involve those who harm themselves so much with their illness that they die easily due to the insanity that results from their condition and the severity of their illness. One should fear these things.
And there are those who lose their senses and say: Wait, I am cured. and the illness is deceitful.
Do not agree with those who come to you in this manner, but place greater value on your honor than on your desire. Open yourself wisely and carefully to those whom you are sure of and whose praise you can earn.
Use prediction and indication in treating your patients, so that health may be restored
This will help you gain good reputation, glory, and the memory of praise.
"Dear child, Our Lord grant you good understanding and uprightness, and if it pleases Him to inspire you with His holy breath, Amen."
"Or I have arranged this chapter for you by chapters, according to what is before the chapter on cauteries which I have already arranged from head to foot, so that you may find more easily what you will need."
Know that this illness often occurs in newborn infants when the birth canal squeezes the child's head too tightly;
And sometimes this happens due to a hidden cause which one does not know.
And I have never seen this disease in anyone but children, and it always leads to death in those that I have seen. Therefore, it seems to me that I should leave off working on such cures.
I saw a child whose head was filled with water, and it swelled each day so that he could no longer support it.
And the moisture grew so much that he died, and this moisture gathered under the bone over the sphenoid, between the heart and the bone.
And if this moisture is between the heart and the bone, and if the abscess is small, then make a wide incision in the middle of the head.
and let it be as long as two fingers, until the moisture runs out.
And here follows the form of the spathula:
"If the moisture has grown more and the abscess is larger, then make two incisions in the shape of a cross, according to this form:"
And if the moisture is under the bone, and you see these signs: the corners of the head raised on each side, water shoots out when pressed with your hand from within, but nothing comes forth in response: If you must cut around the head three cuts in this manner
After the incision, remove all moisture forcefully. After stretching the wounds with bandages and powders, apply wine and oil, and leave it thus until the fifth day;
Then untie it, and treat the wound with dressings and poultices, leaving the head bound evenly; then give the patient dry food without moisture until the limb is healed.
And another manner of incision is to look where the boil opens and where its point meets;
for sometimes it is in front sometimes behind sometimes on the right and sometimes on the left.
Therefore cut where the boil opens and where the water collects, cutting along its length according to your ability;
and be sure not to touch the artery; for if you damage an artery or vein, the patient may die from blood loss and evacuation of moisture.
When a person contracts an illness called "cataract" in the eyes or the foot, and if that illness is chronic, and medical treatment does not help, then the final remedy is cauterization with two arteries being tied off.
It is therefore necessary, when you bandage his eyes, that the patient turn his head back. After rubbing the spot with a coarse cloth until the arteries appear, then twist the patient's neck with the entire cloth. Then look where the vein lies, and its ends are located behind the ears; few are covered.
Then mark the spots with ink, then cut both with a sharp spathula at two parts until the vein is cut to the bone, and this should be done on the wide part of the head.
And if you see one artery, insert the spatula underneath it and cut it from above at two points across its width.
Once the vein is cut, blood will flow out continuously upwards.
And if the artery does not appear upon feeling, then you must measure the distance of three fingers' width, then mark with ink and cut until it reaches the bone.
And approximately six drops of blood should be let out; sometimes a little more or less depending on what the patient can bear and the fullness of the artery.
Then examine the wound: If it remains on the bone tip of the hipbone, so cut that no abscess may come into it; then press the wound and bind it, and treat with ointment until it is healed.
"de emigrainne" translates to "of migraine". When an ancient migraine comes on, accompanied by catarrh and severe headache with moist eyes, heat in the temples, and other such disturbances which do not improve with medical treatment, then it is necessary to tie off the arteries of the temples and cauterize them as we have described.
And the manner of extracting them is that the patient should shave the hairs from his temples and listen to the artery which opens in the temple; for it beats plainly there, but it has little response outside except in some men who are very cold.
And if it is responsive, then the patient should bind his neck with some cloths; then rub the place with some rough cloth, and apply warm water to that place until the artery appears plainly. Then take the spatula of which this is the shape: Then gently strip the skin until you reach the artery; then raise it with pincers and carefully separate it from the tissues that are beneath each part.
And if the artery is thin, then twist it with the point of a nail file, then cut off that part according to the amount of two fingers. But if it is not cut, the blood will not flow entirely.
And remove six finger widths of blood.
And if the artery is large, then you must tie it in two places with a strong doubled silk thread, so that decay does not come before the wound is sealed, and blood flows freely.
Then cut off the excess between the two ties at that same hour, and then, if you see fit, cauterize with a cautery knife up to the bone until the head is cut.
And this is the second operation, if the patient has no fever and is of warm temperament. For a cautery helps to finish off moistures: Therefore it is especially helpful for moistures.
Wherefore, for the extraction of arrows, one must fill the wound with plenty of cotton and place well-made tampons on top;
And when they are dislocated, let them be treated with dry medicines that cause flesh to grow, and dressings, until they are healed.
And if the artery breaks during your operation, hurry to cover it with a cautery, or use the place of quicklime and press with your hand until the blood is stopped. And if you do not have this available, place your thumb on the spot until the blood is frozen, then rinse the area with cold water until the bleeding stops, and bind it as necessary.
And there should be one thick spacer between the two blades, and then when you have marked the two spots with the red-hot iron, cauterize the vein in two places down to the bone. And let them be removed between the two heads for it is not entirely suitable to this cautery.
And this is the form of the cautery:
And in extracting the artery, it is easier and quicker to cauterize the vein with this cutting cautery of two parts, but let the cuts be well spaced to retain their heat longer. For when the instrument is too thin, it retains its heat less well.
tears When the tears of the eyes descend from the veins above the forehead, and medicine applied there is ineffective, and you see the face redden, and feel trembling on the brow like shivering; And if the eyes are thin and moist so that the hairs of the eyelashes fall out, and the eyelids are heated and scorched by the heat of the tears, then this treatment is necessary. And they called this treatment 'cure contuse' and it is to be done thus: behind the forehead of the patient who has this illness, let him have hairs there, then make three incisions equally along the length of the forehead;
And they called this treatment 'cure contuse' and it is to be done thus: behind the forehead of the patient who has this illness, let him have hairs there, then make three incisions equally along the length of the forehead; And let one of the incisions be just like two fingers' width throughout the forehead sloping downwards until near the nose, and the other two on either side above the eyelids, but guard against cutting into the arteries that are on either side above the eyelids;
And keep your hand away from the connection of the two lower jaws, let each cut be the size of three hairs wide.
And have ready a sponge and many bandages to wipe away the blood; then insert the forceps at two points, of which this is the shape:
From the incision that starts at the temple up to the second incision; And strip away all the skin that is between the two incisions up to the soft tissue on the bone, then make another cut from the middle incision up to the other second one, and then remove this forceps. Then insert into the first incision the instrument called "the curette", which is very sharp on one side and blunt on the other. Here is its shape:
And place the sharp knife towards the flesh near the heart, and the blunt knife towards the bone, and cut until it reaches the middle groove.
And cut all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes until the incision is continuous down to those that open from the heart, then make another cut in the middle incision up to the other end.
Then drain the blood evenly and press the wound to stop the bleeding;
Then place in each incision a wick of old cotton, and put on moist bandages soaked in wine, oil, and honey, ensuring that no abscesses form.
And on the third day untie the linen, and bring great plenty of cold water, then apply the plaster of balsam with rose oil, and other treatments to heal wounds until it is healed.
If catarrh comes frequently, and you see the eyes thin and small, and weakens sight, and burns the membranes; and the hair falls out, and deep in the head there is burning pain, and the patient sneezes then know by these signs that those matters and that catarrh come from many veins, and the proper treatment for it is this.
And you should command the patient to lie down on their back, then make a long incision along the forehead and another across it. And begin at the opening of the left temple to the right temple, and let the incision be made down to the bone; and keep your hand away from the nerves that move in chewing
And when the bone is exposed, wipe away all the blood with a sponge, and then open between the two lips of the wound and put in old cotton, and linen strips. Then tie upon cloths moistened in wine and oil, and guard against hot abscesses.
When it is removed, you must rub the bone until flesh begins to grow, then treat it with drying agents that cause the flesh to adhere.
In this manner: Take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony; make a plaster from them and apply this plaster to these wounds to cause flesh to adhere all around.
Of earplugs
All that falls into ears is one of four things: either grain, or beast, or stone from a mine, or similar thing like iron. or seed, such as peas, beans, lentils or flowing things like water and juices and similar things.
When something like a stone or other thing falls into the ear which does not fit well nor grow in the ear, place the ear to the sun.
If you see the stone, then distill some drops of violet oil or sesame oil, and apply it for extraction and when the stone is expelled by sneezing, hold the nostrils closed during sneezing, and wrap around the ear cloths or wool. And they attach the ear above.
Many times fire comes from this treatment;
And if it does not come out by fire, let him bring about extraction with subtle tweezers, of which here is the form:
If it jumps out with the tweezers, that's good;
But if not, then bring about extraction with a small, subtle hook;
And if it does not come out with that, then make a small copper tube and thrust the end of the tube into the hole of the ear strongly, and stop up what is around the tube with soft wax so that the wind cannot enter with the tube; Then draw fire strongly through it, for often does fire come thus as we have said;
And if it does not come out by fire in this manner, then take pitch with which they catch birds, and put some of it on an instrument that is sharp for this purpose, and place a bit of cotton around it; Then press the buttock over the stone or whatever it may be, and draw fire.
And if it does not jump out from all these things that we have said, then hasten to cut the ear before the abscess becomes hot and spasm occurs.
And the manner of cutting is as follows: first, make the patient lie on their back, and draw out blood according to the measure of their strength; then have the patient sit between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and make a small cut at the root of the ear where it depends on fat. And let the cut be like a half-moon until you reach the stone, then remove it according to your ability and suck it out quickly into your mouth;
and continue treating him until he is healed.
And if it is gravel that is inside and it swells, then administer an extraction.
and if it cannot come out, then administer a thin, subtle spatula according to this shape: and make an incision on that boil.
But do not do this when you think the grain is moist due to ear moisture.
Then extract it with tweezers or forceps gently and carefully, as we have said, so that the extraction is smooth.
Therefore, in the water that falls into the ear, it is necessary for the patient to use sneezing movements first, and plug the ear with old cotton. And let him lie on that same ear where the water is. If it jumps out from there, it's good.
If not, then take many thin, light pins according to the length of your thumb and heat them a little over the fire; and have the patient insert one or two of these pins into a perforation in their ear, with one end sticking out on the other side, and then place another pin on top of the one inside the ear; and continue doing this from pin to pin until all the water has come out, and thus it will all flow out.
And if you see this, then take a reed, insert one end into the ear, and heat the other end with fire until the inner part of the reed is burned.
Then repeat this process with other reeds until all the water has come out, as we have said in the case of pins.
In extracting a creature, if it is small-bodied, like a flea or similar thing, treat it as we have said in the section on division.
But if it is large-bodied so that one can feel it, then arrange an extraction using forceps; and this is the easiest thing to remove that might be in the ear.
In extracting roundworms from the ears, when you treat them as we have said in the section on division and dealing with distillations, and if the treatment does not help, then you must examine the ear in sunlight if no worms are visible, use delicate forceps to extract them; if they still cannot be seen, then use the instrument whose shape is shown here
And it should be narrow below and wide above. And insert the most subtle end of the instrument into the ear according to the extent of the patient's suffering, then suck strongly along the entire length of it Repeat this often until all the worms emerge.
And if they do not obey and come out, then plug around the instrument with cotton as I have said regarding stones;
And if they do not leap out as we have said, then administer distillations that the ancients have proven in the killing of worms, and you will find them in treatises on distillations.
And if you distil your oils and medicines into the ear with all these instruments, here is the form as you see: It should be made of silver or thin brass below for the small holes, and above for distilling.
And for pressing inside the distillation, make sure the instrument is well-made of brass, and if you wish, take a razor and wrap cotton around its point carefully. Then pour your oil or juice into the tube, along with any of your medicines you wish in the ear, and place the tube in the ear.
Then insert the razor with all the cotton inside, and press gently with your hand until the oil has been distilled into the ear. And let the patient feel it inside; and let the distillation be in a small pot warmed over the fire before it is distilled into the ear. And ensure that [the cautery iron] is not too cold, for then the remedy would not be good.
Of earplugs
No child is born without any holes in their ears;
and the same happens to people due to blockage of wounds or tissue born within the ear, and these blockages sometimes go deep into the ear so they cannot be seen;
And sometimes there is no hole, yet it can still be seen.
So then, if the blockage is deep and cannot be seen, it is difficult to treat in many cases; but if one can see it, then place the ear of the patient towards the sun; And look inside: If you see the operation clearly defined, then perform this procedure according to the form written below:
And let it be sharp and cutting in front and behind, so that it does not wound the ear;
If the blockage is of flesh or bone within the ear, then hold it with fine forceps and cut gently until all that flesh is removed.
And if the eruptions are deep in the ear, then take a sharp, light razor and heat it slightly on the fire, then place it on the body of the ear.
If you sense the obstruction that causes the patient to feel pain upon hearing, pierce it easily and ensure you do not harm the nerves of the ear.
Then place in the ear a wick according to the width of the piercing, and soak it in Egyptian ointment. Do this for several days until the wound is healed; then take a wick and soak it in rose water, and sprinkle powdered tartar on it.
And if you see that the ear is swollen, then you must remove the wick and replace it with another wick soaked in rose oil cerate until the swelling is gone. Then continue treating it until it is healed.
"And if bleeding begins to flow, then dip a sponge and wring it out in cold water, and place it on the ear. Use other remedies that stop bleeding which are found in treatises on distillation."
These membranes that come from the eyes when they are moist and dry should be stretched out with forceps and tweezers, and cut off at their base with a scalpel. Then sprinkle powdered tartar on the wound.
And if you find blood on the skin, then cauterize it with a small circular cautery iron, and afterwards cut around the incision.
and often they return, unless something remains at their roots; And when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
Hail Many times there come forth from the eyes certain things that resemble hail in their shape and hardness, and for this reason this illness is called 'hail', which is a gathering of thick moisture on the paper above and below. The workings are such:
The workings are such: Be aware if the hail moves from one side to the other, and this is easy to know;
Then make an incision on the large side, gently scrape each part with a scalpel, then grasp it with forceps and cut it off.
If you cannot cut it off without piercing the paper somewhat, it does not matter to the patient;
And if the wound is large, join it with a suture, and treat it until it is healed.
If it is small, do not exert force, for gentle treatment will restore it quickly and form scar tissue.
And if the hailstone descends into the ear towards the upper part, turn the paper, grasp the hailstone with tweezers, and gently press it from both sides;
and if the paper is moved away by the incision, that does not matter.
And once the hailstone has been removed, rinse the ear with saltwater, and treat the site where scar tissue formed until the patient is healed.
de la graisse des eulz Exinach is a fatty substance that becomes trapped in the webs of paper tissues above, which happens more often in children than adults. It causes great discomfort to their eyes and they experience watery discharge in the mornings, unable to look at sunlight because tears rush to their eyes.
And therefore they often lie on their faces and sleep like that, with their papers wet under their eyebrows, causing swelling and inflammation to cover the exit pupil which opens in the eye. And when you press your thumbs on both sides and feel the exit point between them.
And the manner of working is this: The patient should place his head on your hand;
Then take a linen cloth and prepare a tent in the manner of a circle according to the quantity that contains the exit pupil from each part, then place it on top; And press with your two thumbs, one on either side, so that the exit pupil is gathered within the circle;
Then make a cut through the middle of the moisture with a sharp scalpel blade, creating a slit no wider than the wound made when letting blood from a vein;
And cut deeply into the skin until you reach the exit pupil; And in many cases, the exit pupil comes out of the slit in the form of a white piece of fat.
Remove then, with one piece of soft linen between your fingers at the front, and turn your hand to the right and left until it is spread out.
Ensure that you do not insert into the crevice; watch so that all the spatula reaches up to the eye without injuring it.
And if the exit is not at the beginning of the crevice, then slightly widen the crevice lightly until it appears.
Then remove it as we have said, then moisten rags in warm and cold water and place them on the location, and apply compresses.
And there are men who crush mustard seeds and place them atop to corrupt the moisture that remains.
Then treat it until it is healthy again.
And if an abscess forms in a hot location, then treat it with soothing plaster until it heals.
Of the hairs of the papers When hairs grow on the eyelids that are not natural and become entangled, they harm the eyes and cause various diseases such as habitual tearing and softening of the eyelids, leading to the destruction of the eyes;
And there are four methods of treatment: Either by cauterization with fire together, or by warm medicine as stated earlier in the chapter on cautery, and it is done either by incision and stitching or by tweezers, according to what I will say.
It is necessary for you to place the head of the patient in your hand, then twist the paper from the eye towards your left hand;
if it is turned over, that's good; if not, then insert a needle along the entire thread. and this should be done near the edge of the paper where the hairs grow around these hairs, and draw the thread upwards along the entire paper, then twist it towards the razor;
then cut below the paper, below the hairs attached, along the entire blade edge, from the large corner to the small one;
then extract the thread, and place underneath the paper a small tent of cotton and cloth, then press upon the paper with an iron, like a mint leaf, making sure that the pressure is according to the amount you see lifting the paper which has been cut.
And if there is need to cut off a large quantity of the paper according to how moistened it is;
Then make all of the spatula according to the two lines you have marked, beginning from the large handle down to the small one. And let it be one of the slits near the natural hairs in the thickness of a root; then place the unicorn horn at one of the two corners of the heart, and scrape all over.
Then bring the two lips together with a stitch of fine thread made from wool, and wipe away the blood; and harden the surplus threads over both eyebrows with any sticky substance you have if you wish to do this.
And if not, pay no heed to it; then leave the stitch and threads for three or four days
Then heal the wound without stitching with dry and constricting things, for paper weakens the healing of the wound and its union, but stitching is harmful (as the ancients say), and this is done without fear. And there is another manner:
And there is another manner: It should be that you draw on the paper a figure like the leaf of a myrtle, as we have explained, with three incisions according to the form shown below:
"Then cut those that exceed the small forces evenly according to the shape shown here."
And if you are unable to hold the forceps, and the thing is not even, then take a needle with one thread attached and insert it into the figure; And place the second thread next to the large bell, and the third thread next to the small one, and bring together between your two fingers evenly.
Then lift your hand evenly, and raise all the skin where you have drawn, as we have explained, then bring together the two lips of the wound by stitching, and heal it until it is sound.
And if an abscess forms at your incision, then soothe it with wax and similar softening ointments;
Sometimes the hairs of the paper are reversed:
If you must use what we have said about incision.
But stitching is more artful on one side than the other.
The treatment of sinews follows this form: And take the paper and fold it inside according to what I have said, then make two sinews artificially, and two fine threads as long as the paper and as wide as the span. And cut off two heads of two parts where you hold the threads;
Then bring together both subtly over what is above the paper oil, and tie the two sinews of the two parts firmly; And leave it thus for a few days, and the skin that is tied will die, shrivel, and become porous until it falls off.
If it takes too long, cut it with forceps, then treat it until it is healthy;
And when the wound is healed, and the paper has been removed, the hairs will no longer grow.
And this is the form of the two cakes which you shall make according to this figure, and according to this quantity in length and width.
The operation is such that you take a thin needle, and through it pass one thread of soft and fine silk; Then join the heads and tie them both carefully, with the length of the threads being a palm's length;
Then pass another thread of silk through it briefly, tying the ends of the thread;
The patient then places their head in your hand;
And be near the sun so that the operation is clear, for it is a subtle and small operation. Then insert the needle along the entire length of the hair root, piercing it quickly through the skin until you draw it out naturally from above the hair;
Then pull out the hair up to the point where it entered, and pass that hair through the needle if there is one or two or three or more;
Then pull your hand out so that all the hairs come out with the paper along with their natural hair.
And if the wick has been treated and the hairs do not come out with it, then pull the wick from underneath until all the thread you have wound comes out, so that the wick comes out through the hole above and you can see it by the sight of your eye.
Then pull out the wick and thread, and close the eye and leave it closed for 2 or 3 days, until the hairs return to their place and flesh grows over them.
And if the hairs are short, then accompany them with one long hair from your head and let it be lifted with it until it becomes elongated, and then remove it.
"About the rottenness of the eye" When this disease called "aleacrati" or corruption occurs in the eye, there are two ways to treat it:
One is natural and the other unnatural.
And it happens suddenly from a wound, or cut, or burn, and similar things.
And the manner of the work is this: You should cut through that joint, separate its lips, and insert linen wicks. Then bind it until it heals.
And you must not use things that dry and constrict in treating it. For if you do this, the illness will return worse than before;
But apply softening things, such as fenugreek. And rosewater or alembic and linseed oil boiled, and diacylglycerol melted in some of the oils, wrapped in a linen cloth, for this is the treatment.
And the essence of your treatment is to ensure that it does not heal in its former shape;
And these procedures we have mentioned are only remedies for this disease, so that it does not return in the same form as before.
This disease that is underneath is truly called 'axacrati', and it is natural and accidental.
Accidents happen from wounds and cuts and burns and similar things;
And the way of the operation in this case is that you take a needle with doubled thread, and insert it into the flesh, making it pierce from the left eyelid as far as the right one, so that the threads come out on both sides of the flesh.
Then stretch the flesh above along the whole needle, and cut it with a wide spatula. And if the figure on the paper returns as it should, that is good;
If not, then take a razor and place it in the slit, turn the paper, and make two slits on each side within the paper;
and the openings of the two slits should be at the two corners of the incision you have cut, and one angle should be made so that when they are joined together, the figure is like the figure of a letter called 'I Greek'.
Then remove that flesh according to the size of its sides and bottom from what is beneath the paper, then join the two separated parts together and sew them with a wool thread;
Then, treat those we have mentioned with softening medicines, and use tents until they are healed.
And if the disease comes from a cut or stitching or cauterization, then you must make an incision full of pus beneath the hairs of the pubic region, and according to what is written above. then place between the two leaves of a tent, as I have said
then place between the two leaves of a tent, as I have said and one must perform the procedure according to the form of the disease, for it is very diverse in shape, and the wise master prepares everything with all his power so that the form returns to its natural shape
and the patient himself, according to what is needed in each procedure and tools for various positions.
When this injury happens to many men in such a way that the skin above is stuck with the whites of the egg, and cannot move or perform its natural functions, then you must put the tip of a razor underneath the skin and lift it up.
And they apply it like pincers, until you grasp what is ready at the subtle spatula, which should not be too sharp nor too cutting, so that the patient cannot suffer if the spatula is too sharp and blinds the eye.
And let your incision be light, from which you strip away that gathering, so that the skin returns to its natural form;
and all of that gathering is healed, and sometimes they put salted water in the eye, and rinse it with fresh water, and with collyrium;
then place a linen tent between the skin and the eye, and put wool moistened in egg white over the eye; and after the third day, apply cold compresses and ointments until it is healed.
Know that a nail is in two ways: either it is nerve-like and similar to hard skin, or another kind that is not nervous but resembles moist white congealed blood, which when touched by iron and grasped with pincers cannot be seized.
And both kinds of it start near the large eyelid, and grow little by little until they cover all the sight and light and movement of the eye.
And the manner of the incision is that the patient puts their head in your hand, then opens their eyes; then lift the paper with your hand, then curl the finger like tweezers of small width, and stretch it over; Then take a needle, and put in it a horse hair, or goat's hair, or cow's hair, and strong thread; and double the tip of the needle slightly and stick it into the finger, and pierce through with all the needle, and tie the finger with a thread and stretch it over, and scrape all along the hair's edge on the inside of the nail that goes between the skin and the hair up to the top, then cut off the remaining part at the root of the eyelid with a very fine spatula and gentle forceps, and leave the natural flesh of the eyelid so that tears do not flow through the incision as usual.
And sometimes the nail stands up on its own and on the string, as we have said. Then scrape off all the fat from this meat; here is the shape:
And ensure that the spathulum does not touch the delicate tissue and break it, and that the probe is not pierced.
And after the incision, pour in a little powdered sage, and make a poultice with litharge, leaving it until the next day. Then treat this wound as necessary until it is healed.
And if the nail is not nerve-like and you cannot insert the needle, and the tweezers will not fit, many times this type of nail can be treated with medications.
And they grow as I described in the section on division; and if you see them opening, immediately perform the eye of the patient and take a light stroke with the spathulum according to this shape: And raise the nail gently upwards, and if you see that it does not decrease in size and the bone presses close afterwards, then distill from your mouth onto a hot coal made of litharge and red ochre ground together, and plug the eye until the next day;
If there is any obstacle in the eye that opposes this operation, such as a hot aposteme, then apply cold compresses and first treat the hot aposteme until it is healed; then resume the operation as before until it is healed.
Then begin the other operation according to this same procedure, until it is all removed.
And if the appearance of the flesh from the tear duct harms the eye greatly, then suspend it with sinew and cut off part of it, but not all of it, so that tears may still come.
Then distill onto the eye red hot coal made of litharge.
In some men's eyes, red flesh sometimes grows, covering the pupil and pressing on the membranes, turning towards the front, resembling awart.
And the operation is that the patient places his head in your hand, then you open their eyes and coil all of that flesh with suitable tweezers for this purpose, and hold it firmly;
Then cut the first hair, and keep cutting all the way down to the skin until finished, but be careful not to wound the eye during the process.
And make the incision of the spur small like we said in cutting the nail and the little forces with which one removes the bone, as shown later in this chapter.
And once the incision is complete and all flesh removed, apply to the eye a powdered salve or distill upon it red collyrium and similar corrosive medicines; then place cotton soaked in egg white over the eye so that it may be securely bound with a warm plaster.
And if anything remains and the heat increases, and you doubt a hot inflammation, then leave the eye alone and treat the inflammation with things that alleviate heat.
Then return to your work until it is safe, and so do for every flesh joined in the eye by this manner.
But nevertheless you must align the treatment of each weak eye according to its natural course. and in accordance with its accidental course, particularly using iron instruments;
But do not perform any of these operations until you see that the member can withstand them.
Before there are red veins that cover the eye, they veil its work and weaken sight every day.
It is therefore necessary that you first examine whether the eye in which the stone is present is protruding, and if there is no other external disease besides the stone; then treat it in this manner:
Instruct the patient to place their head on your lap, then gently compress those veins on both sides according to your discretion, and make the bandage thin and doubled in this manner:
"And there should be two bandages placed at intervals along one course according to this shape:"
then gently compress those veins thusly, and wipe away the blood immediately afterwards, until you see that the veins outside the eye are retracted;
And ensure that you do not cut the eye with the points of the forceps, and perform this operation at midday facing the sun, being very careful in your work so that you do not injure anything but those veins;
And once you have done this, then distill in the eye green and red collyrium to corrupt what remains of the sediment.
And if you are unable to collect all of this at that hour, then make a plaster for the eye with soothing substances for the pain in the eyes, and leave it on for several days until the pain is alleviated and the heat of the abscess is assured, then resume according to this manner which is written before until it is healed.
And this is the form of the poultice:
The surgeon calls a fistula 'arissati'
When you treat it with cautery and with burning hot medicine as I said before, and it is not yet healed, then know that there is something inside which you should incise over the abscess where it must be cut open, and draw out all the moisture until the bone is exposed.
And when the bone is exposed and you see the corruption and blackness, then you must use all of the instruments mentioned here for its form:
and is called 'sharp head', and it should be made of iron from the crown downwards, and should be pointed like a file as it is in its current form:
And place on the location of the rotten bone, then twist it between your fingers and press gently until you feel that the corruption is removed;
and do this several times, then apply drying medicines to the location.
If the location is solid and flesh grows back, and the body of the bow is solid, and remains thus for forty days, and it does not renew itself nor become infected, and no bad accident occurs, then know that it is healed;
If not, then there is no other remedy than to bring the fistula back to the opening of the nose according to this form: and that you uncover the bone a second time with iron and hot medicines, and when it is uncovered take the chisel according to this form, with an iron head having three angles, and the handle tapered all the way to the tip as shown here:
Then place it on the bone near the ear, and keep your hand away from the eye. Then turn the drill until it pierces the bone; the patient will feel this because the vein will then flow out if their hand is on their nose.
Then restore the place with dry medications as I have taught you. When the flesh grows and the joint hardens, then go to the nose. It is easier for the patient this way.
When the eye opens completely in every direction and there is no obstruction to the nose or diminution, then you must bandage the patient.
Then wash the eye, then apply cupping glasses without touching to suck, then place on the eye a linen made of acacia and aloe and incense and saffron, then compress the eye, and cover it with bandages and cloths.
And the manner of the cloths is that you take soft cloths and fold each one into four layers, then place them on top of each other according to how much the eye needs.
Then tightly bind it with a firm bandage from above, and resume using cupping glasses to suck without striking.
then remove the cupping glasses and keep the eye bound day and night; if it begins to loosen, then you must bind it tightly.
Then remove the bandage after a day and night, and if you see the eye improving, that is good;
if not then resume the emplastrum, dressings, binding, and cupping glasses until it is healed.
Regarding the bursting of a blood vessel in the eye When disruption comes to the uveal membrane, then it appears, and fire comes out of the papers like grains of resin, which is frightening to see.
Then if you see it covered, the procedure is such that you insert a needle into the root of the part below until it reaches the part above, then insert another needle where there is a doubled thread on the eyelid. and pierce it through, leaving the first needle in place according to its position;
Then cut the spot with the double thread and tie one part of the vein around it, pulling it taut; then remove the needle and place a wet linen cloth moistened in egg white over the eye.
and let it remain until the threads adhere with the vein; then heal the eye with comforting substances until the wound is healed.
And sometimes the wound is held in place by each vein being bound with a circle of cloth until it heals.
And if the eye appears swollen, then pierce it with a fine spatula that comes from within the eye, and correct the moisture in the white of the eye, allowing it to descend; then insert it quickly.
Then remove it until it is healed.
This disease called "alcunnati" is nothing but mucus gathered in the eye, resembling descending water, and it is not water.
The appearance of this disease is that you make the patient sit on an arranged and upright seat; then take their head between your two hands, and tilt it until you see the mucus come up to your eyes. Then let it be inserted, and not descend, and let the light be extinguished, and let the patient see things as they used to.
and if it does not descend below, know that it is acute, and if the descent of the bowel is not as we have said.
Have the patient sit between your hands, then take the spatula and cut through the corneal membrane near the junction of the conjunctiva with the cornea and sclera until the bowel emerges.
And once it is out, distill hot water mixed with honey or boiled fennel and honey onto it, then dress it further until it is clean.
Regarding the waters of the eye We have here the signs of acute [disease] in division, and those which ought to be pierced. if you work according to the patient's condition.
You must have the patient sit between your crossed hands, away from sunlight, with the healthy eye tightly closed and held firmly.
Then place the eye paper on your left hand if the eyes are left [ones], or on your right hand if they are right [ones];
Then take in your left hand, if the eyes are left ones, the instrument called "almagda," or in your right hand, if they are right ones.
Then place the tip of the instrument near the cornea by the thickness of a grain at the part below the inner corner of the eye, then gently insert the instrument called "almagda," turning your hand until it pierces into the white of the eye, and feel that almagda reaches the empty space.
And it is necessary that the length of the almagda's pathway be equal to the distance from the pupil up to the end of the blackness. And this is the cornea of the eye.
If you see the bone through this paper due to the clarity of the corneal tissue, then move the instrument until it reaches where the water is, then press down along one vein after another.
If the water rises now, then the patient sees before them and the instrument in their eye.
After a short rest, if the water rises up the second pathway, place the funnel with the instrument, and when it is inserted and it does not rise, then gently remove the almagdah in a twisting manner bit by bit.
and then add a drop of blue silk to the water, and rinse the eye with it inside and out. Then place before the eye plugs made of wet wool in rose oil and egg whites, binding it with healthy eye.
Now, we and those of our time place commin broie upon it with plenty of eggs.
And if almagda cannot enter the eye due to its hardness, because there are certain people who have very hard eyes, then you must take the instrument called "alberit", of which this is the shape:
Therefore, pierce only the conjunctiva, not too deep but carefully; then insert the almagdah as we have said.
And upon completion of the procedure, prepare a comfortable bed for the patient to lie on his back in a dark place
and keep him still from all movements; let him eat light foods, and do not move his head to the right or left. Bind him according to his condition for three days
then untie him in the same dark room, examine his vision, and show him some things to look at. Then reapply the bandage for seven days
And it is not necessary that you do this during or after the incision now, but rather you should tie off that vessel, because water rises quickly.
If an abscess becomes hard, untie the eye before the seventh day, and apply what subdues the abscess;
And once it has subsided, untie the bandage and place a compress soaked in honey to cover it for several days, keeping it always in that dark house.
Then slowly exit the house little by little, and return to his usual activities;
And know that no disciples should intervene in this case. And one from Iraq came to us and said that in his land people used to make something called 'almagda' for piercing, through which water is extracted. However, I have never seen any such thing in our land nor have I ever read about it in the books of the ancients; And perhaps it's something new.
And these are the likenesses of the forms of algebra, so that those who do not know them may see them;
and they should be made of pure silver: And their heads should be of this same subtlety, and the back in three sharp angles.
Sometimes nails or horseshoes are born twisted in various ways, among which some resemble scorpions with many feet;
And there are also such ones where the iron has enchanted hair of dark color, and the skin has soft hair of fair color. Therefore, in the case of a horse that is gentle and not enchanted, you should make the patient sit between your hands facing the sun;
Therefore, in the case of a horse that is gentle and not enchanted, you should make the patient sit between your hands facing the sun; and open his nostrils, and throw the unicorn's horn at those horses, and draw them apart strongly; until you can no longer support it on the subtle point of the compass needle on one side, until you know that the horse is completely exhausted.
And if anything remains that cannot be coped, then open it with all the subtle tools lightly, so that nothing remains; And if blood does not mount up, or a hot abscess appears, then cut as it is necessary.
And if it is malignant abscesses, then hurry and cauterize until the blood is stanched and all the flesh is removed, then pour on quicklime and vinegar. If nothing happens, and moisture reaches the palate, know that it is incurable;
And if moisture does not reach as it should, know that there is flesh grown into the bone above, to which the instrument cannot come to cut:
Then you must insert a thread of fine linen, slightly thickened with our hands, and have it dampen between each knot. And let the patient place the head of the thread in his nostril with some force, and pull on it with care until it comes into the mouth.
Many children do this at school, and it is an easy thing for one who wishes to do it;
Then grasp the head that comes from the snow with one hand, and the other head that comes from the mouth with the other hand, and pull them apart gently one after the other, following our method which they are in.
Do this until you know that the nerves have corrupted that flesh, then pull out the threads, squeeze out the blood, and moisten the thread with Egyptian gum, and replace it in the snow as before;
Do this for three days or more, until the poultice has corrupted all that remains of the flesh;
And then place in the snow a cake of lead for several days until it is dry, and if there is need for drying medications, use them.
And this is the form of the instrument for purging the head, where oils and medications are distilled in the snow:
And it should be made of silver or brass, resembling an open lamp, like a pipe, with the conduit also.
And if you see one, make a closed cane and let the instrument be full to purge the head.
And have many hands at the head to hold it when heating oil or any liquid.
Here are some ways to treat flesh growing on the nail:
Many times there arises on the head a disease called "telul", which grows and becomes large continually until it is visible to look at.
And therefore you must cut it off at the beginning, and scrape away all fur, then place on level the cautery or burning medicine.
But if one delays cutting until it is large, take heed whether it is hard, of dark color, and lacks sensation:
If not touched by iron for it is an enchanted abscess; for when one cuts it, great harm comes to the patient.
But if the abscess is soft to touch, not dark in color, and you see that it can be completely cut out, then let the patient empty and cut it without fear, and cure the area with drying and constricting things.
Know this: when humors accumulate in one of these joints, they profit little there, especially in some men.
It is therefore necessary when this happens to anyone, to look whether the wound is fresh with all its blood; And then join the two lips together in a stitch, and then treat it until it is healed.
And if the lips are already separated on both sides, then you must cauterize all parts of their edge until they heal, then join the two lips together in a stitch, and bind it, and sprinkle powdered dragon's blood powder and ground incense. Then place over the powders a piece of strong plaster or another sticking plaster, and leave it until it adheres by itself, then treat it with ointment until it is healed.
The method of stitching is that you bring together... or by needles, as we have said in the abdominal suturing. or by thread, as I have shown you.
"boils on the lips"
Many people have hard tumors inside the lips, resembling grains of millet, small and large;
Then it is necessary for you to turn back the lips, and cut along each nostril, and grasp it with forceps and cut in every part.
Then fill the space after the incision with powdered vitriol until the blood is stanched.
And then the wound should be stitched up, and the area dried with dry cloths until it is clean
Often there appears on the fleshy gum a growth called "albulus" by the ancients;
then you must hold it with forceps and cut at its root, allowing the vein or blood to flow freely
then apply powdered vitriol or other restrictive and drying powders to the area
and if that flesh returns after being cut, which often happens, then cut it a second time and cauterize it if it does not return after cauterization
Some times they are assembled at the head of the teeth, within the mouth between the gums, scars which are ugly and sharp. And sometimes the teeth are black and yellowish-green and worm-ridden, such that corruption comes to the gum, and the teeth smell bad.
Thus you should make the patient sit between your hands, and their head be in your lap, and scrape the teeth where the scars appear, until nothing remains. And thus do likewise for the blackness, greenness, yellowness, and other stains, until they are cleaned.
And if one removes what is at its root cause, it is good. If not, then recommence on the second and third day, until you have scraped all.
And know that teeth require various forms of tools to scrape, according to what the task shows, for those used to scrape between teeth have different shapes than those used to scrape on teeth. And these forms and others are to be prepared with you.
When treating a toothache, delay pulling the tooth as long as possible, for this should not be done at all; for it is a very high substance until there is no excuse for extracting it.
Then when the patient is constrained by thirst, you must be certain of the tooth that is aching. Often the pain leaves the patient and they believe it is in a healthy tooth, so they have it pulled; but still the pain does not depart for that reason, since the evil has already been extracted, as we have seen in many cases.
And when you are certain about the aching tooth, then it is necessary to scrape around it with a scalpel, deeply enough to protect the gum from all sides;
then move it gently with your fingers or fine pliers at first, until it is well loosened, then firmly grasp it with the forceps; And hold the patient's head between your knees so that they cannot move.
After extract the tooth correctly without breaking it, and if it does not come out easily, then take any of these instruments and put it gently on each side, and with the lever move it as you did first.
And if a tooth is pierced and eaten away, then you must fill it with wadding where the hole is. And if he grasps it subtly with pliers, that it may not break while extracting;
And one must operate much around the gum to remove the tooth.
And see to it that you do not break it, and if a piece remains, it will cause the patient greater pain due to the root's mischief.
And beware that you do not act like the ignorant surgeons who through their haste and boldness sometimes break the cheekbone, and do not bring about what we have mentioned;
but by their carelessness, great diseases sometimes occur due to the roots that remain there, or because of the cheekbone they break, as we have often seen;
And when the tooth is pulled out, wash the place with wine, vinegar, and salt.
And if bleeding occurs, which often happens, fill the place with powdered vitriol;
And if that does not help, then cauterize it.
The shapes of the instruments with which one moves the teeth first should be long-pointed and have thick handles, so that they do not bend when you pull the tooth.
and these are their shapes: And let them be of large limbs so that they do not bend at all during traction, and let them be of iron well-made, and let them be toothed for holding movement.
Of the root of the teeth When the root remains in place during tooth extraction, you must apply cotton moistened with butter for one or two days until the area is softened, then insert the forceps called "algefree", so that the head appears like a bird's beak.
and they should also be shaped within like a file, which is their shape:
"And if the roots do not wish to come out with all these pliers, then you must uncover the flesh all around the root, and place the instrument called 'althali', that is, the crowbar, of which this is the shape:"
And let it be strong and thick so that it does not break, and if the root comes out by itself, that is good.
If not, then use all the instruments, whose shapes are shown hereafter:
"And if one uses this tool that has two handles, of which this is the shape:" "and other iron tools that are before in the reason of the teeth, and of this tool that resembles large pliers, of which this is the shape:"
And let this instrument be strong so that it cannot break, and know that there are many instruments for teeth. and also other instruments which are not enumerated
And the wise master finds his instrument by himself, according to what his works and the illness reveal, for there are such illnesses where the ancients did not teach any instrument due to the diversity of ailments. And if he breaks a bone or others, where it is necessary, then he seeks the instruments that are required, as I have told you, and helps with gestures; this is the form:
And let them be large and well-fitting to hold the bone so it doesn't slip away, but can grasp and remove it;
And then restore it to its place with appropriate medicine, and if there is rot in the bone, even if it's small, remove it with this instrument:
When teeth appear not according to the natural body, and their form is ugly, especially in young women, it is necessary that you know if the tooth is near the other tooth, but not in the right place, and cannot be removed or filed:
then pluck the hair and if it is hard with the teeth, then take this instrument of which there is the form below, and it resembles a small beak, and be made of iron well sharpened at the end
"And tap the tooth lightly every day for several days to soften it and so that you do not move the others. And if it is apparent enough to be filed, then file it with such a file as this one has here its shape:"
and it is also like the file used to make needles.
file the teeth gently little by little over several days so that they do not move until they fall out
then finish it off with any plain razor at the end, and if the tooth is too sharp and hurts the tongue, then file down its sharpness until it is even so that it does not hurt the tongue or hinder speech
When a tooth is knocked out in front, either by impact or by falling, and the patient cannot chew their food without it hurting them, and you have treated it with constricting medicines but to no avail
then tie it with a gold thread, for silver wire turns green and decays, but gold does not change
And let my son's thread not be too thick nor too thin, according to the width of the space between the teeth.
And if you see the teeth aligned, then take the thread and a doubled needle between two healthy teeth, and place the heads of the needles between the misaligned teeth, one or more, until you reach bleeding up to the next healthy tooth on the other side. Then resume the threading up to the point where you began, and gently pull your hand steadily until there is no movement.
And let your ligature be at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape.
Then cut off the heads of the thread with pliers, join them together, and pass them between the healthy tooth, placing them in such a way that they do not injure the tongue.
Then leave it as tight as possible without causing harm, and if it loosens or the thread breaks, then bind it with another thread.
If it remains thus and serves this way throughout its time, then that is the shape of teeth and the direction of growth of the two upper and two lower teeth, as you see.
And when a tooth falls out, it should be put back in its place, little by little, as we have said.
and let not the foolish and impatient meddle with it, and sometimes a tooth made of cow bone is used, placed where the gap is, and secured as we have said, and it remains thus for a long time.
Sometimes this tie comes from below the tongue at birth; or by chance due to a healed wound;
and the operation is such that you open the patient's mouth and place their head on your lap, and lift their tongue
then cut the nerve tie from behind until the tongue is freed from its attachment, and if there is scarring or hard tissue, due to an old wound, then insert a hook and cut it away.
And ensure that the cut is not too deep, for the artery below.
Once done, lift up warm rosewater and vinegar, or cold water, then place a linen cloth beneath the tongue.
And have the patient apply this every night so that the wound does not dry out.
If blood comes flowing out, then place crushed vitriol on the location. and if the blood does not clot, cauterize it with the slow-acting cautery, which is good for this purpose. Then treat with other treatments until it is healed.
If you see a boil that is red or black or hard, even if the patient does not feel it, do not touch it, for it is a chancre.
If it leans toward blenching and has moisture, sprinkle onions there, cut it with a fine spatula, and open it on both sides. And if your blood fails you during your work, grind vitriol and apply it until it is staunched; then return to your work until all bleeding has stopped.
Then lift the bandage and dressing, and treat with other remedies until it is healed.
Here is a translation of the text you provided about swollen glands in the neck: Sometimes bits of stone appear in the throat which are called 'godaths'; properly speaking they are called the two amygdalae. When you treat them as we have described in this section and yet they do not heal, then be cautious:
If they are hard abscesses with a small opening and dark red color, then do not touch them with iron.
And if they are red and the root is large, then do not touch them with iron; likewise for the flow of blood. but let it be until it rots, and then you will divide it, or else it would burst by itself;
And if it is white and the root is thin, then prepare the instruments to cut; but first check whether the abscess is warm, rests quietly, and is quieted.
Then seat the patient before the sun, their head in your hand, and they open their mouth, and the servant takes it between his hands, and presses down on the tongue with all the instrument; this is the form:
And it should be made of silver or fine brass, like a knife:
While pressing the tongue with this instrument, if you see the boil, then take the awl and pierce it into the almond, and draw it forth from above as far as you can;
And pull out some cloth with it, then wipe the instrument clean; this is the form that resembles a sieve: Moreover, their ends are curved and turned towards each other, and they are very sharp, and made of iron or brass;
"And if you do not have this instrument at hand, cut it with pincers, which are shaped thus:" And on one side it is sharp, and on the other blunt:
And once you have cut one boil, then cut the other in the same manner, and afterwards the patient should gargle with hot water mixed with salt, and if blood flows copiously, then the patient should gargle with water in which cooked pomegranate rinds or myrtle leaves have been steeped, until the bleeding stops; Then perform the treatment until it is healed.
And sometimes other abscesses arise in the throat besides the tonsils; cut them accordingly like the tonsils.
And I treated a woman for an abscess that had grown inside her throat; namely, a small abscess.
And the throat was almost entirely closed, so that the woman could hardly breathe because of the obstruction, and she could neither eat nor drink, and would have died within two days had it remained thus.
And the abscess had already risen so much that it had filled both passages of the throat with two raindrops each.
So I promptly made an incision with a scalpel on one side, then extracted a large portion of the boil.
Then I reopened the other side of the abscess and opened its mouth, pressing down the tongue;
Afterward, I cut into these abscesses with a scalpel, cutting off part of them, and only a little blood came out. And thus the woman's throat passage was opened again, and she began to drink water and then wine. And I continued to cut into that abscess for a long time.
And the abscesses kept cropping up again, filling the space I had emptied out until they became very large.
So then I pierced it and cauterized it inside its throat: Thus it remained without growing any further.
And I departed from these parts, not knowing what God did with him afterwards.
"de l'uve"
When rheum descends to the eye and it is inflamed and protuberant, it is called "perpendicular".
And if it is below large and round, it is called "eyeball".
When the eye is treated as we have said in the section on division, but the treatment does not help at all, and you see that the inflammation has subsided, and it remains subtle, then you must pierce it.
And that which is round and gathered together without being protuberant; And if it is blood-red or dark-colored or black, then you must avoid incising it. For there is great danger to the patient in doing so.
It is therefore necessary, when you see it according to the manner I have spoken of, regarding its blemish and length, that you make the patient sit before the sun, and press his tongue with the instrument whose memory we have mentioned earlier; then insert the awl into the eye, and draw it downwards, and cut with one of the two instruments that I have mentioned in the incision of the two eyelids.
And it is necessary that you do not cut further than the natural limit;
for if you cut more, you harm both sight and speech;
and after the incision, apply what we have said about the cutting of the two eyelids, until it is healed.
And if the patient fears being cut, then you must use a device for cauterization to alleviate their fear.
The method of cautery is sharp and hot. And it is that the patient places his head in your hand, and then you press his tongue with the instrument mentioned in the chapter on cautery, and heat the forceps with live coals so that it is neither too thick nor too clear; And when using this tool, of which the form follows:
And it has at its head a small vessel where one places the medicine, like the head of a spoon, and sets the tool upon all the medicine on the ulcer;
And let the patient lie on their side so that saliva and mucus from their mouth do not mix with the medicine, so it does not reach the throat or the lung.
Then hold your hand over all the medicine and press it on the ulcer for about half an hour until you see it is darkened and the absorption of the medicine is complete;
And if you see, take cotton and wrap it around some tool, wet the cotton in the medicine, and place the tool against all the cotton in the vein until the cotton adheres to the ulcer;
And do this often until the cautery is complete, then let it dry and fall off after four or five days.
And if you need to recommence the cautery of the medicine, then recommence it, and afterwards wipe around the eye with cotton dipped in butter, cleansing that which is around the medicine.
and be rinsed with cold water, and be cured with gargles until it is clean
This treatment is better than the incision or cautery;
If it is treated with fumigation in this manner, take calamint and hyssop and origanum and rue and chamomile and marjoram and similar herbs, and combine them all or some of them in one pot, and put it on the fire to boil;
and the pot be well sealed with strong clay, and inside the pot has an iron comb made in this manner: And be of silver or brass, and one of the heads be placed in the mouth of the patient until the vapor rises to the eye through the canal, until the eye is anesthetized;
After the inflammation begins frequently until the eye becomes dry, and ensure that you do not perform this at the onset of a hot abscess formation, for many things can happen there. and do not do it except when declining a hot abscess.
And if this instrument is not present, then take a cane and put at its tip an eggshell, so that the mouth of the patient does not become too hot. for the eggshell does not let much steam harm the mouth, and this is a good remedy together with health.
Many times an object like a bone or fish spine becomes lodged in the throat;
Therefore you must pull out what you can see and press the tongue down with the instrument so that you can see the object move;
And what you cannot see and is stuck in the throat, make the patient vomit before the food becomes cooked in the stomach. By chance, if the thing were to go bad through vomiting;
Or if the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of naval, or a root of lettuce, or a morsel of dry bread; And ties it to the sponge with thread, and then swallows it And when it comes to its place, so it will harden, and then pull it out
And if it does not come out through what we have said, then take the instrument of lead according to this form:
And let the instrument be curved at the head so that it may more easily enter into the throat, and have its head raised high And take care not to touch the epiglottis, that all the way may go down, nor push the bone in
But let the patient move the instrument there, so that he knows where the thing is stuck; Then push it down until you pull it out evenly with the whole instrument, until it comes out entirely.
Here's a possible translation for "de la sansue de la gorge":
No bloodletting is performed, as I mentioned earlier in this section; And if this does not help, then examine the throat of the patient towards the sun, and press the tongue with the instrument I have mentioned.
And if you see blood vessels, then draw them out little by little with tweezers, or with fine forceps suited for this purpose.
And if bleeding does not help, then take a cane tipped with iron and put it into the patient's throat, then put at the tip of the cane a hot piece of iron, and do this often. If the patient sweats all day long.
Then take a full view of cold water, open the mouth, pour it in without letting them swallow, and move it with your hand frequently. And as soon as the blood feels the water, it falls.
And if it does not fall as we have said, then fumigate the patient with asafoetida using the instrument mentioned in the fumigation of the eye.
Do this many times until it falls without staining.
And the method of fumigation is as follows: take a pot containing live coals and place it on a stand covered with a cloth pierced in the middle, and insert the head of the instrument into this hole.
Then cast your fumigation upon it, and the patient places the head of the cane in his mouth, closing the mouth so that no smoke escapes, but reaches the sinew.
and if the sinew does not fall, then repeat the fumigation many times;
and let the patient suffer thirst and eat salty foods but drink no water.
Then it will be necessary for him to evacuate heat through this treatment.
The shape of the instrument used to treat the sinew appears, when visible, like curved tongs for entering into the throat; and it resembles a goose's beak and is rough like a file, so that what it grasps it cannot let go.
Many types of abscesses are described hereafter in this book, differing in perforation and incision;
And this is of two kinds, one like itself, and what it holds moist.
And the second manner is for the places where they occur on the body.
For the abscesses of the head are different from those of the fundament, and those on fatty tissue are different from those that come in joints; each has its own judgment in operation.
But some abscesses should not be pierced until the bowels have died according to their completion;
And there are those which must be pierced when they are ripe and do not die according to their completion, like abscesses near joints.
For when abscesses occur near joints and are left until they are completely surrounded by pus, sometimes the ligaments and nerves of the joint become corrupted, which causes contraction in that limb.
When the abscess is near the main member, if you delay piercing it until it has died, it will harm the main member;
Or when it's near the fundament, pierce it before it dies.
And do not pierce a ripe abscess without completing its digestion except for the one near the fundament lest it rotted internally and create a fistula. and cannot heal in a long time.
And you must know the time to pierce an abscess that has died according to its completion when the pain is appeased and the fever departs, and the decrease of pain and redness, and the softening and sharpening of the head of the abscess, and other signs.
And you must make the incision where the abscess is most dependent and where it opens moved.
And let the incision be long along the body; and if the abscess is on the hands or feet, or in joints and near arteries, and in all places equal where there is no wrinkling. In cases where it pleases, according to this member.
And when abscesses are in the flesh, it is best that you delay their perforation until they are firm and digestion is complete, as we have said.
But if you pierce it before that time, then the body will be extended with its venom, and it will be filled with much filth. And perhaps the lips become hardened and the depth of it becomes difficult
And some abscesses should be pierced according to the width of their body, according to what the member requires.
And you must bring for small abscesses, small incisions; and for large abscesses, large incisions, and many slits according to the likeness of the size of the abscess.
And if there are such abscesses where it is necessary to chop with the knife, and cut; When they have become like a blister and are deadened, then you must do as one does for boils
And there are such ones which are split into three angles; and there are also such ones which are cut like the cap of a fir tree, as abscesses in the armpits.
And there are those where one makes a round cut, and other cuts and similar incisions.
Those which have no head, like a soft superficial abscess, must be pierced directly.
And when the abscess is large and has formed much bow, you should pierce it but not draw out all of the bow at that time, but only a part. Then plug the abscess until the next day, then draw out some more afterwards; Do this several times gradually increasing it until all of the bow comes out;
Even if the patient is of weak strength, or a pregnant woman, or young children, or elderly feeble men. Because sometimes the spirit leaps with the release of the bowstring, causing the patient to die unexpectedly.
Therefore approach this chapter with great caution, and when you have pierced your abscess, then open the wound and observe if the wound from the abscess is small; And if it is a simple cut, then bring linen or old cotton pads. And if it's a large abscess with many holes, you must insert a pad into each so they touch each other.
And if you have cut off a piece of skin from the abscess and shaved around it, then fill it with dry cotton or linen cloth lint without moisture, and bind it for three days.
Then bone-set, and apply ointment until healed.
And if bleeding occurs during your procedure, bring cold water and a basin, wet a cloth in it, and place it on the bleeding area repeatedly.
And if the bleeding persists, bring medical care and treatment, and apply the powders mentioned earlier in this book, especially during wintertime when the affected area is very tense. Then place warm, moist cloths soaked in wine and oil on top of pads.
And if it is during summer and the area is fleshy, then place moist cloths soaked in water and oil, or in cold wine and oil, for three days, as we have mentioned.
Then remove the abscess and heal it, as is necessary, until it is sound.
And these things he should know universally in treating abscesses:
As I have told you how one should proceed with the treatment of abscesses, here is that chapter.
And small boils come from the head, and they are like those on hens' wattles, appearing in large numbers.
There are some that are fatty and such where there is moisture like feathers;
And there are some that are hard and stony at the cut, and there is no doubt that an artery opposes it.
And this is how one performs the procedure of amputation: first, test all instruments called 'entromissoires', from which the form comes that follows, and what they contain.
But if it contains moisture, then open it carefully over a long period.
And when the moisture has been drained, scrape off without leaving any skin that contains this moisture, for it returns immediately if anything is left.
Then dip cotton in Egyptian ointment, if available; If not, then in water and salt, and use it to dress the wound, leaving it until the next day. And these things will run their course for those that remain of the night.
And then resume with cotton as before on the second day and the third, until you are sure there is no more left of the night.
Then treat the wound with suitable ointment until it is clean.
And if the swelling holds firm and fat, cut it according to this shape, long; and cast your onionskins thereupon, and scrape off all around it, and take great care to draw out the coat wherein it lies.
And if the artery opposes you, then do as I told you afterward.
And similarly, cauterize an abscess if it is hard, cut it open, and treat it as I have told you.
And the cutting into a hard and moist abscess is easier, since there is little blood involved. And if some of these swellings have no moisture at their head, and those old swellings that I cut off from the head of an old woman;
I found the swelling like a hard, sharp, white stone, and could not be broken. And if one had tried to strike it, they would have made as great a wound as from a stone.
In other swellings that come on the head, besides those which come on the heads of children and at the roots of ears, let the opening always be made in the lowest place possible, so that the bowels may more easily issue.
And heal them as it is necessary.
Many times these abscesses occur at the neck, and under the armpits, and among the anus, and sometimes they appear elsewhere on the body, and are numerous, and are interconnected.
And each boil is properly located within its own skin, like the naevus and the abscess of the head, as we have said; and there are many similar kinds of these boils.
and there are many similar kinds of these boils. There are some that contain moisture, and there are evil ones that do not wish to obey healing.
In the one that you see with good position to touch, and is similar in color to the body, and moves from each side and is not hard against the nerves of the neck nor the artery nor the channel, and is not deep;
then you should cut it from above and scrape each part, and stretch the two lips of the wound once, if necessary, as we have said about abscesses on the head;
And cut it little by little, and be sure that you do not cut the nerve or the vein, and that the scalpel is not too sharp or cutting too deep, so that you do not cut what you should not.
And if you cut a vein or artery, and it does not allow you to work, then place powdered vitriol or some powders that stop blood in the wound, and press the wound. And leave it until the abscess is calmed, and the wound begins to soften and rot.
And when the blood is stopped, return to your work until you complete it;
Then look at your finger for any small scabs, and cut them off and clean them.
And if there is a large vein at the root of the scab, then you should not cut off that scab at its base, but tie it with a strong doubled thread and let it fall off without harm;
Then fill the wound with thick cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, then bandage it.
And if you cut the entire scab, then it is necessary that you join the two lips of the wound and sew them now, so that there remains no excess due to the size of the scab. If you must understand to cut the root of it, and draw out fire, and stitch as we have said.
If you must understand to cut the root of it, and draw out fire, and stitch as we have said. Those scabs that hold excess fluid, prick where they open and die;
And pierce it thus as the one mentioned before, depending on it; then apply dressings with salve and similar things so that it corrupts what remains of the corruption. And when the wound is well cleaned, treat it internally with ointment until it is healed.
The ancients said and spoke of cutting the throat; but I never saw it done in our land, and that is their written word.
For those who have choking fits, the fold of the throat called 'epiglottis' must be cut; and help should not be given because all the veins and organs of the patient are hot due to an abscess in the mouth or throat.
When the illness is in the channel of the membrane, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to avoid strangulation.
It is therefore necessary that when we want to cut the epiglottis, we do so below three circles or four with a small slit across between two circles, or through its length, not in the cartilage.
And these places are so close to the epiglottis that there is no flesh there, and the vessels are long on either side.
And if the master is fearful, then he should stretch the skin of the neck all around the goiter before cutting through it until it reaches the jugular vein. Avoid the blood vessels if you see any, and then cut the sciatic nerve as we have said;
And it is demonstrated by cutting the vein of the goiter which suddenly gushes forth from its broken place, and by loss of voice.
Leave the wound open for a while.
And when the hour has passed during which strangulation is feared, join together both lips of the wound around the heart and sew it up entirely without cartilage.
Then administer medicines that promote the growth of healthy flesh.
Albucasis says that this procedure should not be done unless the patient's throat is completely blocked and they are judged to be near death, otherwise there will be damage. Therefore cut off the epiglottis because the patient cannot swallow and breathes through the wound, thus avoiding death.
And for this reason the ancients commanded that the wound should be left open until the evil of the disease has passed, and it passes in three days or four. And then they commanded that the wound be sewn up and dressed, until it was healed.
I will tell you what I saw. I saw a damsel take a knife and stick it in her throat, cutting some of the vessels there.
And I was called to heal her, but found her as dead.
I examined the wound and saw that blood had come out of it, and I knew that she had not cut her veins or arteries except for those in her throat, from which the windpipe was protruding through the wound.
I hurried and sewed the wound, and cared for it until it was healed.
And nothing happened to the damsel except that her voice became hoarse, and afterwards she returned to her former state.
Therefore I say there is no fear in cutting the epiglottis.
This swelling is called 'throat hernia,' and is a large swelling of yellowish color, common in women;
And there are two kinds: Essences, and accidents;
Or natural has no engine.
And accidents are of two kinds; one is similar to flesh that grows on us, and the other kind is like an abscess that comes from an artery. and there is fear, but one should not operate with great fire except in the case of a small one; prove and search through all the introitor. If you find it like other flesh and not connected to any vein, cut it, as one cuts flesh, and remove all of its skin if there is any. And search well around it, and heal it as it should be, until it is perfectly healed.
There are many kinds of flesh, all of which I will describe their likenesses;
And now I must explain the difference between flesh and bone.
I say that bone is hot and holds fever until boiling has passed, and corruption is complete; Then let fever and heat subside.
Without pain, heat, or fever, the nut has no sweat, and contains a white fluid that is like its own sack, matching the color of the body, beginning as a drop, then growing large;
And they are according to two appearances: either fatty or moist, and many have colors as mentioned in the division.
When you come to treat dislocation, first examine and inquire about all the instruments called "intromittent" according to how their forms come in the chapter that follows.
And the method of examining nasal abscesses is to press on the moistest area you find in the abscess, turning your fingers bit by bit until you know that the instrument has pierced the skin, then proceed according to the size of the abscess;
Then remove the trocar, ensuring nothing jumps out.
If running moisture is found, regardless of its color, open it as mentioned for other abscesses;
And if no moisture comes after the trocar, know that it is fatty, so cut it in a cross shape, grasp it with forceps, and lightly scrape each side, then carefully remove the coating where it rests without harming the nut.
And if you cannot draw it out whole, then draw it out piece by piece so that nothing remains.
If anything remains, the wound will reopen many times;
And if some remains and the blood bothers you, then sprinkle the wound with certain watery corrosive powders, bind it tightly, and apply warm soothing things to the inflammation, and continue treating it until it heals;
And if the wound is large, cut the two lips of the wound, and treat those that are near flesh.
And if a beating vein is against you or other such, then quickly apply powdered vitriol to the wound's location, leave it for two or three days until the wound rots, and let the blood's ebullition rest; then return to cauterize what remains of the wound.
Here are the forms of exploratory instruments, and they come in three types: Great, medium, small
And there are 3 pieces called "albarets", and 1 called "breb", of which there are three kinds: large, medium, and small to encircle the fistulas' abscesses;
and are also like the needles used to sew wounds; they are made of yellow brass or iron or silver, with those that are yellow being more valuable, and are particularly preferred for encircling the curves of fistulas
and come in three kinds: large, medium, and small according to the size of the holes' width.
The shapes of the forceps are very similar, as you can see here:
And there are also forceps with two curves in three types:
And there are also forceps that have three curves and come in three kinds
And there are also forceps with two curves, and those with only one curve, which come in three kinds
And all these are necessary in their place.
The heads of these knives are sharp, and there are some that cut only on one side, from which we strip the nerves to avoid cutting the vein or nerve.
And these trocars are those placed in handles so that the patient does not notice them during the opening of abscesses;
And they come in three kinds: Large, small, and medium-sized, as you see;
And they should only be used in fleshy places, such as legs, arms, breasts, angles, and similar locations;
Moreover, another small instrument resembling the skin of a fist is made according to this form, with which blood is wiped away: "And it is sometimes placed at the site where there is danger of cutting veins or arteries, and some are made in this large size:"
Sometimes the breasts of certain men swell when they begin to be corrupted, appearing like those of a woman;
and remain unsightly and swollen; anyone wishing to treat them should follow this form from line .b. to .g. Then scrape away the fat, fill the wound with medication between layers of flesh, then bring together the two lips of the wound to stitch them closed, and treat it until it is healed.
and if the breast hangs down and is enlarged like in some women, cut it open through two similar incisions on top. so that one holds onto the other at the end of both, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this shape: .b. up to line .g.; Then scrape away the skin between the two lips and remove the fat. Apply what we have said about stitching and powders, and do whatever is necessary in treating it until it heals.
And if it does not heal, or the incision is not complete because the patient refuses to rest, or due to bleeding, then you must fill the wound with cotton moistened in corrosive ointment. And let him chew on the remaining flesh and fat until it is clean.
"These boils that appear under the arms are hard, with knots, and some contain moisture."
He who contains moisture must have the following form cut from the line .b. to the line .g.: "And when all the matter inside the boil has been emptied out, then fill the wound with cotton wool and leave it until the following day, then remove all the cotton wool and dress it with an appropriate ointment until it is healed."
"If the boil resembles a scrofula, then incise it as we have said for scrofula incisions, and if the wound discharges matter, then apply a cautery as we have said before."
When an artery bursts and the skin above is burned shut, many abscesses often form; likewise with a swollen vein and an abscess.
And if one recognizes it as such when it is for the artery, then the abscess will be long and deep. When you sense it with your fingers, you feel tension.
And when it is for the vein, it appears swollen and dark-colored
And it is foolish to cut into this abscess, especially when it is located under the armpits and groin areas or in the neck and many other places where it would be very large. Therefore, one must avoid cauterizing with fire and also the person in charge should avoid doing so, especially when it is an inflammation of an artery that has burst through the skin over a long period.
Then make an incision at the joints and carefully separate the artery from the tissues until it is exposed.
Then place a needle beneath one side, and pierce it until it reaches the other side, and tie off the artery with a doubled thread in two places, as I have shown you in the extraction of the two arteries that are in the temples.
Then prick the place between the two ligaments with an introjector until the blood flows out that is there, and let the abscess be lanced.
Then perform the treatment as in a bowed inward wound, until the ligament falls off. Then treat those with appropriate ointments until they are healed.
And if the abscess is due to the incision of a vein, then you should cut around the entire skin of the abscess with your hand, then place the needle beneath the spot you are holding and pierce it until there is one doubled thread that can be pulled from the other side. Then tie off the abscess, as I have told you, with the ligament of one of two parts using the thread.
And if you doubt that the thread is not hot enough, then insert another needle alongside all the threads below the entire abscess at the incision of the first needle, and tie the threads in four places;
Then cut away the abscess until the surplus comes out; then cut away the surplus from the heart and leave what is tied.
Then put a cloth dampened in wine and oil on it; then apply dressings and poultices until it is healed.
"So boils can also occur on nerves when they are struck or from too much physical exertion and similar causes."
And this happens most often at shoulders and hips, and in all places where there are joints; it is a serious abscess, its color resembles the color of flesh, and it occurs in many ways without pain.
And when it is pressed strongly, the patient feels pain, but it is not deep within the body, rather below the heart.
And it moves well in all directions, and does not go forward or backward, down or up; those that are in joints should not be cut with a knife: It might happen that there would be contraction there. And he who is at the head or forehead, cuts the skin with a scalpel.
And he who is at the head or forehead, cuts the skin with a scalpel. If the abscess is small, grasp it with tongs and cut it at its root;
And if it is large, suspend it with forceps and scrape it, then remove the bone and sew the wound closed, caring for it until it is healed.
Sometimes this occurs in bellies and nowhere else, and it is a disease called "funge" due to its resemblance; it has thin roots and large heads.
And among them there are some small ones and many very large ones.
I have seen someone who had two in the belly that were more like fungi than anything else; they were white, had fine roots, and were often split open, with moisture always flowing from them.
I cut them out and found one weighing 18 ounces and the other 6; upon opening them, it was evident that the patient was moist, with the flesh appearing pale, moist, and having fine roots. If he strikes the shoulder blade widely, and if there are cauteries with fire before you.
If he strikes the shoulder blade widely, and if there are cauteries with fire before you. For in cutting, it often happens that too much blood flows out, and if the blood gushes forth, then hasten to cauterize.
And if you see the patient frightened and fearful of the cut by iron, then take a well-made string of lead, and tie the artery as we have said, leaving it for two days.
And then bind it, and do not cease twisting the string of lead until you strike the artery, and cut through it without labor.
And if the roots are large, then one fears cutting even for the belly, but you can indeed cut half of it, then cauterize so that it does not return.
Then treat the wound, and make sure you do not cut the lobe which is of fox-like color, poor sense, and produces milk.
For this is an enchanted aposteme, and I will come to the cure of cancer hereafter.
When the boil has burst If swelling appears due to cautery of a wound or incision from syphilis, and it is on the belly and in some cases among the bowels, as happens with other sores, or from blood issuing from veins or arteries according to what is before
and if it's due to the rupture of the spleen and the exit of bile, then the color of the abscess resembles the color of the body, and it is a light thing without pain, and there are various exits. And if it is for the outlet of the intestines, then it is more diverse. And when you press it with your fingers, it rises up and then returns. And sometimes it is seized, and greatly enlarged at the entrance of the anus and by violent effort.
And if it's due to moisture, it's a light thing, and opens well when you press it with your hand, without constraining.
And if it's due to blood, then the abscesses open with these signs: large and hard, and are stuck according to a certain quantity; And if it's due to windiness, then it is soft to the touch, and the work is such that you look to see if the appearance is for arterial blood, or venous blood, or windiness.
And if it's due to windiness, then it is soft to the touch, and the work is such that you look to see if the appearance is for arterial blood, or venous blood, or windiness. It is necessary that you leave the treatment. For there is doubt and fear, as I told you in the chapter on abscesses, concerning the artery and the vein.
And if the appearance is for the intestines or the bladder, then you must command the patient to stain their armpit and stretch it out straight, then press all around the belly. then command them to lie still between your hands, then go around the place that you have marked with all the spatula, then stretch half of the abscess upwards with the whole large finger. Then wrap it around with a strong thread or silk cord tightly, and let it remain so.
Then open half of the boil over the ligature, and insert your index finger into it to search for the intestine; If you find it caught in the ligature, untie it, and bring the intestine out of the abdomen;
And if you find the boil, grasp it with forceps and cut off its excess;
If the artery or vein opposes you, go around it carefully, then return to your work and take two needles, thread two strong threads through them, and insert the two needles around what you have done in a cross-stitch pattern;
Then press the boil in four places over the needles, and if you see fit, remove the needles, leaving them there until it rots, and cut away the dead flesh. And when it becomes subtle and rotten, cut it off there, then treat what is necessary, and cauterize the boil as we have said;
And when it becomes subtle and rotten, cut it off there, then treat what is necessary, and cauterize the boil as we have said; Extract the blood or moisture that you find,
chancre We have spoken of the likenesses of chancre in the division [of this book], and how one ought to operate by means of medicines there, and how one should avoid the cure with iron.
And we say the chancre that invades the marrow, and great caution in its treatment. The ancients said that when chancres are located where they can be shaved, such as those on breasts, hips, and similar areas, one should remove them entirely at the onset.
Never has anyone been cured of it before me.
And when the operation is in a location where it can be removed, as we have said, you should purge the patient of black bile once.
Then make him fast if he shows signs of repletion, then place the patient in a good location to perform the operation.
Then pour on your ointments around the cancer, and shave all the hair off, and scrape away everything without leaving anything.
And let the blood flow freely, and press well on the spot with your hand or any object; if the bleeding from the incision of the artery or vein troubles you, cauterize it until the blood stops. Then treat the wound with other treatments until it is healed.
Regarding dropsy We have already discussed in the section on dropsy its similarities, how water collects in it, and the signs of each type, and treatment by medications, and that treated by iron.
And in these two types, one should not touch them with iron: Namely, tympanites and hydrocele, for they are deadly.
Therefore, when treating this type of dropsy called 'eclipses' with medications and the treatment does not help, look to see if the patient is weak or has another disease besides dropsy, such as coughing, diarrhea, etc. If you do not touch iron to it, there is doubt [about its effectiveness].
And if you see the patient with strong vitality, and they have no other illness but dropsy alone, and are not too young nor too old, then you should proceed thus: Lift the patient upright onto your hands, and have the assistants press the abdomen using water at its lowest part, then take the spine in this manner: And let it be sharpened at both ends. At an angle, but not so deep that it can reach the intestines when inserted, and not sharp enough to wound;
Then observe whether the dropsy has entered towards the intestines: If so, you must make three incisions directly below the navel using a knife; And if the dropsy is due to liver disease, then make your incision to the left of the navel.
And if it is due to worms, then make your incision on the right side, and ensure that the patient does not lie directly above where the incisions are made so that excess fluids do not drain into this weak area.
Then pierce all the hide with the instrument and insert it; raise your hand entirely over the spatula between the hide and the skin as in flaying, to the quantity of one nail or even more around.
Then pierce the skin until the spatula reaches its proper place; this is where the water emerges. Then heat this instrument and insert it as follows: And it resembles a thin silver tube, made of brass or light iron, with a small hole at one end. And on one side, three holes And two on the other side, and one on the other
And the head is cut like a feather, this is the shape of the incision with which writers trim their feathers
At the top above is the funnel, so that when the instrument reaches the water, it should now be placed over it.
Empty it then of half or a third part; for if you empty more than is necessary at that time, the patient may perhaps die from the dissolution of his spirit by the weapon, or fall into a swoon, or approach death.
But pour out according to its quantity of power, and according to what the dispositions of the patient's virtue signify, and his breath.
Then draw the instrument and hold the water, which is now retained by the heart blocking the opening that is above the stomach, as I have spoken about, piercing according to this manner;
Then recommence the instrument on another day if you see the patient enduring these things, and draw out a small quantity of water.
Do this for several days, but be careful not to draw too much so that only a little bit of water remains.
And if you doubt about the patient, and leave much water in him, then treat it with hot salt or sand, and often wash him with sweat or baths and sun exposure, and apply ointments to drink. And treat with drying medications until he is healthy, and cauterize on the stomach and liver and spleen after extracting the water, as I have said before.
Sometimes children are born without any opening in their penis, or with a small opening, or one that is not in the correct place.
If it needs to be done immediately, pierce it with a very fine spatula according to this shape:
Then place over the hole this thin tin covering, and secure it, holding it thus for three or four days. When he wishes to urinate, remove the cover, let him do so, and then replace it.
And perhaps there is no need for this, as the hot urine will not leave through the closed area.
He whose wound is small, let him apply clay of lead, as we have said; it will widen.
Those who do not have the opening in its proper place are handicapped, for some are born with the opening at the end of the penis, which prevents them from urinating unless they raise their penis upwards. They also cannot ejaculate because the matter cannot reach the mouth of the urethra, and this is a serious condition.
And the manner of performing this operation is that the patient lies on his back. Then stretch out the head of the penis and bind it tightly like the shaft of a feather, so that the opening falls in the middle, as it should.
And beware of bleeding that often occurs there, and if it does happen, stop it with whatever stops bleeding, and heal the wound until it is clean.
"Regarding the pustules of the penis:" Many times these blisters come upon the penis, appearing as ugly flesh.
And among them are malicious ones and non-malicious ones;
Therefore, you should prick them with a fine needle, cut and cleanse all of them, then place moistened cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment upon them; Then treat it with diaphoretic ointment until it is healed.
And if the wound is malignant, foul-colored and foul-smelling, then you must apply cautery to it.
When you have cut it open and if the blister is on top of the penis with some part inside the foreskin and some outside, then you must first remove the blister that is inside; And once it's removed, then treat what remains outside.
For if you treat them together, the head of the penis may be pierced, and blackness and corruption come to its tip and its opening.
Therefore cut away all that is black and corrupted, then apply a plaster made of honey and flour mixed with the peel of pomegranates and figs, then treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
And if bleeding starts, then apply the lunar cautery according to this form:
The cauteries help with two conditions together: That is to say, for the removal of blood, and for gangrene;
And if the head of the penis is corrupted and retracted, you must insert a lead tube into the penis, and the patient will urinate through it;
And when the foreskin at the head of the penis is stuck, which happens to those who have not been circumcised, or due to wound or abscess, then you must cauterize it with a hot iron until the bonds are released and the glans of the penis is freed from all sides;
And if it is difficult to separate them, then you must cauterize with the spéculum some of the head of the penis and foreskin;
Then gently pull apart both sides, and place a thin linen cloth soaked in cold water between them so that it does not stick again.
Circumcision is not like other wounds; Nevertheless when we perform this work of our will, especially on children, it is necessary that we do the best and easiest work for their health.
"I say that the ancients did not mention the circumcision of their children because they did not use it in their law, and we have only what we have acquired through experience."
For most masters and surgeons performing circumcision use irons, forceps, and an entire novacula
But if the heart fails because there are two layers, sometimes one is cut above and the other remains below. Otherwise, it should be cut again, causing double pain, and during healing, the tip of the member may not be securely attached.
And during healing of the nail, sometimes the iron slips, spoiling the work; many times they are born this way and do not require healing.
"Regarding the cleansing that is done with forceps along the entire length of the thread, I have found through experience that it is good because forceps cut equally well above and below."
For when you press your hand, cut evenly in one second. But make sure the thread is tightly wrapped around the skin
And the manner of the first work should be that you make the child think, if he understands, that you are only tying the thread around the penis and not harming him in any other way
Then make it stay between your hands straight, and hide the tools under your feet so that the child does not see them nor any of the instruments.
then place your hand on the neck and blow near the heart, and pull up until the head of the neck is inside; then clean it well of the dirt that has gathered there, then tie the wound closed with a doubled thread, then tie below the pouch to the other string
then clean it well of the dirt that has gathered there, then tie the wound closed with a doubled thread, then tie below the pouch to the other string and hold it there with the second ligature on the pouch and the index finger, and cut between the two strings, then raise the heart quickly and pull the head of the neck then let the blood flow pouch and pouch, for that is the medicine; and sprinkle powder on it and over the powder apply a cloth dipped in cooked egg yolk tempered with rosewater, mixed with good fresh rosemary oil, and leave it there until the next day, then treat again until healed.
The form of the cauterization for purification is thus:
Both heads [of the cautery] should be thin and sharp-pointed, and let them be as long as a finger evenly.
The mistake in cauterization is when the heart is inside the incision;
Therefore, you must stretch it to your fingernail before the boil appears;
And cut evenly, and if you cannot hold it with your finger, then use forceps, and then cut.
And if it lasts for three days, and what is under the shaft is swollen, then leave it until the boil calms down, and gently scrape off the scab;
Then cut as much as you can move, but be careful not to harm the part of the shaft, for it will do no harm.
Therefore, treat the place with sudden wound powder, which we have discussed in treating powders; and if you cut too much of the heart, it will not be harmed.
Heal it then, as we have said, until it is healthy.
"On the retention of urine"
The retention of urine is due to obstruction from a stone, or coagulated blood, or bowel, or flesh born, or similar things, as we have said in the division.
And if urine is not released and you see that it is retained because of a stone lodged in the neck or bladder, then the patient must be bent forward on his knees. And let him put his feet on his back, and extend his belly from the part above the back, and let the patient hold himself up as much as he can. And then the neck of the bladder is forced open for the expulsion of the stone above, whereupon the urine will be released.
And if it does not come out as we have said and the patient feels great pain, then you must use all instruments called "syngenes" for extraction.
And let there be a light, subtle silver chain, like the feather of a bird. And let the chain be one and a half palms long, and thin at its end.
And the manner of the issue of urine is that you take a doubled thread, tie at its head a pouch of wool or cotton, and put the head of the thread inside the syringe.
And cut off the excess wool and put it up to the head of the syringe; then grease the syringe with oil or butter mixed with egg yolk, and make the patient sit on a seat, and raise his bladder and penis with moist oil and olive oil and warm water.
Then gently insert the syringe into the penis, until it reaches the root of the penis; then fold the penis upwards towards the belly.
Then push the syringe forward until it reaches the bladder; the patient will feel it when it is empty. But if this is not done correctly, it may be because the tube leading to it is twisted.
then they pull the thread all over the wool bit by bit, and the urine follows the wool; then pull out the thread, and make the urine run.
and continue squeezing the syringe until the bladder is emptied, and the patient is relieved.
When the skin is peeled off and blood flows into the bladder, or putrefaction has gathered there, and you see that water and medications are being distilled from it, then use all the instruments called "clepsydra," and this is its form:
It has three openings: II on one side, and I on the other, as you see;
and the raised places where the medicine is applied should fit tightly around the penis so that it can be drawn closed without additional help to keep out moisture when needed.
and when you see your medicine entering the bladder, place the head of the funnel in the moisture and draw up what is inside it
and then tightly plug the funnel. Then the moisture will enter and reach the bladder, causing the patient to feel it.
And this is the form of the subtle enema used for bladder enemas
And is made of silver or lead, and the head is higher.
and below it leans on the chest where the links fall;
then take a sheep's bladder and fill it with the moisture you want to use for sitz baths; then tie it between both breasts with a good doubled thread and heat this moisture over the fire;
then place the mouth of the sitz bath in the rectum, then press your hand on the bladder until all the moisture has flowed into the bladder, so that the patient feels it has reached the bladder;
and if you do not have a bladder, then take a piece of parchment and make a circle from it and pierce it evenly around the edges; then insert a strong thread into these holes; then gather the circle together like a sieve and put inside it whatever oil, moisture, and water you wish, and tie it to the instrument;
and do as you did with the bladder, pressing your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
"de la pierre"
We have previously mentioned in the division the types of stone and their removal along with medicines.
And I have said the difference between a stone that enters the bladder and all its signs, and in which stone one should operate by cutting. and in the bladder, and in the penis;
And I will tell you clearly and briefly.
I say that stones which enter the bladder often happen in children, and it is a sign that water leaps from the bladder like water in its fineness;
and it is apparent when hair appears, and grit is felt by the patient's penis, and he urinates many times and then becomes constipated. And often these are the fundamentals;
and the cure of children is easy until they reach four years old, and it is very difficult in old men, and it is medium for those between youth and old age.
And the cure is easier for those who have a large stone than for those who have a small one.
And when we come to the treatment, it is first necessary to cleanse the patient with a clyster, to draw out all the filth that is in the intestines. For it sometimes obstructs seeking the stone.
Then seize the patient by the feet, tip him over and move him downward so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, and ejects sometimes from the high place;
then have him sit between your hands prepared, and his hands beneath his thighs, so that the bladder is completely inclined downward
then locate it and touch it inside
If you feel the stone in the space, then now hasten to cut upon the stone.
And if it does not fall upon touching it all over, then moisten your left index finger with oil if the patient is a child, or your middle finger if the patient is an adult man. and insert it into its base, and seek out the stone; when you feel it with your finger, then move it towards the neck of the bladder
then press upon your finger and expel it there where you see to cut.
And instruct the assistant to press upon the bladder with his hand; and command him to extend his right hand upwards with the scrotum, and with his left hand remove the skin that is beneath the scrotum in the part where you will make the cut
Then pour in the spatumic acid, of which this is the formula: And make an incision between what is between the thighs and the fundament, not in the middle but on the left side toward the navel;
And let it be straight upon the stone, and your two hands always on the fundament; and make the incision across so that it is wide at its entrance but narrow within, according to the size of the stone, not too large.
In case the pressure causes the hand on the fundament to slip without effort;
And know that there are stones with corners and edges. If it is difficult to pass out;
And some are smooth like a glass marble, and round, whose exit is easy.
For those with corners and edges, make the incision larger.
And if it does not come out, then you must use tongs like a chisel's head to grasp and remove the stone so that it does not escape. When you place beneath the inflamed instrument its curved head;
And if you cannot manage it thus, then widen the little hole a bit, and if blood flows out, constrain it with powdered glass.
And if there are more than one stone, then insert the largest first at the neck of the bladder, then cut it open, then remove the thread, and afterwards remove the smaller ones if there are several.
And if it is very large, then it must be so, and a larger wound must be made. For two things happen to the patient: either he dies, or urine flows continuously from a place where flesh cannot heal;
But nevertheless try to remove it using forceps or cutters until you remove it piece by piece.
And when you have completed your task, then fill the wound with incense and aloe and dragon's blood, and constrain it, and place upon it a moistened cloth in oil and wine, or in oil and rose water and cold water, to soothe the hot abscess. Then raise the patient's head, and do not untie the bandage until the third day.
"And when you untie it, then wash the area very well with oil and water, then dress it with diapheconointment and basilicon ointment until it is healed."
And if an abscess occurs in the wound with corrosions and clots of blood in the bladder, causing retention of urine in this manner that it cannot pass without effort with the urine: Therefore, apply a poultice to the wound and remove that blood, for if it remains, it will harm the bladder and corrupt it.
Then wash the wound with water and honey and salt, and help him in all ways that you know until he is healed;
And it is necessary that every time you treat him, you bind his two thighs together and apply the medicine to its proper place.
And if the stone is small, and it is in the passage of the penis and stuck within, and urine cannot pass out: Then perform the treatment that I have mentioned earlier, cutting it many times until it is relieved from the cutting; otherwise, excuse yourself from this treatment. I have already tested it thus.
"Take one iron rod according to this shape and let it be forked at three ends stuck into one stick:"
Then take some thread and wind it around the stalk below the stone so that it cannot move backwards into the bladder.
Then insert the drill gently into the stalk until it reaches the stone; and slowly twist the drill by hand against the stone little by little until you can pierce the stone from the other side
When urine begins to flow, then press your hand on what remains of the stone inside the stalk. If it breaks soon, and flies out with the urine, then the patient is healed;
And if you cannot do this for any reason that hinders it, then tie a thread below the stone and another above it, then cut the stalk at the stone between the two threads, then pull it out with forceps, untie the thread, and clean the blood clot from the wound. And treat it until it is healed.
"from the stone of women"
It happens rarely that a stone enters the bladder of women; and if it does happen sometimes, its treatment is difficult and forbidden for three reasons:
One is that perhaps the woman is a virgin;
and the second is that one cannot find a well-known woman who reveals herself to physicians, especially if she is chaste.
And the third manner is that perhaps one cannot find a skilled woman in this art of midwery;
And the fourth manner is that the stones of the woman are more hidden than those of a man, for which one must make a deeper cut, causing great fear. And if you need to show them, then you must take a skilled midwife, and they are scarcely found, and if you do not find any, seek out a very learned and subtle female physician;
and the present one brings a very wise old woman knowledgeable in women's affairs or a woman who knows some part of this art, and commands her to do what you command regarding the examination of the stone; and observe carefully whether the woman is a virgin:
and observe carefully whether the woman is a virgin: Then he must place his thumb on the foundation and search for the stone.
And if he finds it, let him press down on it with his thumb, and tell the patient to place their hand over the bladder, and then grasp and press strongly with their left hand.
If she finds it, she must move it little by little from the entrance of the bladder until it reaches the root of the thigh.
Then strike the stone at the root of the thigh against the middle of the anus where it has moved, and feel for the stone in that part. And do not move your thumb above or below the stone, but make the first cut small.
And do not move your thumb above or below the stone, but make the first cut small. Then insert the knife into the cut. If you feel the stone, widen the wound until the stone can exit. Know that there are many types of stones.
That is to say, some are small and large, sharp and smooth, long and round, and some have tails.
and know the similitudes to know the outcome.
And if your blood weakens, then place powdered vitriol in its place, holding it for an hour until the blood is stanched.
then return to your work until the stone is removed, having instruments that I told you about for extracting stones in men to help you with your task;
and if blood weakens you, and this is from a cut artery, then place the powder on the spot and hold it with bandages and strips, do not resume cutting, leave the stone and do not extract it at all, for fear that the patient might die; Then treat the wound.
"And when the heat of the blood has subsided and the wound is healed, then return to your task until the stone is out."
Rainwater is nothing other than a collection of moisture or clear urine, which is below the heart of hens and contains eggs;
and it is called "syfac," but sometimes it is pure in the fabric of the egg itself, so one might think it was another egg; and this is the skin of the pig between the white sinew which we have mentioned;
And if it's not hot, then no. "And the generation of this hernia is from weakness that comes to the intestines, and this matter is spread out."
Sometimes it comes from a blow to the joints, and this moisture has many colors: Or it is colored declining towards yellow, or it is without redness, or black, or aqueous white, and there are more.
And these are the signs to recognize this gathering: if it is white like the sinew we have mentioned, then the abscess is solid and long like the shape of an egg, and it does not open the joints because it has moisture all around.
And if there is moisture in its own skin, then the abscess is solid with a part of the egg white, and because of this people think it's another egg.
If the moisture is between the skin of the joints and the white sinew, then one feels it well.
Therefore, when you want to know the color of the moisture, try all four corners of the surrounding area where the form is shown beforehand. "So according to what comes after the probe, judge what is inside."
And when we cauterize it with iron, it is necessary for the patient to be as healthy as possible and his body well-fed.
Then lay him on his back on something slightly raised, and place many cloths underneath him;
Then sit on the left side of the patient, and instruct the assistant to sit on the right side, and extend the staff to one of the two ribs on the right side of the chest.
Then take the scalpel and cut through the skin of the chest along the line from the nipple to near the armpit, making a straight incision that divides the skin down to the white fat, scraping it off carefully according to your ability;
Then pierce the fat with water using a large needle, extract all the water, and then place your bandages, stretching the skin upwards;
And do not touch the heart of the chest, but only the skin. Cut through all or in pieces the costal cartilage from below carefully, so that if you do not cut it sharply enough, water will flow back.
And if the egg jumps out of your way, replace it in its place once you have completed the task.
Then join the two books of the heart of the lungs with stitches, then heal it like other wounds until it is sound.
And if you find the egg corrupted by another disease, then tie up the vessels that are suspended, preventing the flow of blood.
Then cut the lung with all its suspension and remove the egg, and heal it as we have said.
And if water is gathered into two parts together, know that these are two branches. So cut the other part equally as you did the first, then suck out the blood, and put linen moistened in rose oil on the wound.
So cut the other part equally as you did the first, then suck out the blood, and put linen moistened in rose oil on the wound. And put another linen moistened in wine and oil on top, place it over both lungs, cover with doubled cloths, and tie it all together according to this pattern:
Then take two strips of cloth, and stuff them with wool bandages in this manner, and they should be sewn together at the waistband of the breeches, and one end should be taken up from the fundament to the back, and the other at the wrist.
and tie both ends together over the two angles, so that the bandage is fully assembled in the loop of the breeches;
and sometimes this bandage is used as a cautery in place of iron tongs; you should take one small scalpel cautery and scrape the skin around the boil, and heat it up as we have said, so that the white fat which contains water is exposed.
then take this cautery in this manner and pierce that fat at its base with it, and scrape off the boil with this hot scalpel cautery.
And scrape it all away in every way you can, until everything is scraped clean.
And make sure that the fire does not touch the eye
And know that this work is safer; and avoid blood loss during the operation; make sure the cutting process is done carefully;
And if anything goes against you, such as a wound becoming inflamed or excessive bleeding or other issues, then treat what is going against you according to what is said before.
And if the patient is fearful and does not want to undergo this procedure due to its frightening nature, then perform a perforation, as I tell you; for when you are certain by the signs that we have mentioned that the kidney stone is there, then make the patient sit on a raised seat; then cut open the abscess on the part below to the whole spinal region widely, and insert the perforation deep into the body.
And make the opening wide enough so that all the water flows out freely;
then place cotton on the wound and tie it, and leave it to allow the remaining water to flow out, then treat it until the wound is healed;
and if the white cloth does not allow water to exit through the mouth of the wound, then you must insert a feather or the tool used for drawing out water in hydropics, as shown above;
And widen the mouth of the wound, and know that water returns, and after six months or more it reassembles, and when it reassembles as before, then the patient will pass their days.
Know that in the cutting of this branch there is fear and many dangers, therefore it seems better to leave it alone;
I will tell you about the treatment and the like of an abscess.
I say therefore that many abscesses come to be in the body, especially in the joints; and this happens often.
It is known that this is due to an excess of acid and water spread throughout the joints, or from injury;
and the color of the abscess is according to the color of the body; And does not find any pain, but an abscess severe.
And sometimes there is a pale and bloody abscess, yellowish in color, often caused by an artery's wound or swelling of a vein.
When it is from an artery wound, it is known by the hot arrangement of the abscess when you press it with your fingers; And do not touch it.
That which is caused by vein swelling is known by its expression when touched with the fingers, and can be well incised in this manner and others. And cut the skin of the shin bones, then stretch them out, and the egg-shaped swelling will appear white on its surface, and remove the suspending membrane from all around the egg.
If the egg is already hard with these new growths, then you must extract the egg and cut it;
And if it is air-filled on its surface or inside the vessels, then you must remove all that membrane and cut it cleanly.
And if the origin of the flesh is at the back, you must cut it all away, and extract the egg, as we have said.
And when your operations are complete, apply linen soaked in rose oil and wine to the wound, then dress it with other dressings until it is healed.
This is an abscess wrapped in a wrapping resembling a boil, with softening of the kidneys, and if the patient moves they cry out.
And the treatment of this disease is equally frightening as the one mentioned earlier; nonetheless, we will tell you about it according to what the ancients did.
You should have the patient sit on an elevated seat, then place the suspension of the kidneys below their testicles, close to the penis and scrotum, and the master should hold them tautly.
Then cut with a sharp, wide-bladed scalpel across the vessels until they are exposed and then scrape each side as we have described in the extraction of arteries from the temples.
Then insert a needle with a doubled thread and tie it at the first spot where the vessel appeared, then tie it again at the other end. Then cut straight through the middle, according to the length of the body, and remove the corrupted moisture.
Then treat the wound like others where an arrow is struck, so that none of the vessels fall out from either side.
For otherwise no harm comes of it, and if all the vessels are visible, then you must pull on both sides of the wound for all the vessels. So that the bone does not lose its nourishment due to the incision of the vessels, and they dry out and cannot heal.
The outcome of this operation is that it results in the sectioning that comes from below, or the extension upwards on the abdomen in the region of the groin, causing the intestines to descend through that opening on one side
And this opening is either below the scrotum or from its extension, and both these methods are caused by many things
or from blows, falls, jumps, carrying heavy loads, and similar causes
And the sign when it is due to the extension of the scrotum is that it happens gradually over a long period of time, and does not come suddenly and the abscess is even to its depth because the surgeon presses the intestine
And the sign when it is a cut in the thigh is that it causes sudden pain at the beginning, and there are various visible swellings under the skin, which is due to the leakage of intestines and blood from the wound in the thigh
Sometimes the rings are torn along with the intestines, which are retained inside and cause great suffering for the sick person, especially when they are pressed upon
And in these cases of iron wounds, it is necessary to avoid them
The manner of this procedure is that you should instruct the patient to replace the intestine with their hand inside the wound, if it can be reached. then gently press on its colon between your hands and raise the thighs;
then stretch out the heart upwards and cut all the skin from the length of the thighs Then insert forceps into the hips on each side according to your need to open the wound, so that the bone can come out.
then skin the surgeon so that it is under the skin of the thighs until the white muscle is exposed on all sides;
then insert your index fingers into that which supports the thigh, between the white muscle that is beneath the skin of the egg (scrotum), and the second muscle, and separate what lies behind the egg, and between the second muscle
And then move your right hand into the heart of the kidneys, and stretch your left hand upwards to touch the spleen, and lift the eye towards the waist. And instruct the assistant to raise the eye upwards, and untie that which is behind the lien.
And search with your two hands if there is any intestine wrapped around or hard spleen, and if you find anything, push it into the abdomen below.
Then take a needle with a thick thread made of silk threads and insert it into the rear part of the spleen, which is after the kidney's skin. Afterwards, cut the heads that appear from the threads, until there are four threads remaining; Then tie them together in the form of a cross and tie the spleen, which we have said is below the kidney's skin, with a strong thread in two parts. Then wrap the heads of the threads and tie them firmly in two parts so that no vessels that nourish it can enter inside, so that an abscess may not come. And then place the bandage according to the first bandage's length of two fingers from that one, and after these two bandages leave the sinew that is under the heart of the lungs on the right side. And then the rest according to the roundness that the arm carries;
Then cut into the part that is under the skin of the lungs until blood flows and the bowels, as we have said before;
Then bring wool moistened in oil and place it on the wounds, and then bring the bandage that we have mentioned. And sometimes cauterize the white flesh that we have mentioned after the incision, for fear of bleeding But this happened many times, so leave the bandage until it sticks by itself;
And if it is slow to stick, then be risen with warm water and place on what we have said until it sticks;
Then treat the wound with another cure until it is perfectly healed.
Hernia carnosum
In this branch, I never saw anyone daring to perform the cure by iron
And the ancients said that it should be done like the branch that grows with the vine, in such a way that you tie the vessels, after cutting slightly above lightly below;
Then cut in mid-air, and treat the boil of he who operates, until the vessels bleed.
And treat it as we have said, until it is healthy.
Sometimes a rupture occurs in angles, as we have said, and the place opens up;
And none of the intestines descend to the joints, and if any do, it is little, and repair them at all times.
But if it remains too long in this state, the wound becomes inflamed or gangrenous, so that the intestines descend;
And this happens due to the extension of the gangrene which is at the angles, as we have said, for it extends, then the place becomes softened and swollen and opens up.
And its treatment is by cautery, as we have previously said.
And sometimes it is cured by iron in this manner: And the patient should lie on their back between your hands, then cut the place of the rupture open with a wide incision according to the size of three fingers;
And then remove the sinew that is under the skin which you follow, then take the thread and place it on the visible surface of the sinew.
And press deeply into the abdomen, then sew the two visible surfaces of the sinew onto the top of the thread, sewing one and the other.
Then remove the top of the thread, and do not cover any part of the sinew or extend the wound or anything else, as I have shown you in the treatment of intestinal rupture. Then treat it with the cure for wounds.
Then treat it with the cure for wounds. And when you cut the threads, cleanse and dress the wound until it is healed.
The sinew is contracted and has no appearance in the rupture, and the cautery is more effective at this point and closer to safety.
Regarding the softening of the skin around the anus
Often in some men the skin of the scrotum becomes softened because the contents inside are softened to see.
And it is necessary, when one wants to treat it, for the patient to lie on his back, and cut away the softened skin from the natural skin.
Then bring together both lips with one stitch, and if you wish, sew up the excess softened skin with three or four firm stitches.
Then cut between the ribs, and heal it like other wounds until it is healed, and then stitch it up.
Regarding castration
Know that astrologers are condemned in our law, therefore I would like to not speak about them in this book;
And it is necessary to mention for only two reasons:
One of which is so that the physician may know how to answer when asked and how to treat;
And the other is because we often have need of castration for certain animals to help us, such as goats and sheep and cats and other beasts.
I say therefore that castration is done in two ways: Either by traction or by cutting.
In the first way, which we do by traction, make the animal sit in warm water until its testicles are softened and hanging down; Then grasp them with your hand so that they remain in place and you no longer feel them.
Of the cautery of burns: You must shear the animal, and press its skin with your left hand, then tie the suspender, and cut each boil once when you have well cleaned them;
and leave any boil that is deep and hidden beneath the vessels.
And this method of cauterization is better than that done by suction because some substances from the boils may remain through suction, which causes the animal to crave lustfulness.
Then heal the wound until it is healed.
Regarding hermaphrodites
Hermaphroditism exists in two ways among men: One way is that between the two testicles appears also the form of a woman's genitals, with hair and sometimes urine comes out through the foreskin.
And the other way is in women, who have on their pubic region both a penis and two testicles.
And the treatment for both men and women is that you cut away all the excess skin, and heal it like other wounds;
In the second way, there are men whose urine flows through the foreskin's skin, for whom there is no treatment.
Tartaric acid is a substance applied to the natural part, so it looks too ugly to see; And some women have it as large as a hand, and that is the treatment.
It is necessary for you to cut off the excess skin of the tenting with scissors, then trim it lightly;
and do not go too deep, so that bleeding does not occur, then apply the treatment until it is healthy again.
And there is another substance that arises from the mouth of the uterus, and the womb, and sometimes jumps out, and resembles a cow's udder, and for this reason the ancients called it 'cow-like disease'. If you must cut it, as we have said regarding the tenting procedure, and care for it until it is healthy.
Erratic is when a woman's nature is not pierced, or the opening is small; and it is natural at birth, or accidental due to illness that comes upon it.
and it is natural at birth, or accidental due to illness that comes upon it. or it is caused by applied flesh, or a thick or thin membrane, and it is formed deeply in the uterus, on the sides, below, or wherever it may be.
And forbids conception, childbirth, and sometimes flowers from being had.
And the recognition of these is by the gaze of the woman.
If the swelling is near the surface, then search with your fingers or a probe.
If it is close and subtle, and near the two books, then be quick, they are together like this:
Bring your two index fingers together, and let the woman be on her back with her legs spread.
Then open the two books together until the subtle vulva is revealed, and cover the openings.
Then take wool, soak it in oil, place it on the location, and let the woman lie on her stomach each day so that it does not heal.
And if the shoulder blade is hard and thick, you must shave it like a laurel leaf.
If the opening is born from flesh, then stretch it with the horn and cut it open;
And have the blood-stopping medicines ready, such as achic, dragon's blood, incense, mixed with an egg.
Then prepare a wide leaden funnel so that the wound cannot heal;
And thus let it be lengthened, and provide him with a linen tent.
Then other treatments should be applied until he is healed.
And when flesh comes out in the wound, it must be shaved in this manner, unless it's an inflamed abscess. For the inflamed abscess that is in the wound, one should not apply fire.
**Hemorrhoids:** Hemorrhoids are varicose veins inside or outside the anus; they appear as small lumps like bunches of grapes; some are internal and invisible from without, while others are external; they cause pain when defecating or sitting down; they can cause blood to flow freely during defecation or after, or only stain the toilet paper; sometimes they prolapse and come out at defecation; they are caused by constipation due to a bad diet, heavy lifting, or frequent diarrhea. The cure for them is to avoid their causes: eat healthy food that does not cause constipation, drink plenty of water, exercise regularly, do not lift heavy objects unnecessarily, and use ointments to relieve pain and inflammation. For internal hemorrhoids, surgery may be necessary if they are large or causing significant symptoms. Otherwise, rubber band ligation, sclerotherapy, or infrared coagulation can be used to treat them. For external hemorrhoids, warm sitz baths, witch hazel pads, and over-the-counter creams can provide relief. In severe cases, surgery may be necessary. Hemorrhoids are openings of veins that do not normally occur in this way; and when hemorrhoids become old they become hard.
As we have already said in the division of them, their similitudes and signs; now I will say those that require treatment.
I say that hemorrhoids and piles, when they are deeply embedded in the flesh, and are not visible to the touch, then iron treatment is not applicable.
Those that are at the mouth of the anus, which one can feel, those are the ones that can be cured.
Therefore you should put the woman in a cold house, then grasp the hemorrhoids with forceps, cut them at their root, and sprinkle powders containing sanguinary-restraining medicines on it, such as achiote and dragon's blood, incense, and similar things.
Then place her feet in cold water for an hour, then put her in cold water.
And if there is bleeding, then make her sit in a decoction of sumac, pomegranate bark, and similar things; then take barley flour, mix it with honey and oil, and apply this poultice on her back.
And if she stops bleeding, that is good. If not this, then apply cupping glasses to the back and breasts without piercing.
Then take linen, dampen it in burdock juice or celandine juice with old wine, and apply to the location.
And when the abscess has softened, then treat the area with ointment until it is clean;
and that which is called "albathir" is red, and resembles a sharp-pointed head, so it must be covered as I said earlier; And then treat it until it is healed.
Many kinds of boils come in the flesh, such as cancer and stone boil, herpes and erysipelas and fistulas and hemorrhoids and hot boil, and many other diseases that I have mentioned in the division.
Therefore, I must speak of the hot abscess that comes in the marrow, which is not one of those that swell;
And if you wish to know the work of iron, look whether the abscess is hot at the beginning of its appearance, and full of heat and fever, and if it becomes red when you can see it. Therefore, do not rush to pierce it, but let it ripen until the pain is alleviated;
And then make the patient sit on the seat, and have two small seats where they can recline, and lean them against their back and bring their feet together near the knee.
And let their thighs be spread out, and place their arms beneath their knees, and tie them securely with a good binding;
Then have the helper approach from the right side and bring forth the instrument with which one opens the mouth of the mare, the form of which shall follow.
And it is necessary that when you bring forth this instrument, you first insert the rod to know the depth of the mare's throat, so that what enters thereafter does not go deeper than it should and injure the patient. And if the instrument is too large, then cover the depth of the mare's throat with cloths so that the instrument does not cause injury.
And it is necessary for him to put the funnel of the instrument on top and moisten the instrument.
And when an abscess opens, and you cut it gently by hand, then it is necessary to cover its head with spathumile lotion.
And when the bowels are emptied, then you should put into the wound moistened tents in rose oil or green oil set.
And place the tent far from the wound at the bottom of the marrow, and put behind it on the marrow and on the linen cloth moistened with hot water or malted water.
Then treat it afterwards for 2 days with appropriate ointment until it is sound.
And sometimes lift up the marrow and wound by enema of water and honey, then with water in which lily roots and long aristolochia are cooked. Then reapply the ointment.
And if the wound is located in the marrow, then you must refrain from cauterizing with fire, but treat it as we have said in the section on dislocations.
Of childbirth The task of the midwife is first to know the form of natural childbirth, and the signs are when you see the woman pressing downwards, and she desires to smell the air:
Then the child eagerly desires to come out (into the world). Then know that this birth is according to Nature's form; the head comes out first, followed by the child.
And when you see these signs, gently press his belly so that the child may come out quickly
For when it settles upon its head, then comes forth the afterbirth with it; and the mother is cleansed of her excesses through proper cleansing.
And any child that comes otherwise does not come naturally.
For sometimes it comes out on its feet, with the body or head first, or the hands; or it may come out on its belly, and sometimes it is turned around by chance on its neck or in other harmful positions
Therefore, it is necessary that the midwife be wise and skillful in these matters, careful to avoid error or deception; and I shall show you all the positions and how one should assist her.
If the child comes out naturally headfirst and the woman is crying out in pain, but her contractions are weak, then have her sit on a stool or have women hold her up
And if the nature of oil or fenugreek has been cooked, then place the small spatula between its teeth, of which here is the form: And cut the foreskin, and scrape with its nail until the moisture within flows out;
And take the woman's belly until the child descends, and if it does not descend, then the woman must be given a suppository of ground fenugreek with sesame oil.
Then make her inhale the powder and sneeze, holding her mouth and nose for an hour: The child will now be born.
And if both hands come out first, then you must gently push them back in bit by bit; and if they cannot be pushed back in, then put the woman on a seat and raise her feet high. then lower the seat to the ground, taking care that the woman does not fall during this process;
And if the hands cannot be pushed in and the child is dead, then cut the hands at the joint shown here and extract the child, resetting it correctly.
Of the delivery of a child onto its feet When the child comes onto his feet, then you must strike upwards; And then turn it gently, gently, until it is even.
Then take one of the feet and extend it gently, gently.
When he jumps up to his knees, then command him to grasp it, and make him sneeze with rue; If God wills, let him jump forth.
And if there is no cautery as we have said, then it should be turned little by little until it matches its natural shape Then it becomes easy
And if he does not come out as we have said, then take musk mallow from the mountain, and oil of sesame, and melted gum, and grind everything together in one mortar; And apply this ointment to the nature of the woman, then have her sit in hot water up to below her ribs;
And when she is softened below, put on the woman a girdle of myrrh and place it under her, leaving it for an hour. Then have her sit on a chair, then make her sneeze and hold her mouth and nose closed, and lightly press her belly, for the child will now come out.
"of the child's exit onto its knees" When a child comes in this form, then the bailiff puts his hands gently. and is hung by the neck, with legs hanging down, lying on the bed; and folds his hands gently, then he takes the hands onto the stomach, and removes the cushions underneath so that it hangs down properly; and if the child does not jump, he takes its feet and shakes them violently, then moves his stomach up, then places his hands there; and takes the child gently; and tells the woman to hold on until the child is born.
"One hand comes out during the birth of the child" It is necessary to devise how to bring back the hand: If it cannot be brought back, then make the woman get up and go;
if she cannot go, then make her lie on the bed, and forcefully lift her legs;
then apply the muscle relaxant that I have mentioned.
And if she does not give birth, make her sit on the chair, then study how to bring back the hand; And swaddle the child according to its natural shape, then make it sneeze, and instruct her to lie on her back until the child is freed.
"At the moment of birth, with its hands spread wide, facing its mother's back." It is necessary that the servant take his hand, then slowly turn it little by little, and swaddle it lightly;
and when it is aligned, then place the natural balsamic mixture of mastic and oil on it, as we have said, then instruct her to move it slowly;
and when you have done this, make her sit on the seat, and instruct her to lie down; And make her sneeze. "This same manner is used for the afterbirth."
"This same manner is used for the afterbirth." When it comes free in this manner from the entire afterbirth, then cut the afterbirth with your fingernail until all moisture is drained;
and if the child's face and neck are covered in blood, then cut it at the cheek, so that it is not retained, otherwise the child will die;
then place the child inside until you have positioned it correctly, and instruct the woman to lie on her back several times:
"Regarding the birth of twins:" Know that twins are often born, sometimes three or four at a time; and this is not a strange thing, and it happens occasionally. Two are rare, and do not live long, if they have names;
Two are rare, and do not live long, if they have names; I know those that are multiplied, and they are despised by the devil who divides them, which is tied to hunger.
and sometimes they come out naturally like one whole, as we have said.
And if they are born crying, the treatment is as we have said, and the midwife should be skilled, and do what she does quickly and easily; and do it in such a way that it leads to health. "Regarding multiple births:"
Sometimes they are formed in the womb two or three or four or five or six or seven, or many up to fifteen, and all of them are perfectly shaped like children according to the measure of God's glory, and it is necessary that the midwife knows all these things, for such things can happen. If one does according to what is necessary
Regarding a stillborn child:
When you treat a woman for a dead child or miscarriage, as I have described in the section on this topic, and it does not expel the fetus, you are constrained to intervene manually Then you must know whether the woman is of sound virtue, and has no illness or fears death
Then the woman should be positioned on her back with her head lowered and her legs raised
and the assistant should grasp her thighs, or she should be tied to the bed so that she cannot push during childbirth
Then rub the mouth of the womb with moist oils made from althea and fenugreek and linseed, then anoint your hands with these oils and mucilages
Then gently insert your hands into the womb, then find the place where you can grasp the handles that are suitable for this purpose, and be careful that if the child is in the breech position it does not slip out headfirst
If he sticks the arrows in his eyes or in his neck or in his mouth or on his palate or under the beard or in the belly or near the ribs, and if the descent is below feet, stick them or prick them at the middle ribs.
And he must draw the arrow with his right hand, place the curve between the fingers of his left hand, and gently push it with all his strength, sticking the arrow into any of these places that we have mentioned, until the object is emptied.
Then stick against the other arrow, or the third if you need it, so that the extractions are even.
And then stretch them evenly by moving from one side to the other, so that they can come out easily, and let the arrows be toothed for better grip, as shown here:
And if there remains a part of it, then oil some of his fingers with oil and press them on that part, and pull the other part.
If none remains there, then place this poultice higher up, and do so until it completely emits fire.
And if one hand comes before the other and cannot return due to constraint, you must wrap it with cloth until it relaxes completely. Then strike the joint of the sole or the instep, and do likewise for the other foot.
And if the child's head is large and its passage narrow, or has a sharp-pointed bone assembled at its forehead, you must place the spatha spine between your two index fingers and cut open the forehead and extract the bone. Or you could round it using the instrument called "almidach", for which the form comes with the instruments in the chapter that follows this one.
And do likewise if the child has naturally a large head;
Then draw out the bones with forceps, and if the head still resists and is constrained by the forceps, cut it until the moisture in the pectoral opening escapes.
And if it cannot come out, cut it into pieces with a knife where you can reach.
If it is swollen in the belly or beneath the ribs, then you must pierce it until the moisture runs out.
"And if the child is on its feet, traction will be light, and the alignment of the mouth of the marrow will be easy."
And if it is stuck in the belly or the breast, then you must pull it out using a cloth wrapped around your hand; and cut into the belly or the breast until the moisture that is inside runs out.
And if other bones are broken but the head remains in place, then put your hand deep into the marrow and draw it out until you reach the mouth of the marrow. Then put in a hot poultice or two, and burn it with fire.
And if the mouth of the marrow is narrowed due to an inflamed ulcer that has come there, then you should not work it open, but rather bring moist and fatty substances and use plasters, and make poultices from softening and moistening herbs.
And if the child is on its side, and you can set it right, then arrange as we have said in the living child.
If one has no power, then let it flee by pieces; leave nothing of the afterbirth.
And when you have done this, if arrangements should come to abscesses that arise in the flesh.
If blood flows, let it be put into restricted water, and arrange other treatments.
"I saw a woman whose child had been bitten in the abdomen by one mouse, then another mouse came and bit the other." "After many days, an abscess formed on her cheekbone and swelled so much that it opened up, causing great pain."
"I was called to treat her, but after thinking about it for some time, I could not heal the wound."
"I applied a poultice with strong drawing power and out came one bone, then after a few days another." "I was greatly amazed at this because the abdomen has no bones."
"So I thought it must be the bones of a dead fetus."
I wished the wound to be wide, and pulled out many bones until the woman was much improved; And the woman lived for a long time like this, and sometimes a little bone would come out.
I recorded this chapter so that when the master finds something unusual, he may know how to help.
Hereafter comes the form of the compresses, according to which the books are opened;
And at two turns for each head of the kidneys. However, let the wedge be more subtle than the restrictor, and made of ebony or boxwood.
And let the mouth of the wood be two fingers wide, and the margin of the trees one and a half palms long. And in the middle let there be two joints of this same wood, which are closed on one and open on the other, half a palm long or a little more.
And these two joints are placed in the mouth of the mallet to open it when one turns the two wedges.
Another form, more subtle and lighter in appearance, should be made of ebony or boxwood wood, according to the shape of the tweezers. And it has at each end two joints, as you see, one palm long and two fingers wide.
And when you wish to open the mallet with all the equipment, make the woman sit on a bed, her feet hanging down and her legs spread wide apart, then insert the two joints joined together into the mallet, and hold the head of the equipment under her thighs. Then open your hand to the instrument, just as you did with the pliers evenly, according to the quantity that you see opening the mouth of the mortar, until the pestle does what it wants.
This tool is all equal, and their appearances are multiplied; And when the master has prepared them, the quicker the work is done, and the higher it rises among people for its quantity.
"Therefore do not disregard the instrument until you have prepared it, for its usefulness is not negligible."
When the second twin is retained during childbirth, you must command the woman to retain her breath, and then make her sneeze with condition, and hold your hands over her mouth and nose; And if she sneezes because of it, all is well.
If not, then take the pot, and make a hole in the lid, and put herbs that can open the mouth of the mortar, such as calamint, rue, anise, chamomile, cumin, and centory; All these herbs, or some of them, should be cooked in water over fire;
Then place a tube through the hole of the pot, with the other end in the mouth of the person sick, and hold it thus until the vapors enter the person;
Then cause them to sneeze, as we have said. "If the midwife acts quickly,"
And if it remains after this treatment and is not extinguished, command the maiden to moisten her left hand in oil of sesame or in gum arabic, then place it on the navel and rub the second bellybutton. And when she has found it, grasp it and stretch it little by little straight out, so that the person does not fall during extraction.
But one must move it gently to the right and left, then pull it out. If it comes out and becomes disconnected.
And if the person's mouth is narrow, we have given the treatment of sneezing and herb fumigation;
And if it is not as we have said, then guard that you do not err in bleeding.
But it is necessary that what is at the mouth of the uterus, you tie it to the thigh of the woman, then perform a vaginal irrigation with a tetrafarmacon ointment. Then she will swell and revert, and come back stronger.
But nonetheless, when it swells and there comes a bad smell to the stomach and head, then it wounds the patient. Therefore, fume incense suitable for this:
A number of the ancients have tested fumigation with watercress and dried figs.
"The shape of the instrument used for fumigation of the woman during childbirth and delivery is as follows:"
And it is similar in appearance to a dog's tail, and one places the fine point on the nature, and the wide heads over the fire;
And let the fumigation be over the charcoal embers until it is exhausted, then begin another.
Many children are born whose anus is not pierced but obstructed by some small membrane: If it must then be, that the maid shall prick him with a needle at his hand, and not with a sharp point, she should clean the thread first so as not to touch it.
Then place damp linen soaked in wine and oil on it, then apply the salve until it is healed.
"And if you suspect that it has not healed, insert a silver tube into the hole and leave it there for several days. It should be removed when the child is ready to go to its room."
And sometimes this swelling arises suddenly from a wound or abscess. If that suddenness must be covered: As we have said about the burn of boiling water.
Fistulas that arise beneath the fundament are nodular, and growths that arise near the fundament or in the space between the two buttocks indicate the presence of one fistula or more.
And when this nodulation is ancient and opens up, it oozes moist white pus or subtle bowels, and sometimes these fistulas are persistent.
And they are recognized by the fact that fluid or wind comes out during evacuation when the patient defecates, and sometimes a worm jumps out.
And there are fistulas that pierce up to the bladder, and up to half of the penis; and they reach as far as the hip joint, and as high as the nape of the neck.
And thus one recognizes a fistula piercing into the fundament, but not piercing: and it is that you place your two index fingers on the fundament, and insert a fine needle of brass or iron into the fistula when there is no twisting.
And if it has twists, then insert a thin reed or horsehair into the fistula until you feel the reed or hair with your finger.
and if you do not feel it, and nothing comes out of the hole except wind or vapor, as we have said: know that it does not pierce. if you hasten to cure [it].
"And when a fistula extends all the way to the bladder or the urethra, urine flows out of it and cannot be stopped with medications."
If it is pierced as far as the hip joint, then the reed coming from there reaches the place: If there is no twisting and the pain does not spread around, then it has left suddenly, and medication or salves are of no avail.
In these Persian fistulas there is no other cure but labor, and foolishness of those physicians who meddle with them in vain.
For that which is not Persian and not ancient, there is hope of healing by iron, as I have proven, and it is necessary for the patient to lie on their back between your hands.
And lift up his legs until his thighs are level with his belly Then place an iron tent on it, or lead if there is twisting, until you know where the tent enters.
If the patient feels it around the anus, then you must insert your two index fingers there, until you sense that the tent has pierced.
And when you feel between your fingers the sinew or flesh, know then that it is Persian. If one does not work at it, it cannot be healed.
It is said everywhere that some can indeed be healed well, but this happens rarely;
and the aid that one does there, it is to heat the fine cautery according to the width of the fistula, as it was said earlier; and insert it hot into the fistula until it reaches the base; and do this two or three times until you know that these broken parts have been burnt off, which resemble the feather of a bird;
and then rinse with damp cloths until that charred part comes off, and then apply an ointment between the skin and the wound to heal it.
If it is healed thus, all the better.
If this cannot be healed otherwise;
and if the tent enters but does not pierce all the way to the bone that is at the base, and between your two fingers and the tent there is a thick covering of flesh or fat, and you see the fistula through the covering on the heart side; If at the start of the fistula, you grab and pull forward the skin, then apply the cautery afterwards until it reaches the tip of the skin. and the skin will be relieved, and it will fall off;
then scrape away those faulty parts that resemble a bird's feather, leaving none behind.
"If the skin becomes inflamed, and cracks between you and the wound, then cauterize it with fire or strong medicine."
For the fire cautery accomplishes two things: that is to say, the burning of those attached parts, and the staunching of blood and the drying out of moisture;
then the treatment for moist skin sores with hot ashes or crushed substances until the wound gapes wide open, and the burned skin can be pulled out from the wound;
then treat the wound with solid oils that penetrate deep into the flesh, and these are dry medicines.
"For when it is thus restored, it will be healed and not return again."
"And if the fistula comes right up from the fundament but is distant from the body, push your thumb into the fundament and feel with it."
If you feel that the skin is about to burst between two stitches or sutures or flesh, where there is great danger and hope, then administer one of three methods:
When you cauterize it as we have said, or cut it down to the bottom, if you can then apply dressings and heal it as first.
And do not go too deep that you cut the tissue holding the fundament, and cause unwanted discharge. Then heal it as we have said;
Then heal it as we have said; Perhaps then it will be healed, or you remove that covering and cleanse it after it has been cut near the fundament, either with a dressing or with some other pointed instrument; Then cleanse the faulty flesh in the wound as much as you can; then strive to restore the wound and ensure the fistula remains towards the front of the fundament
then strive to restore the wound and ensure the fistula remains towards the front of the fundament so that it will be easier for the patient.
And sometimes fistulas are formed in this manner: and when you insert the dressing into the fistula and it is on the side of the fundament near the skin above, then take a pointed dressing shaped like this: "And thread two turns of thread onto it, then insert the tent all the way down to its tip into the fistula."
If it pierces through to the margin of the foundation within, then extract the thread from that hole, in such a way as you would push your finger into the foundation;
And pull out the head of the thread, and bring together the two heads, and tie one to the other, leaving it for one or two days;
And bind it several times until the threads break those excesses that are between them.
Then dress the wound until it is healed and clean.
"If the fistula does not open on its own, then make an incision in any way that you can, if it is not too deep." "For one should not cut too deeply for the sake of making a hole and then dress it as we have described until it is healed."
The shape of the spatula used for opening a fistula should be narrow, pointed, and cutting-edge; And on the other side not so, because one should not break what one should not break, as you see here:
Haemorrhoids are of two kinds Either they are inside the fundament like grains of resin and are small or large in size; there is blood present on their surface at all times, and there may be one or several, they deform the fundament and its head
But those which are displaced have little moisture, often containing a bit of yellow citrine or a bit of blood, and they have the color of flesh.
And the treatment for those which are in the fundament, so it is that you command the patient to strain while walking around rooms, until the fundament is released, and they become visible. So hurry, and take it with tongs or hold it with your fingernail, then cut it at its roots;
And if the tweezers cannot hold them due to their moisture, then take them with a cloth, or cotton, or a piece of chamois. Then pull them out with your thumbs, then cut them off, and sprinkle warm powders on them in place of cautery; Or cauterize them as it is said in the chapter on cautery, then treat them with other remedies until they are healed.
And if the fundament cannot be released, then administer a bitter and sharp enema to wash out whatever is in the fundament so that it can be released openly; If the patient grabs [it], and if the hairs are burned at their base, then the treatment is easy.
If the patient grabs [it], and if the hairs are burned at their base, then the treatment is easy. And you should grasp them with your nail or with forceps, cut them off, then cauterize them as we have said, until they are clean and the patient fears cutting by iron. If you must arrange stitching in this manner:
If you must arrange stitching in this manner: Take a twisted thread, insert it into a needle, then draw the thread up and pierce the needle from the other side, turn both ends of the thread under the needle, and thus make it wide.
And draw the thread tautly, then tie the knot, remove the needle, and do so for all others, leaving one for checking excess blood.
Then place on the wound a moist cloth soaked in rose oil or wax, and cover it, instructing the patient to rest.
And leave it thus until they fall off, and when they have fallen off, treat them with ointment and other treatments until they are healed.
"on the drying of fistulas in the fundament" "Sometimes there is a drying up of fistulas in the intestines due to constriction of nature, and when the disease is old and medicine no longer helps;" If you must scrape off with a scalpel's tip or your nail the scab above it that moisture does not remain. then dress it until it becomes firm as is fitting;
and if it cannot become firm, then resume scraping more forcefully than before, until much blood flows and the flesh is scraped raw. then dress it until it becomes clean.
fever Formice (formication) is a small apparition that occurs before the body and goes very deep;
and sometimes it finds the limbs cold, with a sensation like deathly trembling, spreading throughout the whole body, especially in the hands more than other parts.
And the treatment is that you take a quill from an eagle's wing or a strong owl's feather, and place this feather on the trembling spot until the circle formed around it becomes red. then twist your hand around the entire feather until you encompass the trembling spot completely and drive it deep within, crushing its roots.
"And if you see this, do so with a cane of brass or iron according to this form, and let it be thin underneath and pointed above:" Does not pierce, to keep movement steady, and presses on the two sides.
And if you see, cauterize around the trembling, as it is written in the chapter of cauteries
Sometimes, one performs an enema with silver or lead, or molten brass or copper;
and sometimes these instruments are made small and large according to those for whom they are intended. "Therefore, those that should be used in the treatment of children and those who are weak and painful are small."
"Therefore, those that should be used in the treatment of children and those who are weak and painful are small." "The form of the small and large enema is as follows, where the belly is tied according to this manner:"
And if there is a constriction or the belly is bound up, as you see, and the bowels are pierced within;
and on one side there are two holes, and on the other one.
And the belly should be filled with medicines in a beast's bladder or parchment, and pierced all around with small holes, and between each hole there should be one finger's width of space, then insert strong threads of coarse yarn twisted in an X shape or wound around, and gather up the belly like a goat. And when the medicine is inside, tie it to the instrument beforehand with a strong thread, then cauterize.
and this is the shape of the circle:
And let the medicine not be too hot nor too cold, and grease the end of the cautery with oil or egg yolk, or something similar, then insert it gently; Then the minister presses with both hands together until it is all flat, then extracts the cautery, and the patient raises their legs to the side, and if the medicine wants to come out, let it come as much as it can; And if he spends a night entirely undisturbed, it is greater aid.
"And if you perform an enema on someone with diarrhea and the medication comes out quickly, then start it again until it is finished."
And if the hemorrhoids are at the fundament or in an abscess, let the cautery be as fine as for a child;
And this is the shape of the fine cautery on which the skin should be stretched:
We have already spoken in the division about the treatment of wounds;
I shall tell you the treatments for hands and medicines according to their completion.
"I say that wounds are diverse according to how they are made, and according to where the wounds are made, and what they are made from."
The things by which wounds are made are by striking with stone, cutting with sword and knife or lance, club or arrow, or similar things;
or wounds made according to the parts of the body, such as a wound that falls on the neck, head, thigh, belly, liver, and similar members;
And I will tell you the treatment for each wound, starting with simple head wounds, as memory will come in its chapter.
I say that when a simple wound comes to the head and the bone is not broken, take care if it was caused by striking with stone or similar things, and if the skin is completely torn and the wound is large, then you greatly doubt the formation of a hot abscess then quickly wash it with cold water from the head itself if there is little blood coming from the wound, and let the washing be contrary to the direction of the wound;
And when the patient has emptied themselves of wine and heavy foods.
And if he does not want to fast, then let his food be made smaller, and let him drink no wine nor eat meat.
and place upon the wound, if an abscess forms, cotton moistened in rose oil alone, or in astringent wine;
And if there is no hot abscess, then place over the wound, if it is fresh and full of blood and not moved by air, powder which I will describe later.
And if the air has moved it, then place on it some ointments until it is healed.
"And if the wound is large, like a cut from a sword or similar objects, and the lips cannot be brought together by force, then bring them together by stitching, as I will tell you about in the treatment of abdominal wounds."
If the wound is exposed to the bone and gaping, and hangs only by a little, cut it off; then heal the wound with medicines, and replace hard flesh in place of skin, and order the patient to eat heavy foods, such as testicles and cooked wheat, also poultry and similar things.
And if you find rottenness on the hide, but it hasn't reached the bone, cut away all the rotted part, and burn it with fire, then treat (the wound).
And if there is an artery in the wound or vein that does not stop bleeding without a bandage, and it cannot be staunched by medications, then seek the artery; and if you find it dislocated, tie it with a thread. And if this does not help at all, cauterize it.
And if these wounds are small and simple, then the treatment is easy: and it is that you put in this powder which seals before the wound moves.
And the way to make the powder is: Take incense one part; Dragon's blood two parts; Grind it finely and fill the wound, and bind it tightly until it adheres well and joins with all its blood;
And then tie it securely, and leave it unbound unless it swells. Because one does not remove medicine until it is healthy again.
"Sometimes this can also be done with quicklime alone when incense and dragon's blood are not available, but only if the air has not moved the wound."
And if the wound has moved, especially in summer, do not apply this powder to it
Instead, apply some digested oils or poultices made from barley flour and water and honey until it softens then treat with other treatments until it is healed
And if a bone fracture accompanies the wound and it is small, remove it with fine forceps
I will tell you about head fractures later
"Of the wound on the neck"
"If a wound comes to the neck and it is simple, there is no difference between it and one on the head, except when the nerve of the neck or an artery is cut."
If it is the nerves, there is no other remedy than to leave them alone and not apply anything constricting, for they harm the nerves and cause them to retreat and do not apply anything cold to the wound, for the substance of the nerves is cold, and their connection is with the brain, which is the highest member
But let the medicine be warm, such as warm water mixed with honey and rose oil, and cooked in soft water, and other mineral stones according to this method, and moist poultices
"And if the wound is large, then stitch it up with thread and bind it with bandages until it heals."
And if wounds are deep and full of bowels, pierce it below or lower.
If the artery is cut, and blood flows copiously, tie it off, ligate it, and cauterize it if necessary.
If the spine of the neck or heart is cut, and the vessels are preserved through which blood flows, then sew the heart to the windpipe, and do not touch the throat but reset it according to its natural shape. Then bind it tightly and leave it for a few days, then treat it with healing ointments until it is completely healed.
If the wound has impressed upon the bone, scrape it away. If there are bone fragments, remove them all if you can; those that you cannot have, let the wound fester and drain, then ligate the opening.
If the wound is fresh, sprinkle it with the powder I mentioned. "And if there are bones in the wound and there is a fistula, cure it as I have said in its chapter."
If it is a blow from a lance or knife, and the wound is deep, then observe whether wind enters the wound whenever the patient breathes. you will know then that the wound is mortal;
and if it is not deep and the blood is fresh throughout, do not apply powder to it at first nor bind it tightly lest the blood retreat inwardly toward the heart and kill the patient; but apply an attractive ointment to it, binding it twice a day;
and if you have no ointment, place old cotton in the wound to suck out moisture, and make the patient sleep on the wound for three days, or four, or more. Otherwise, no spasm will come nor harmful trembling of the heart will occur; and when you see good signs, then know that the wound is saved. Then treat it with compresses and other treatments until it is healed;
And if it cannot heal nor open, know that there is a fistula present.
If the treatment is as it should be. And if the wound is from a sword or knife cut, and is simple, or worse on the back, then treat that which is in front. If it is large, stitch it.
And if it is small, powder it, and if it is close to the bone and has cut pieces, then search the wound, and treat the edges if they are separated. And if they are not separated, then let the wound suppurate, so that the extraction will be easier.
And for other wounds on other limbs, the judgment is as we have said.
"Regarding rupture of the abdomen"
The rupture of the abdomen is great, medium, and small.
From a large wound sometimes the intestines or the nerve of the intestines leap out, which causes their intrusion.
And stitching is more difficult, and sometimes a small wound is worse than a large one because it is harder to push the intestines back in unless they are put back piece by piece.
Because the intestines swell quickly when they feel cold, drawing in more points, and therefore it is worth moving the wound, so that one can reset the intestines to their place along with the others.
And know that there are four ways to perform an abdominal incision:
The two common sutures occur in the abdomen suture, and the suture of other wounds on the body has two more common sutures that are shared by other wounds;
However, these sutures are most suitable for the abdomen, and I will describe each one and explain them.
I say that when the wound is small, and nothing of the intestines has been exposed, and there is no need for anything else, it should be done in one of two ways: either because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestines are swollen due to cold.
And when it is cold, warm it in this manner: Moisten an sponge or the soft cloth in boiling water alone, or cook in water with vinegar and cumin and spices, and rinse the intestines until the swelling is gone;
And sometimes doing this wine constricting, it is useful to wash wounds for reducing inflammation.
And when you see the swelling diminish, then moisten the intestines with water or ale and malt, for by this means the entrance is eased somewhat;
And if it cannot enter, then make a small cut in the wound with the instrument used to tie off hemorrhoids;
And the first treatment is useful that the surgeon, that no one should cut without great necessity.
And this is the instrument for splitting it:
So cut inside in the curve and do not deviate, and see here the shape: And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestines protrude outwards, then put them back according to their natural shape in their proper place, if you have the power, for this is useful.
When the wound is wide and it is in the lower part under the belly, then you must make the patient lie on their back and place their legs higher than their head; And if it is in the lower abdomen part, raise the head and breast higher than the lower parts; similarly, if the intestine rupture is on one of the two sides, place attention so that the wounded part is higher than the other.
And thus you must arrange what I say for both large and medium wounds.
In small wounds, put on what you are equipped with, then place your hands gently around the wound and draw together its lips.
And this is the common manner of suturing: take one or more needles according to the size of the wound's width, then leave two spaces from the wound's beginning, and insert a needle with good strong thread. And pierce the two ends of the skin with the two ends of the sinew which is beneath the skin inside, until you have pierced it on that side, and bring together the two ends of the sinew in four places.
Then tie a doubled thread around the needle of two parts, then bring together the two heads of the wound gently, and then leave two spaces apart, and insert another needle.
Then tie the thread knot as you did with the first needle, and continue doing so according to how many needles you need until the entire wound is closed.
And let the needles be medium-sized, between fine and coarse; for too fine needles cut all the flesh, and too thick ones cannot enter properly. Therefore they must be of medium size.
And do not push the needles too deep into the flesh and skin, lest they cut and reopen the wound before it can heal.
Then cut the heads of the needles so they do not bother the patient while sleeping, and place small bandages or dressings on the needle heads to keep them in place until the wound is healed.
And this manner of stitching with needles is more suitable for small wounds, where one or two needles suffice.
The second stitch is common; you should bring together the two edges of the skin and the two edges of the flesh with one needle having a medium-strength thread.
And once you have pierced these edges all together with the needle, then bring the needle back to the beginning of the stitch, in the manner one sews cloth.
Space each stitch apart by the thickness of a barleycorn;
This stitch saves lives; I once sewed a wound in the belly of a man who was stabbed with a knife. The wound was over a palm's length wide and the bowels protruded by two palms' lengths.
I reset the intestines for him after he had been feverish for 24 hours, and the wound healed up to the 15th day, which I cleaned, and it was healthy.
And the physicians had judged that he would die, but it was a miracle;
I did not treat him with ointments because there were none available in the place where I was. Apply cotton wool twice a day to the wound and rinse it with honey water until it is clean.
I will tell you the two proper methods of suturing:
Take the needle and insert it from the outer part to the inner one;
When it has pierced the flesh straight through, then attach the head of the thread or the skin where you have inserted the needle, and make it pierce elsewhere from inside out;
And the purpose of this suture is that you should sew like a tanner sews leather, leaving the thread once on one side and taking it up again on the other until the entire suture is complete.
The second method of suturing, which Galen considers proper, is this: some people join the two parts naturally together and apply one end of the thread to the other in such a manner:
Stick a needle near the head of the liver, and pierce that spot alone, leaving both ends of the spleen untouched. Then twist the needle and make it pierce from the outer part inward toward the spleen's two heads.
Then pierce both of them from the outer part inward toward the liver's two other heads that are on the opposite side.
And this is the usual way to cauterize and the most common one.
According to Galen, it is said that one should sew up the belly with two needles, each having thread on it.
And one needle should be inserted from one side and the other from the other, in the manner of those who stitch hides.
Know that when the intestine is inside the belly, the stitching is more difficult than in other parts of the abdomen.
The judgment of this wound is like the judgment of other wounds:
And it is necessary that when you find the wound fresh with all its blood, before the art has moved it, then put back the intestine and sew up the cut.
Then place powder around the flesh, and if the wound has moved, apply some ointment that is available, until the wound bows. And draw the thread tight, and let the lips of the wound be sewn together, and the skin. Then treat the wound like the others until it is healed.
And if you do not have medicine, then apply old cotton as soon as the wound begins to ooze, and move it twice a day until it is healed.
For in many cases where wounds are simple, no other medicine is needed;
And if you doubt that the wound will not communicate with the main limbs, it is necessary to wet light linen in warm oil of roses or rose oil, and place it around the angles and under the armpits;
If he feels pain or corruption in his bowels, and this happens often, then perform black wine enemas. Moreover, if the corruption reaches the intestines,
And if it pierces inside, know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small one.
The intestines called "jejunum" cannot heal when wounded due to the thinness of their vessels and the delicacy of the entire body, as well as its similarity in nature to nerves.
If the worm jumps out of the wound, push it back in like the intestines while it is fresh;
And if it is old and has become worms or black, then tie the place that is black so that no blood flows there, because there are veins and arteries.
Then cut what is between the tie, and put two heads of a knife dangling from the part below the wound until it reaches out to aid in extracting when the worms fall, and the wound opens.
from dislocation of the eyeball
When the intestines are torn, and the wound is small, it can sometimes be restored in some people; for example, I saw a man pierced in the belly with a spear,
And the wound was on the right side of the stomach, it was invaded and became a fistula, and excretion and wind escaped through it.
I applied treatment according to what I could, and did not cease to probe until it was clean, and the area bound up.
And when I saw him healed, I doubted that the patient might have some ailment in his belly; But there was no illness, he remained in better condition, eating and drinking.
And some experts said that when one has a small wound in the intestine, it must be tied in this manner: Take large leeches, then bring together the lips of the wound, and when the leech has opened its mouth, place it on both lips so that it sucks there;
And then cut off its head, and this holds so that it cannot detach itself, then place another leech afterward in the same manner as before, until the wound is entirely covered. and cut the wound.
If such a stone enters the intestines and causes no harm to the patient, then one can tie the intestines with a fine thread made from the gut of an animal, like this:
Take the head of this gut thread that is well scraped, and then tie at the head of this gut a thin twisted linen thread; then put the thread through the needle and stitch the intestine, and reset it in its place.
and this manner of sewing with threads is not used except according to the way of trust and hope;
And if the wound is large and wide, especially when it is in one of the small intestines, then there is no device nor health except for subtlety.
"of fistula wherever it may be" Know this: any wound or abscess that becomes hollow is universally called a 'fistula,' and likewise when it swells and contracts.
And a fistula is according to truth a hard and white node that is not painful, and it is also shaped like the feather of a bird;
And sometimes in clear jump bow, and other times thick. Sometimes small, and other times enough.
And I have spoken of this in the division of wounds, that any wound which is not clean and has no flesh, only appears as one of the nine causes: That is to say, by the smallness of blood or body; Or because of its wickedness; Or because there is hard flesh inside and on the lips that does not allow flesh to grow. Or where there is too much bow. Or where the place is porous, and the matter is of poor quality; Or where the medicine used in the treatment is not good; Or because the corruption is a type of pestilence; Or because the property in the region has delayed digestion and delayed healing, and is naturally inflamed. Or where there are veins or bones:
And I have already shown all these causes, signs, and medicinal remedies in the division.
"Now I must tell you about the treatment of fistula which is done by manual work."
Know that a fistula occurs in all members of the body for there are fistulas that come from large veins and arteries, and nerves, either in the face or in the intestines, or in the bladder, or near some of the ribs, or in the spinal cord of the back, or at any joint of the hands or feet and some come to the property of the main member and similar places
And all fistulas that are of this kind are difficult to heal, and there is nothing but labor and ignorance
And if there is any fistula that does not reach the place I have mentioned, and you are confident about its cure and recognize it, then take a tent of brass or iron, if the fistula is straight, and seek it
And if the fistula is twisted, search for it with a subtle tent of lead, for lead bends more around the twist
And if the fistula has many holes and you cannot search it well by touches, then cleanse it through one of the holes, for moisture flows quickly from one hole to another, and cleanses it.
Then search for blood as much as you can, so that you know if there is bone or nerve, and how deep it is. Ask the patient well about the pain they feel when pressed by your hand, and where they feel it.
And once you truly know where it is, and if it's far from a joint, or nerve, artery, vein, or in any of the places I've told you, then cut according to what I've said. Remove the furthest layer and the rotten flesh that is inside.
Then treat it until it is healed. And if the fistula is very deep in its proper place, then cut as deeply as you can. Then put moistened cloths soaked in hot water and vinegar at the mouth of the fistula until the medicine corrodes the excess that remains at the bottom.
And then I place compresses of healthy flesh until it is healed
And if it does not heal by this method, cauterize it as we have said, and if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, cut it.
If vein or nerve does not trouble you in the main limbs, as we have said;
And if the bone is exposed and there is corruption and blackness, then wash until all corruption is removed, then dress with compresses of healthy flesh until it heals.
And if it does not heal, and returns again as before, know that you have not yet reached the source:
So uncover and search until you reach the bottom, remove all corruption, then replace it in its proper place.
And if it is healed thus, that's good. If not, know that the corruption is too deep to reach. So there is no other remedy but to leave it to nature.
And if there is a small broken bone, and you can grasp it with tongs, then remove it using the appropriate tool; but if there are many bones, pull them all out together, leaving none behind.
And if moisture opposes you, and there is no error or fear, then cut away the moisture and flesh, and expose the bones.
And if you cannot remove them within an hour, then place something irritating to corruption on the wound, and let it remain until the surrounding flesh is corrupted; and then the bones will come out more easily.
And if it's a large bone, like those of the leg or thigh, then remove only the corruption until all the blackness is gone; then dress the wound.
And if there is much corruption, and it reaches even to the bone, So it must be cut away entirely down to the corruption, then treated until it heals solid.
And I will tell you of a fistula which happened to a man in his leg, so that you may take example and help in your work.
A young man of about 30 years suffered pain in his leg due to an internal cause that brought matter into the limb, causing a large swelling without apparent reason for opening.
Yet the physicians, through their foolishness, operated so much on the swelling that it opened, and there flowed out much matter, becoming a fistula with many openings that poured forth wind and moisture from the body.
And many physicians tried to treat it for about two years, but none were skilled in the art of hands, so I was called and saw his leg and the remedies with which they had treated him, and what flowed out through the openings was great. And the young man's body became red, and he had a yellowish hue.
I pitched a tent in one of these holes, and then sought all the holes, and found that one came against another from all parts of the leg.
I therefore hurried and cut into one of the openings until I discovered a part of the bone, which was decayed and perforated, and corruption had reached the bone within.
I saw what appeared to me of the decayed bone, and thought that there was no other decay besides that which I removed.
And I began to heal the wound with soothing medicines for a long time, but it would not close.
Then I began again, and uncovered the bone as before, and found that the decay had continued in the bone, which I scraped out, and then removed it, and tried to close the space. But even so, I could not close more than half a palm's width of the bone, and scraped it away entirely, then restored it with medicines. And it was soon healed and closed, but there was still no need to resume the operation except for the weakness of the patient who could not endure it, and out of fear of death that I had of him. Because often blood was evacuated, but he became entirely healthy, and in place of the bone, hard flesh grew, and it was of good condition and had no harm or opposite at all, neither in going nor coming.
And if the bone is broken in any part of the body, it should be treated in this manner: Take the lien, and stretch it over the head of the bone that opens, and command him to extend it upwards; And place another lien of thick linen over the first lien, and tie it above the flesh that is over the bone; stretch the head so that you pull out the corrupted flesh below, and uncover the flesh on the spot where you wish to perform the cautery, so that the heat does not blister the flesh.
And place a truss or a spoon underneath the bone to move away the corrupted flesh;
And it should be done until one can see and feel the corruption, and then once again.
And if the bone is corrupted and does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or on one side; uncover all the flesh.
Then place a truss underneath, and then cauterize from one side of the corruption to the other; the length of the cautery should be equal to the length of the corruption as we have said.
And if corruption is in the joint, cut off the corrupted joint, even the bone that contains it on the other side;
And if corruption is between two joints, there is no other option but to cut.
And if corruption is at the wrist of the hand or foot, it is very serious, but nonetheless you must examine this corruption and how it appears. And cleanse it in every way that you can, but avoid cutting veins or nerves.
And know that the blades and saws for cutting these bones are many, according to the position of the bones and their appearance, and their thickness and fineness, and their length and shortness, and their hardness; And therefore one must prepare an appropriate tool for each type of operation.
And know that the work will show you which tool you need, according to your knowledge of this art and the evidence of the disease's nature; If you consider the instrument with which you have need according to what is necessary.
The head rots either due to an internal cause or a lack of force;
And when you have treated that corruption with medicines but they do not help, then it is necessary to cut off the limb up to where the corruption reaches so that the patient escapes death or the greater harm of the loss of the limb;
And the sign is that the limb becomes black as if burned by fire, and afterwards the corruption spreads from limb to limb, and then it takes over the whole body;
So hurry to cut off, and if it is due to the sting of venomous beasts like the sea scorpion or snake etc., if the corruption reaches the elbow joint then cut it off but do not allow it to reach the hand.
And if it comes to the hand, cut it at the joint so that the corruption does not come to the arm;
And if it comes to the arm, then cut at the elbow;
And if it passes the elbow, it's death, and there is no benefit in applying external remedies however great their virtue.
And likewise when corruption comes to the foot: If it comes to the first joint, cut after the next joint;
and if it comes to the foot, cut off the whole foot. And if it ascends into the leg, cut at the knee joint
And if it reaches above the knee, there is no other remedy than to let the patient die.
And the manner of cutting off or cauterizing the limb is thus: you tie it above and below, and stretch one servant downwards from one tie, and another upwards from the other tie; and cut open the flesh that lies between the two ties with a broad spatula until the bone is exposed.
Then cut or cauterize it, and place a linen cloth on each side so that the cautery does not touch the healthy flesh, and the patient receives no other injury or abscess.
And if bleeding begins when you operate, then cauterize the location promptly, where you apply some constricting powders.
Then return to your treatment until it is completed, then bind the wounded limb with a suitable bandage, and care for it until it is healed.
And I shall tell you what happened in Rome once:
A blackness appeared on him that seemed burned by fire, and this corruption first came upon his right foot, spreading to consume the whole foot;
And when the man saw the corruption, he quickly covered his foot, and it was healed.
And many years later the corruption returned to his left hand, and he came to me; after cleansing his body I applied caustic substances, but still the corrosion could not stop.
And it seemed that I should cut off his hand, but I did not want to do so, having hope that we might drive out the matter; And I also doubted whether if I cut his hand he would die, for the virtue of the man was weak.
And he despaired entirely and returned to his land, and hastened to have his hand amputated, and he became healthy.
And I only recount this so that others may know how to act if such need arises.
Sometimes an abscess forms in the flesh and stays so long that it collects a great mass of pus; And then it becomes red and bursts open, and the pus jumps out, and the spot remains empty like an empty vessel; And the skin above it is as thin as stretched fabric, and it does not extend to the bone or the nerve, and such a disease is called "sound," and is not called "fistula.
But if it extends so far that it reaches the bone deeply, then it is called a "fistula
And it is fitting for you to cut that skin all around, especially if it is thin, just like a piece of cloth. and let it not be worried about its corruption.
And if you believe that the skin may decay and corruption is not deep, but the skin is thick with flesh, then perform a clyster thus:
look if the breast is large and the belly that it enters has a foul odor, then perform a clyster with Egyptian medicine made thus: Take equal amounts of aloe and oil, and litharge, and cook them together in a vessel over the fire until the medicine becomes red and thick like honey.
And then take as much of it as you need, and mix it with water or honey, and administer it through a clyster, closing the hole tightly. and let the medicine remain there for two hours, then remove it by squeezing gently.
Do this many times until the breast is bandaged and the pus is removed.
and sometimes you should use a warm water enema made from vine ash, especially when this medicine is not present; you should take ashes of burnt grapevine wood and pour boiling water over them, then sift it and use it as an enema until you know that the breast is well cleansed.
And if the patient cannot tolerate it, neither the Egyptian medicine nor the water made from ashes, then use a warm water and honey enema with a bit of powdered lead. Or you can use an enema made from honey and mixed wine, so that the honey has properties to cleanse and wash, and the wine makes the blood thin.
And once you have done this and you are confident that the breast is well cleansed, then use an enema made from a substance that causes flesh to grow there; take diaphoretic plaster and mix it with rose oil and wine.
When you apply the enema of certain medications and ointments, whose properties I have mentioned when discussing ointments;
And if the opening of the anus is small and the tube of the enema cannot enter it, then widen it a little with an iron tool, and insert a wick of Egyptian ointment or basilicon ointment until it is widened enough.
And if the wound is too wide, then leave only enough skin to allow the enema tube to enter, and if the opening of the bowels that excrete faces is above, cut it lower or at its current level.
And if you cannot reach the bottom of the wound as you wish, then prepare it in such a way that the intestines lie at their lowest point, for when the intestines are deep within, leave flesh behind there. And if you cannot reach the bottom of the wound as you wish If the bow moves too easily downward, do not leave anything on the bowstring.
If the bow moves too easily downward, do not leave anything on the bowstring. Take medicines that solidify to apply on the skin, and press them with a linen cloth covering the whole wound; Then cut as deeply as possible around the hole in the skin about an inch wide; then apply a gentle ointment on another cloth according to the size of the wound, and place it on the wound to relieve the bowstring's tension. Do not remove the outer large cloth until after many days once.
The one on the wound's hole should often remove it to remove the bowstring, and know what flows from the bowstring whether it is venomous or little or much, digested or undigested.
And watch out if the patient feels pain or numbness, and if there is an abscess or not. When your medicine has spread in this way and you see what comes out of the wound's hole, then know that the chest is already healed, and approach the healing.
And then you loosen it in the morning or on the third day, and when you open the wound, change the other bandage and renew the ointment.
And if subtle poisons come after a long time, do not despair of health, for recovery is near.
For there are people whose wounds heal slowly with flesh, and others who do the opposite;
And if undigested food jumps from the stomach after many days, know that the stomach is not empty;
And if the stomach is slow to empty and is distant, apply drying medicines in substance and power, such as diaphoretic ointments, for there is much vitriol in them, and this is the last medicine;
Take diaphoretic ointment, and it is made with rose oil, and rose petals equal in weight;
Then mix it together and use it.
And if diaphoretic ointment is not present, you can also make it better by cooking honey and increasing its size, or take myrrh and aloe and incense, grind them, and powder them onto the honey while it is on the fire;
And then apply a bandage made of drapery; let it lie upon the breast, and sometimes administer a long aristolochia, and roots of blue lily, which is also like flour of barley and centory. And in using simples or compounds: Grind them and make powder, and put upon the honey that I have mentioned, and use it.
And if the wound is prolonged, and not healed by this treatment, know that corruption has gone deep, causing impression on the bone, or in hard members, or in ligaments. If it is the cure for a fistula, as we have said before.
Panarice is an abscess that arises under the nail of the little finger of the hand or foot, or sometimes arises in other toes.
And when it is elderly and not cared for, then a hot abscess comes, and they run and tear so much that they reach the root of the nail, sometimes tearing it all.
Rust spreads to the bone, causing foul-smelling pain; the skin becomes doubly wide, and turns yellowish.
If you treat it as we have said in the section above and yet the treatment does not help, then you must cut away with iron all the excess that remains of the nail, after which cauterize the wound. The cautery is greatly beneficial if the bone is healthy, and the nail is sound;
And if the nail presses into the flesh and begins to prick and cause a blister, you must place the point of a knife under the nail that is piercing the flesh, lift it up, and carefully scrape away the affected skin, then apply burning and corrosive medicines to the remaining flesh to remove all [of the affliction]. Then apply dressings until it is healed.
If the corruption has reached the bone, cut it away and burn it out, for as long as the corrupted bone remains, healing cannot occur;
And if you see that both [joints] are corrupting, cut them off with a knife as was mentioned earlier, then treat them until they are healed;
If he is struck, bruised, and feels great pain, then you must clean it first;
Then cut the nail of the big toe in a crosswise direction and make sure that the cut does not reach the flesh underneath the nail, as this would cause great pain to the patient;
And if it happens, then put something on it that soothes.
Some people are sometimes born with both hands completely fleshy, and sometimes there is bone in them, and sometimes there is a nail, and some are born at the root of the joint, where the birth is in certain fingers.
Those born with a bent little toe do not move, and those born at the joint of the little toe may move occasionally;
The cut in those that are fleshy is easy, as follows: Cut it off at its root with a broad knife.
Those born at the root of the joint are difficult to treat; So hold while cutting.
In one who is born deaf or becomes deaf later on, you should first cut the flesh around the bone all the way to the bone, then cut the bone with an appropriate saw, and then polish it until it is smooth.
The sinews that come together at the two joints come by birth, or by the union of a wound, or by burning with fire, or by similar things.
You must cut off that swelling so that the little toes return to their natural shape; Then place between two bandages or moistened cloths soaked in rose oil so they do not swell again; Place two thin pieces of lead between them until the joint is soundly fixed.
If swelling occurs on either side with the palm, scrape away this scurf as needed.
The veins are large, engorged tubes full of melancholic impurities that come from various parts of the body.
And this happens more often in legs of those who walk and work and carry things than in others.
Therefore you should administer to him a laxative for the colon, and then the holy water of the basilica.
There are two ways to perform the iron cure: One is by pricking it with a cautery and drawing out the black blood; The other way is to raise the vein and draw all of its blood.
The incision should be made in this manner: First, wash the leg with hot water very thoroughly until the thick blood is thinned out, then press the leg of the patient from above the hip down to just below the knee;
then make one incision in the vein where it is most prominent, using a wide cut, then squeeze and draw out as much of the black blood by hand from one end to the other until the patient can no longer tolerate it;
And then the ulcer, command him to anoint with fats from the innards of a black pig;
And recommence evacuation and cleansing when the veins are full, harming the patient.
The raising of him is in this manner: Rise the leg of the patient, if there is much hair, then place it in a bath, and raise the leg with warm water until it becomes red, and the veins swell;
and if you have no bath, heat it by fire, and then cut at the vein near the long tendon at the top of the knee, or in the part below the ankle;
then open the skin with an awl, and strip the vein from each side until it becomes visible when touched;
And you see it red and black, and when it enters the skin it appears like a white cord.
Then place the tweezers beneath it until it is lifted from the skin, and then cut it lightly with an awl, then cut in another place three inches further.
Then scrape the skin over the vein until it appears, then lift it up with a razor, as you have done, and press it onto another sinew, as you had done first;
Then cut another incision, or several if needed, then lift it and cut at the two sides of the foot, then draw it out and lift up to the second incision.
Then extract it from incision to incision until it all comes out, then cut it.
And if you cannot draw it out and lift it, then insert a needle with strong doubled thread, tie it and draw it out, place it under the skin, and twist your hand back and forth until it comes out. And make sure it doesn't cut, because if it cuts, you cannot draw it out or lift it, which causes harm to the patient.
And when you have completely treated it, then place wet wool soaked in wine and rose oil over the wound site; And keep treating him until he is healed.
If the vein is constricted and twisted and wrapped around itself, and it is not straight as we have said, then you must cut it crookedly, but do not sever it completely. And treat it as we have said before.
The shape of the iron tool used to cut a vein is curved, and it does not sever the vein.
And its curve should be large, because if it were thin, it would cut into the vein; but it should be thick as we have said. Here is its shape:
This vein runs through the legs, in warm regions where no herbs or trees grow, and in dry land with no moisture.
And sometimes it may appear elsewhere than on the legs, such as when rot occurs under the skin, like how worms and leeches move between skin and flesh.
And if the sign of the beginning of this vein is that there comes a very great inflammation in the leg, then the place changes, and the vein begins to protrude outward like the root of a plant.
When the vein opens, you must wrap a piece of lead around it, from one and a half to two fingers wide, and tie it; leave the lead hanging on the leg. Every time blood flows out, wrap the lead around it and tie it.
And if it is too long, cut off a portion of it, wrap up the remaining part, but do not cut it at its root so that it remains intact. For if you cut it, it will enter into the flesh and cause an abscess and rottenness in that place, and evil disease;
So therefore it must be treated little by little until its end, and nothing of it should remain on the body;
And sometimes this vein can be treated with the palms of the hands, measuring 12 or 18 inches, and a man once came to me whose had measured 18 inches long; but when you cut it, insert an iron rod into its opening, pierce it right through until all is out.
And let the matter that is inside be emptied, and apply healing medicines at the place every few days, then treat it as you would an abscess.
And sometimes this vein has many branches, especially when it opens at the joint of the foot or in the foot, and there are many openings from which blood flows;
Treat it then as we have said earlier.
of worms that are born between skin and flesh This disease is called in our land 'cattle disease', because it often happens to oxen, and is a small worm that is born between skin and flesh, which travels throughout the body moving up and down; one feels it well when it goes from limb to limb, until it reaches the skin where it goes, and leaves behind.
And is caused by putrefaction of certain humours, such as worms, serpents, and roundworms and ascarids in the belly.
And there is doubt about its severity, for when it travels through the body and reaches the head, sometimes it enters the eye and destroys it. This happens frequently.
When you see it being treated or pulled out, one can only do so when it is moving:
Therefore, tie the place above and below with a strong, tight bandage, then cut it open and pull out the worm; if the worm is deeply embedded in the flesh and you cannot find it, cauterize the area with fire until it dies.
And the greatest harm that it causes is that it corrupts the eye, as we have said.
And if you see it coming near the head of the eye, press down firmly under the eyebrow, then cut across, and cauterize.
And the patient should use cleansing of body with dissolving medicines for harmful humors, and avoid eating rotten foods.
From pain caused by windiness This illness is called in our land 'vakkhir', and it is a pain that comes to certain limbs, which then moves from limb to limb;
And I have seen what I am telling you. I was called to a sick woman, and she showed me her arm, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of her arm;
And shortly afterward, it moved like a worm up to the shoulder faster than anything else, just as quicksilver moves from one place to another.
The pain then left that spot and lodged in the shoulder, and afterward it quickly spread throughout the body until it reached the other arm;
Then she told me that she would turn around again around her body as I saw.
"I was greatly amazed at how she moved from limb to limb in this way, for I had never seen this disease manifest itself like this before." Nevertheless, I had wanted many times before that she might want to move from one place to another without pain, but I had not seen this in the woman.
And I thought that it was because the woman had a dry body and visible veins, and therefore this constrained windiness appeared;
and there is no apparent reason for this in those who are delicate and have moist bodies and concealed veins.
And when you see this disease being cured, and the patient feels that pain which we have described, then quickly apply plaster above and below it, and then cut until that constrained windiness escapes its place; and cauterize the location;
If you do not see it with your own eyes, then treat it with remedies that expel windiness, such as fetid pills and pills of senna, and similar others.
"The causes of hiccups are varied according to their appearances and the parts of the body where they occur."
The varieties of them are such that there are those which have large points, and small ones, hairy and smooth. And there are some with two angles, others with lengths, and still others in fragments.
And those that fall onto any limb do so in one of two ways: Either it falls on principal limbs, such as the brain, heart, liver, lung, kidney, intestines, bladder, and similar members. When it falls into any location on these limbs, the signs of death that I will tell you about appear: So you should beware of extracting this arrow, for afterwards many deaths occur. And if this evil sign does not appear to you, and the arrow is not embedded deeply, then pull it out and treat the wound.
And the sign of an arrow striking the brain is when it pierces the bone and bursts the fontanelle above the brain; this includes sudden and severe headache, dimming of vision with redness in the eyes, inflammation and redness of the tongue, spasms, loss of consciousness, vomiting of bile, And perhaps without force from the nostrils, or ears; And perhaps loses speech and voice And there may be moist white discharge like poultry's blood, which also burns like raw flesh;
Should this sign appear to you, take care, and remove the arrow if it is not embedded.
The signs of an arrow hitting the heart are that it is near the left nipple, and feels as if it were stuck in something hard, not empty; And perhaps the arrow moves like poultry, and black blood comes out, accompanied by coldness and cold sweat, and fainting; Then you may be sure that the man will die.
"The sign of hiccups that occur near the lung is when foamless sputum suddenly comes from the wound; the throat swells up and the patient changes color, sighs loudly, and seeks cold air."
And if the arrow hits the lung's covering, it is near the ribs; and causes great pain and sorrowful sighing; and all the shoulder joints move.
"And if hiccups occur in the stomach, sometimes undigested meat comes out from the wound."
"And if hiccups occur in the belly and blood flows through the intestines suddenly, there is no hope of recovery or extraction of the hiccup."
And if the arrow hits the bladder, urine comes out and there is defecation, and the patient feels intense pain; Know that wounds are deadly.
"Other limbs, such as the face, neck, throat, shoulder, auxiliary muscles, spinal column, buttocks, thighs, and legs, etc., are safe according to many conditions." "When hiccups occur in a nerve or artery and are not venomous, as I will tell you happened to me so that you may do the same."
It happened at a man's house where an arrow fell into the root of his nose I tried it and drew it out on the other side under the ear's fat without causing harm
And at another time I drew out an arrow that had fallen into the fat of the eye under its lid, and the arrow was barbed so that only its tip could be reached towards the wood, and it was large like a Turkish bow, all iron light without ears;
The wound healed without any bad consequences.
And drew out an arrow from the throat of a Christian; the arrow was Arab, with ears;
I cut the barbs and teased it out until I drew it out, and the Christian healed.
And drew out an arrow from a man who had fallen into his belly, thinking that he would die;
And then, after passing thirty days, his condition did not change. I cut on the arrow, pierced it, and pulled it out with fire; there was no bad outcome.
And if you see a man onto whom an arrow has fallen on his back, and the wound is closed over;
and the arrow remained within him, and did not change its natural state nor cause harm to any of his natural works.
And see another man onto whom an arrow fell on his face, and the wound was closed; and remained thus without suffering great pain;
And many others like this.
And pulled out an arrow from the neck of one of the king's servants, which had fallen into his throat and was slightly leaning towards the right side; and the arrow was entirely buried.
I was called for treatment three days after it had fallen. I found the wound very narrow.
I sought it with all subtlety and did not feel it at all; and he felt pain and pressure under his right ear.
I thought it was the tip of the arrow I placed a comforting plaster with digestive properties because the wound did not swell. and then I saw the point of the arrow.
and then I saw the point of the arrow. I applied the plaster again each day and the wound healed over. The patient felt the arrowhead on the ninth day.
And he told me so. I applied a corrosive medicine to the wound daily until it opened. I tested and felt the tip of the arrowhead which was bent.
then I inserted a probe into the wound's opening with that corrosive medicine until the head of the arrow became clearly visible.
And this lasted about four months. Then the wound became swollen so that I could not insert the forceps and pull out the arrowhead.
Therefore, I did not cease to devise and contrive methods of instruments until on the tenth day I obtained good tongs according to what its shape will come to in the end of this chapter, so that I pulled it and restored the wound.
And the physicians judged that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored: I then restored it, and the wound was healed, and the patient became entirely healthy.
Now I have told you about the extraction of certain arrows; therefore, set your care upon what I have not said, for books cannot encompass everything.
Yet the wise master compares even small things and finds new works and nine instruments for the treatment of unusual cases that arise in this art.
I say that arrows enter the limbs where they are struck in two ways: either at the point where they enter, or from another side;
And that which jumps forward where it enters is an arrow entering flesh, and sometimes it jumps suddenly.
And if it does not jump now, let it remain until the flesh can be pulled around it, and the joint relieved.
And if it is stuck in the bone and cannot come out, let it remain for some days, and move it each day.
and then it will jump out, and if it does not, carefully cut around the entire point with a fine blade until the surrounding area is widened, and then pull it.
And if the arrowhead is stuck in such a way that one cannot see it, then search for it everywhere. And if you feel it, then draw it out with some tool.
And if you cannot because of the narrowness of the wound and the depth of the arrowhead, and there is neither bone nor nerve nor vein, then make it wider until the wound is large.
And draw out the arrowhead if you can, and if it has ears by which it holds, then remove the flesh that is stuck into it on both sides as much as you can, and then break or bend the ears of the arrowhead so that you can draw it out.
And be careful not to break the arrowhead while drawing it out, for this would cause greater pain.
"And if you cannot do it all at once, leave the arrowhead until the wound around it is healed, then pull it out, for extraction will be easier." And if the bleeding is contrary to you, then follow what we have said about its treatment in this chapter.
And guard against incising the nerve or the vein; and devise how you can carefully remove the arrowhead without danger, either quickly or slowly, firmly or gently;
and place the patient in the position they were in when the arrow struck them, for that is the greatest help. And if you cannot do this, then place them according to the signs that indicate it.
An arrow that comes from another side, where something of it is visible or the skin is swollen there, can be felt around it:
then cut down until forceps can grasp it, and then extract it. If it is stuck now.
And if it is stuck in the bone, twist your hand round until it enters the bone and widen the bone, then pull it out.
And if it cannot come out, leave it for now and then resume the extraction until it comes out:
and if there is a splinter of the arrowhead, remove the entire piece.
And if the stake falls, and you wish to administer cautery, then insert the heated instrument so that the tip of the arrow enters the wound of the instrument;
Then apply fire, and if the arrow is stuck in deep, insert the heated instrument with its point entering inside to ease extraction.
And if the arrowhead has touched the lung,
And if the arrow falls into the thigh, belly, bladder, ribs or side, and it is near, and you can reach it, then cut towards it;
and be careful not to cut the vein or nerve, then extract it, and then stitch the wound if necessary. And treat it until it is healed.
The shape of the forceps used to treat splints is similar to a bird's beak, and here is the form:
There are many ways: Large, medium, and small, according to the size of the arrow.
The shape of the arrowhead is like that of a bird's feather, for striking at the tip of the arrow, as shown here:
There are 31 veins from which bloodletting is performed, among them there are 16 that are located in the head, namely: The two temporal veins behind the ears, called the 'doubles' or 'twin' veins; And the two arteries that are visible in both temples. And the two veins that are in the inner corners of both eyes, which are called 'aspires'. and the vein that is within the forehead. And the vein that is at the back of the neck. And the two glands that are in the neck. and the two veins that are above the lips of the mouth, which are called 'auguerich'. And the two veins that are under the tongue.
The veins commonly spoken about are five in each arm:
The first is the cephalic, and it runs along the right side of the chest, which common people call 'the vein of the head'. And the second is called 'fast', and it is composed of the cephalic and the basilica veins; common people call this 'the vein of the heart'. And the basilica runs along the left side of the chest; common people call it 'the vein of the belly', and it is above the forearm; this is the one that is openly visible in the elbow pit.
And the savatelet is the vein which is between the little finger and the ring finger, and it has two branches.
And in the leg and at the foot are three veins: the first is under the curve of the pocket on the left side, and the second is the saphenous vein which is at the ankle on the right side; and the vein called "nisse," which is in the ankle of the other side.
And under those are three veins in the other leg.
The bleeding of veins that are behind the ears helps with ancient catarrhs and headaches.
And the qualities of bleeding are such that you should raise the patient's head and rub the place where the veins are with a rough cloth. Then have the patient strain his neck with a vise until two veins appear behind the ears in two places depending on the head: So grasp them with your fingers and where you feel the pulse beneath your fingers, then squeeze tightly;
Then take the lancet and insert it under the vein up to the bone, then raise your hand along the entire length of the vein, and cut through the skin and vein firmly twice near the crossing point, allowing blood to flow until you see.
Then squeeze it and bind it tightly until it is healed.
And I have already discussed incision and cautery in the first book.
The surgery of the two arteries that are in the two temples is useful for migraine, headache, and customary ophthalmia, and for the course of tears from the eyes.
And the qualities of the surgeon are as I said And it is that the patient stretches out their neck so that both veins appear clearly. And feel the pulse beneath your thumb, and then press firmly
Then place your fingertip on the vein above your thumb, insert the lancet underneath it, raise the vein up and cut it as you did with the other veins, allowing blood to flow according to your needs.
Then remove from the patient and place your two hands on the vein for an hour, then place cotton on top. And then tie it firmly, leaving it until it is healed.
And we have spoken of their causes and remedies, at the beginning of this book.
The healing of the frontal vein is as good as that of the temporal vein for treating old facial diseases, migraine, and redness.
And its quality is such that the patient strains their neck by twisting it, until the veins appear; Then take the instrument called the 'fossor', of which this is the shape:
And place the point on the vein and press with your hand or something else, allowing blood to flow out according to what you desire. Then untie the patient's neck and tie the vein until it is healed, often using a wide bandage.
However, the bandage should not be too tight; And move it across, for the bone is near, and sometimes the ligaments break when they are thin.
The cautery of the two veins that are in the temples helps against eyestrain, and against headache, and against redness, and against the whiteness in the eye, and against facial diseases.
And the qualities of its cautery are such that the patient twists his neck to one side, as previously mentioned.
Then the cautery, and let the cautery be across, somewhat long, somewhat wide with fire, for there is no flesh there. And if the fire is too thin, it might break.
Then let blood flow freely until you have enough, and then bind with cotton, binding it well.
The cautery of the vein on the neck is good for ague, and for manic frenzy, and for facial diseases, such as migraine and redness that comes to the face, especially when it is chronic.
The quality of sneezing is that the patient strains their neck, then holds their nose to your left hand, and takes a long thin reed and sticks it between the two nostrils in the space that is not open well, and now blood will begin to flow.
And do not go too deep, make the blood flow according to your need, then let it lie for one night, for it will be quickly restored.
Sneezing from both nostrils helps with childbirth, the beginning of menstruation, and many diseases, including measles, scabies, and hernias.
And the quality of sneezing is that the patient strains their neck on both sides, as we have said.
And let the master stand on the patient's head, and the patient sit on a seat, then open the vein with a long cut slightly wide, then draw out blood temperately or as much as needed.
then perform another on the other vein, then untie it, and gently compress around the veins so that the patient does not strangle. and let it be until morning, for the wound to heal.
of the health of the liver The sanctity of the veins above the lips helps with coughing in the mouth and with gum corrosion, lip fissures, nosebleeds, and around the nostrils
And the qualities of healing are such that you should make the patient sit before you, and hold their neck as I have said; then turn the lip and look at two veins, one on the right side of the lip and the other on the left, which are known by their black color and by the small black veins around them;
therefore cut one and the other, but if you do not recognize them or are in doubt, then cut the largest of each side, and similarly do for the two veins above and below, for it is the same method.
of the health beneath the tongue The healing of the veins below the tongue helps after the healing of the temporal vein, and it is for the tightening of the throat, and for diseases of the eye, and for diseases of the mouth;
And the qualities of the pulse are that the patient feels between your hands before the sun, and lifts the tongue, and looks down on each side for a black vein.
Then feel both, but do not go too deep, as underneath are the arteries
The veins of the wrist that are commonly felt are felt in two ways
either pricking like a broad flame, or olive-like and subtle like a cutting edge, and is called "anesis"; And they are broad or subtle according to the width and narrowing of the veins The form of the myrtle flame is very well-known, and it is wide as you see
It is necessary to open hairless veins filled with visible thick blood that contain thick and turbid blood and this is the form of the olive-like flame
and it is more finely pointed and is for healing thin veins that contain clear yellow blood
The pulse of the basilica, which is one of these veins, helps those with illnesses below the throat, neck, breast, and belly
And the pulsator must feel for rigor and beware of the artery underneath And if he severs the artery, and blood begins to flow, it must be staunched, as I have said. And the flame should not be sharp, but cutting like a knife.
And if the basilisk does not open plainly, you must remove it and replace with another one. or you want any part of it, or you sew in its place the vein within the arm: It opens plainly; And cut with a knife-like flame, as we have said.
And if you see the location of the vein, then you should also remove the arm, and touch the location until you feel the pulse. then mark the point from below, then tie the arm, and cut the vein with a knife-like flame; And beware that you do not strike the artery when you see the location swollen, for it is the artery: Squeeze it then.
And if you see something red and thin like a child's urine coming out on top, know that it is arterial blood: Hurry then, and place your thumb firmly upon it; then remove your thumb if the bleeding stops, for this happens many times. Bind up the arm, leave it thus, and do not let the patient move it
and be afraid to move it until it is healed.
And if the bleeding does not stop and you faint, and a physician is not present, then cut the artery if it is visible, for its mouth will contract. and the bleeding will cease.
Take a bark of fig and cut it open, then take one half and bind it securely until the next day
if the bleeding has stopped, that's good; But if not, then treat it with powders that stop blood flow, as we have said
and the stitching is not considered sufficient in many cases due to the smallness of the wound's opening, and the power of the sinews of the arm.
The vein in the middle if it stands out helps to draw blood from above the head and below the body, because it is composed of the basilica and cephalic veins, as we have said;
and the surgeon must be careful for the nerve that is beneath, and if it goes too deep and touches the nerve, and swells, the wound will not heal properly, and sometimes it cannot heal;
and this nerve often opens, and if it does not open in some people due to its fineness, then you must cauterize it with the instrument called 'anesil'. And avoid touching the nerve as much as possible.
And if there is space between the two nerves, make an incision along it
The cephalic vein also helps to draw blood from the head and aids the eyes;
And it is necessary to cauterize with the olive-oil flame or the myrtle flame, for it is the safest of all veins, as there are no nerves or arteries beneath it. Nevertheless, it is necessary to find the lightest place, and do not give up if it fails the first time; start again. and sometimes the place swells in some people when it fails the first time, but it causes no harm
The quality of the surgery depends on your skill.
The first thing you must know about cauterization is that it is only performed to maintain health and prevent future illnesses
and let the cautery be made on one of the three veins located at the elbow: namely, the cephalic, basilica, and forearm veins and cauterization should be performed at the beginning of Lent, in autumn, and in winter after meals, when the sign of repletion appears.
and cauterization should be done on the first or third day, after two or three hours into the day.
The medicine administered to patients has no fixed time, but whenever there is need by day or night, at all hours and at any time;
Nor should children be given medicine until they are fourteen years old, nor women during the first four months of pregnancy until the seventh month. Nor should one operate on the elderly who have passed sixty years of age
And when anyone wishes to take medicine in any manner, it is necessary that they cleanse the intestines with a light enema if there is much retained feces, so that the veins do not draw harmful impurities from the intestines into the main organs.
nor should one take medicine who is too full of food, nor one who is drunk, until they sober up, nor one who is dropsical.
And beware of taking medicine after an attack of the colic, vomiting, diarrhea, excessive menstruation in women, hard labor, wakefulness and fasting, or any great weakness, either from illness or injury to the body.
Then refine the humors if blood is thick, by foods and beverages and medicines, if you have the power.
Then use a bath, if nothing prevents it, to refine the blood, and wash the vein around the third rib, as we have said.
And guard yourself that day from work, and overeating, and lust, and similar things.
And be at ease and joyful, and let the vein being bled be higher than the others, and rub the arm twice or thrice, then tie the bandage moderately, for if it is too tight or loose, blood cannot flow correctly.
Then rub the place with both hands until the veins swell and can be felt.
Then wet the vein with a little bit of old oil, then place his left thumb on the vein below where he intends to bleed, ensuring that the vein does not bulge or break when struck.
For there are veins that flee as if they were strings in the skin, and some of these are filled with windiness so that when one applies fire, it retreats from the fire and cannot open the vein; and thus some people are. and if he opens the vein, then the wound is too narrow, for which reason the surgeon should be careful in such matters.
And if the vein opens on the first attempt, that's good; if not, then start again a little lower or higher suddenly, if the area is not swollen.
And if the area is swollen and the patient is afraid, let him wait one or two days without binding his arm: perhaps a boil will appear;
Do not enter into baths, then continue the cautery if he wishes.
and if the hole is small and blood flows subtly, or you doubt that enough blood is flowing, then apply fire directly to that hole with all force.
And perform it rather hastily, before the place becomes inflamed. For this often happens when the wound is small.
If you see the place inflamed, do not recommence the cautery, but put on a little oil ointment, for it lightens the body of blood and turns the inflammation to the better in this place.
And apply the ointment of oil in every cautery you perform on veins, to stop the flow of blood.
This same thing does tripcord and bowstring when applied to the place. So that the blood is thinned out and dispersed when it is too thick.
And if there appears a large abscess, which often happens, especially when no cautery was performed except at the time when the vein was opened and the opening was small, then hasten to apply an sponge moistened in hot water and salt, and compress it for an hour.
And it is necessary that you do this after the flow of blood from the vein stops, and if any blackness or greenness remains in place after some days, then it does no harm; And if you see, place something of aloe or myrrh mixed with juice of calamint, mastich, or similar.
And many times an abscess and swelling appear at the site of the incision:
Then place your hand on it, and if you find the spot soft under pressure from your hand, then that appearance is harmful. So be careful not to place anything of what we have said there, for fear of damaging the artery;
But make a dry poultice to harden the spot, then treat it with another cure until it is healed.
And draw off blood according to its quantity and according to its color.
For if the blood is black, let it flow out until it becomes red; And if you see it thick, let it be until it thins; And if he is too hot, let him cool down.
It is necessary for one who is full and fat, and needs bloodletting, that a larger incision be made, and the flame be wide.
But for one who is weak, do the opposite; they must be bled more gently and frequently, and bleeding should be done by cutting across rather than pricking.
And this method of bloodletting prevents loss of blood and injury to nerves, and is better than bleeding done with a long or wide instrument.
For one whose body fails at being bled, it is necessary to give them a drink made from crushed pomegranate juice. If they are overheated, let them bleed three or four times; but if they have a cold complexion, let them drink beforehand a decoction made from musk syrup or honey syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chicory, well scented.
And if he faints after losing much blood, afterwards he should inhale broth of flesh, and fragrant subtile syrup, and use the other things that we have said in the chapter on syncope for evacuation of vein.
And if he wishes to empty the arm vein and be bled again later, it is necessary that when he is weakened by much bloodletting, he be bled little by little according to his continuous virtue.
And whoever wishes to empty the arm vein after the first bloodletting and has a strong body, should be bled seven hours after the first bleeding or after the ninth hour.
And whoever wishes to have blood drawn from another vein should be bled on the second day or the third day.
For there is much blood within the body which has already become heated, causing fever; If it becomes necessary to draw out a large quantity of blood, then one should widen the incision as far as it falls into palm Then, after dressing all the wounds and placing your hand on the pulsating flesh when it heals, ensure that nothing comes in place of palm, for this often happens when healers are careless;
And do not, when you see a loosened arm and blood begins to flow for the second time, close the wound without pressing firmly upon it; Nor if it is curved, should he hastily extend his arm, for this would be harmful;
But allow him to remain until it heals a second time; Where you should touch with the tip of fire until the blood that has frozen at the mouth of the vein flows out again, and put on some cotton wool moistened in water, pressing lightly upon it.
And if the vein is swollen, let it be and do not squeeze it until the inflammation has subsided.
And if there is a necessity to draw blood a second time, do so in the same vein or in another vein, or in the other arm.
The veins in the arm are bled in place of the head vein because they are connected.
And the manner of the healing is thus: The patient places their hand in warm water until the bones are red.
Then it should be bound moderately, so that the vein appears clearly; then apply the cautery across, not along or lengthwise.
And the hole should be wide; cauterize it close to the joint of the hand, and if blood cannot flow out, put the hand back in warm water until enough blood has flowed into the water.
and if it's wintertime, do not put the hand back in hot water, for one puts it in more often in winter than in summer.
And cauterizing this vein is safer than any other, as there are no arteries or nerves there.
The cautery of the vein on the right hand [palm] is beneficial for all diseases of the liver; this is the method:
Press the hand and put it in warm water until the vein swells so that it can be seen; And if the sinew is transverse, and you cut it entirely throughout, then it causes no harm.
And do not cut too deeply, for nerves lie beneath all sinews of flesh; then place the hand in warm water if the blood is frozen in the wound and cannot flow out.
"And once you have cleaned off as much blood as necessary, then place a bandage of oil and flax to quickly bind the wound, and do this for each wound."
"The swelling in the left hand is attributed to mouse disease, so perform the same treatment as I have instructed for the right hand."
The salve of the spleen is beneficial for all ailments beneath the body, such as diseases of the marrow, retention of fluids, diseases of the reins, and old afflictions of the thighs and legs, and similar ailments.
And the procedure for this dislocation is that the patient places his foot in warm water and rubs along the vein until it breaks, then tie above the ankle joint. The vein is at the ankle, and many veins go up the leg from there.
Therefore cut where the largest vein runs, or at the ankle.
And if you cut on the leg, beware of the nerves beneath and also cut transversely as in cutting sinews.
and let the blood flow out freely.
"And if the blood cannot flow out, then put the foot back in the water and allow the vein to drain well."
And if the first incision fails, then begin again a little higher up because the place is salted.
Do not hesitate on nerve, as we have said, and likewise do so with the sinew of the other foot equally.
"The location of the sciatic vein is at the outer ankle joint, and its cauterization benefits sciatica pain when it is due to hot blood."
And the quality of its heating is that when the patient enters the bath, he should strain on top of the ankle four times while twisting, for otherwise the vein will not open;
and if it opens, then heat in all ways that you can, and crosswise; And it is important that you cover it quickly, for the place is bare, and it responds much to many people.
And it is important that you cover it quickly, for the place is bare, and it responds much to many people. But if you do not find it, then heat any vein that opens on the back of the foot, towards the little toe, and beware of the nerves;
and do so until you see blood flow, then untie the bandage, and put cotton on it and bind it. It is now healed.
Ventouses are made of horns, or earthenware, or glass;
And bloodletting is done in two ways: Wherever you strike and draw blood.
And this cauterization without striking is of two kinds: either it is performed with fire or without fire.
And cauterization done by striking and drawing blood is performed on fourteen parts of the body, one of which is located on top of the head. and the other is in the neck; And two others are on either side of the neck; And the cupping glass below the chin; And the cupping glasses for both shoulders; And the cupping glasses for the elbows; and the cupping glasses for both arms; And the cupping glasses for both legs; And the cupping glasses for both ankles;
and cauterization without bloodletting treats only the small veins that are scattered throughout the flesh, and does not weaken the body in any way. and it should not be administered with or without fire in any disease caused by excess until the entire body has been evacuated.
And if it is necessary to undergo bloodletting due to illness or custom, let us perform it each hour at the beginning of the month or at the end, and also in between every time.
For there are some who, when they need bloodletting, have a heavy head;
And others find fulfillment and redness in their face, and in their head, and on the neck, and darkness before the eyes;
Others experience a taste of blood in their mouth, have an swollen tongue, and cough up blood; And there are those who dream or see blood flowing, wounds, death, or similar things.
"And when we see these signs, especially if they occur during the month, we order cupping to be performed after three hours of the day."
The sweat of the face helps against the headache that comes to the eyes, and it is not necessary for this to happen after evacuating everything from the body;
And this bloodletting takes the place of sweating from the head, and those who are of cold temperament or have a cough should not practice it, for it causes them great harm;
And therefore, it is not necessary for the elderly to use them, nor those with cold head diseases.
"And those who often bleed themselves become forgetful, so one must place the cupping vessel a little lower down to avoid forgetfulness."
Wind in the neck is located between the sinew of the head and the spine, and therefore it helps with constriction of the chest and breaking up blockages in the pulmonary vein, as well as coughing and fullness.
And therefore it should be released gently, for if it holds too firmly, it can cause harm to the stomach or heart.
Winds in the two ribs of the neck are beneficial for headaches, ophthalmia, migraines, constriction, and pain in the roots of teeth, and they are located between the sinews of the spine.
And you should command the surgeon to compress his hand on the wound so that he does not cut the artery or cause bleeding.
Winds under the chin are beneficial for mouth diseases and corruption of gums, as well as similar illnesses that are in the mouth. And it is the place of healing for the two lips.
"Cupping on the shoulders is beneficial for illnesses that come from heat and excess;"
The dilation of the ribs is worth as much as three veins of the arm, because it attracts blood from those large veins;
And instruct the surgeon not to cut too deeply into it, for the place is bare of flesh and has nerves and arteries beneath.
The cupping glass placed on the buttock is useful for haemorrhoids of the fundament and for diseases below it. It is necessary that the cup be large and made of brass so that it may draw well. And perhaps if it were thin, it would break; and cause great wounds.
Cupping glasses on the legs heal openly because they attract blood from all over the body, and are useful for old pains in the kidneys, bladder, and hips, and relieve blockages.
And they are located on the two popliteal spaces and the two ankles, but still they weaken the body after long use and bring about lethargy in many conditions.
The manner of applying the cupping glass is as follows: first place it empty, and suck temperately, then place it hastily, and move evenly, and do not cease until you see that the spot has turned red and swollen, and the color of blood appears.
Then heat, and reset the cups, and take care with the arrangement of the body, for there are those who have thin flesh, and large pores: Therefore it is necessary to strike only once, and make wide wounds, a bit deep; and suck gently.
And if the blood is thick, then strike twice: the first time to refine the path of the thick blood.
And if the blood is very dense, then strike a third time;
And when we wish to draw blood little by little, one strike suffices. And if we want much blood, then repeat often.
And if the blood is thick, strike deep, and the endpoint is that the heart is pierced suddenly. It is necessary for those who have tough and hard skin, and narrow pores, to grease the spots of the cups with clarifying and dissolving oil: If it is summer, of violet oil, or of sweet almond oil, or of squash seed oil.
And if it's winter, of cress oil, or of lily, or of chamomile, or similar.
"And if the excess blood is thick and cold, use myrrh oil, balsam oil, fennel oil, or similar."
And if one whose skin is tender and has wide pores is treated with a cautery, no oil should be applied there, but it should be washed afterwards with rose water, or cold water, or water of mulberry, or pumpkin water, or porcelain water, or other similar.
"And those with excessive moisture should rise using hyssop water, myrtle water, sumac water, or similar substances."
And those who have large excesses rise from old wine, or water of the sieve, or decoction of anise or chamomile, or others similar.
And they should not use a cupping glass before bathing nor during bathing, but rather after the bath for one or two hours;
And do not sleep after the cupping, and they should warm themselves when they are to be cupped and when they have been cupped.
And warn those who are being bled that if they are choleric and the blood is too thick and inflamed; then they should eat cold things, such as pomegranates and endive and lettuce with vinegar, and similar things. And eat pullets, and flesh of castrated animals, and moist meats.
And eat pullets, and flesh of castrated animals, and moist meats. And those with cold complexion should take honey syrup and moderately scented wine which is between old and new, and eat little meat and young chickens and small birds.
And on the day he vents himself, he should drink more than he eats.
It is sometimes necessary to give certain men either treacle or muscat before or after evacuation to strengthen the main members Let the blood be subtly drawn, but it should not be done for those who are hot.
The cupping glasses placed without striking are those placed on the liver, womb, podagra, belly, buttocks, and thighs; for these members do not tolerate being struck upon, and this is only done to draw blood from one member to another, as we place them on the breasts when milk comes out.
To remove the stiffness from the limb, as we apply cupping glasses to the belly and chest to reduce swelling.
And relieves pain when there is congestion or stone, its attractive force sometimes draws out the congestion, or dislodges the stone from its position.
And similarly it does when placed on the liver and spleen when there is retained wind, these cups are applied empty to suck gently only. And sometimes they are used together with fire, and sometimes filled with hot water, as in diseases of the lungs, so that one fills the cup with warm water or water in which suitable herbs have been cooked.
The form of administering the cupping glass with fire is as follows:
And let there be two cups of half a palm in width and depth, with a small hole on the side around the middle, like that for putting a needle through, made of bronze, softened beforehand so it does not cut the patient when placed on the limb.
And let there be in the middle a rod of crosswise earth or iron, to place an enclosed candle upon, and let them be both large and small according to the diseases and the strength of those who take them.
for the cupping glasses for children are different from those for adults, and for thin people they are different from those for fat ones.
And thus one must place this cupping glass upon the limb
light the candle of wax or linen and place it within the cupping glass through the rod that is inside the glass so that the flame is at the bottom of the glass where it will not burn the patient
and then place it upon the limb so that it is over the opening we spoke of, so that when one wishes, steam can escape and the cupping glass be removed
and relight the linen as before, and repeat often if necessary.
Therefore, in the case of the cupping glass used for pleurisy or any acute disease, there is no rod nor opening, and it is heated only when full of air, and is placed upon the limb alone.
And this is the shape:
Suction cups are not used except in members where one cannot apply cupping glasses due to their smallness, such as lips and gums, and similar places; And on places without flesh, such as the back or nose, and other similar places;
and the quality of using them is that when you find suction cups which are in sharp, clean waters without any defect, then take them;
And place one in soft water until they become supple and have nothing inside their bellies; Then let it be heated with vein and suction cup, then rub the limb until it is red, and place the suction cups on.
And when they are full and hang down, if it is a place where one can apply cupping glasses, then do so, for this is very beneficial.
If not, then lift the place gently and then with water, very well, and then squeeze it;
And if the wound becomes too hot afterwards on the body of the sick person, then soak a linen cloth in cold water and place it on top until the blood is cooled.
And if the blood increases, then apply powdered vitriol or salt, and similar things, until it cools down.
Or place half a handful of peeled beans on the wound, let them sit until they become warm, and now it will stop bleeding.
And if you need more, take additional ones.
And if the wounds will not close by themselves, then rub fresh blood onto the wound and insert a needle until the blood comes out, then place the beans on top; as soon as they sense the blood, they will become warm.
And when you see that they are full, then sprinkle a little powder made of aloe and sel or ash on them, and now they will burst.
Here begins the book of fractures This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine and provides treatment for broken bones and dislocations.
Know, dear son, that foolish physicians throw themselves into this chapter without having seen any of the ancient books or read any letters.
And for this reason knowledge is extracted from our land, for I never found any good there.
And I know nothing of it except through the knowledge of ancient books, which I have studied so much that I have treated the subject, and through experience, and through the custom of my life.
And I have described for you in this chapter what is contained therein, and have summarized it at the end, and have clearly shown the forms of the instruments that are needed, as I have done in these two chapters before.
"Therefore, we must say in the prologue of this book the sums of speech and chapters where the wise places his understanding, and remains on the truth, so that those who are tried may know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others."
I say that when any fracture or dislocation or torsion or contusion comes to anyone, you should quickly bandage the patient on both sides if nothing prevents you from doing so, such as weakness of body, or childbirth, or old age. or if the weather is not quite hot, or too cold
and avoid cold things, that is to say cold baths, and the flesh of birds and hares, and do not drink wine nor eat any fatty foods, and do not overindulge in meats that fill the veins with blood until you doubt the formation of an abscess or the expansion of matter in the limb.
If the patient returns to their first state of governance which they had used.
"And when the broken bone begins to heal, it is necessary that one nourishes the sick person with foods that promote growth and have viscosity, such as cooked wheat in water, rice, testicles, pears, and veal, eggs, fresh fish, and similar things, and strong wine." "For with this nourishment the wound will close more quickly and completely."
And know that the bones of the elderly and the infirm cannot be well set or joined together according to their nature due to the tenderness of the limbs, nor those which are too soft, such as the bones of young children;
but apply a splint to the broken bone with thick bands that will hold it firmly together until it strengthens as it was before; and do not let any part of its work remain undone, and for this reason, he must be nourished with plenty of meat, as we have said.
"And know that breaks are diverse in many ways."
"For a break of the head is different from a break of the arm or leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all the ways that bones can break." "For there are breaks that happen suddenly, and others that occur gradually, such as when cutting a feather to make a writing pen."
"For there are breaks that happen suddenly, and others that occur gradually, such as when cutting a feather to make a writing pen." "And there is also breakage with wounding, and breaking with just a small crack."
And each manner has its own device and proper tool in the restoration process according to what memory brings to mind;
and the breakage of the bone is recognized by the twisting of its place and the gaping opening, and can be felt when pressed with the hand;
and when there is no twisting nor sound upon touching, and the patient does not feel great pain, then there is no breakage;
But it may well have torsion, or fracture, or small breakage. "So do not move the limb by hand, but apply the medications that come later and then gently immobilize it."
And know that the break which goes up into the shoulder joint, where both parts are dislocated, it is necessary to align them evenly before an abscess forms there.
And if an abscess forms there, let it be some days until the abscess subsides;
Then set it back in its place gently and smoothly, knowing that the restoration of this is easier than those with fragments.
Then hold it in place, as described below.
And if the bone is broken into pieces, then extend both parts, whether it's hand or foot, or hold it with one hand for small limbs, or use two ropes, or one rope and your hand.
And set the limb according to its natural shape, so that when the broken parts of the member are aligned, gently bring them together using all means, and ensure that your work does not cause injury or pain to the patient.
And align the two heads of the bones according to the best forms.
And feel with your hand whether it seems well set or not:
If you raise it nicely and do not pull it too tightly or press down as those who cause heat and contractions to the limb through their work, as we have seen many times:
And when the limb is in place, instruct the patient not to move it while awake or asleep, turning or in any other manner; And ensure that the limb is well secured so that no pain is felt. For if any pain is felt, it is not properly set, and one must position it in such a way that no pain is felt;
And ensure that the limb is well secured so that no pain is felt. For if any pain is felt, it is not properly set, and one must position it in such a way that no pain is felt; And ensure it is placed correctly so that no twisting occurs when it is reset;
For the qualities of a broken limb are as I have told you.
"Know that broken limbs are diverse in size, shape, and thickness."
But there are small limbs such as arms and legs and similar ones: It is necessary to wrap linen cloths that are soft and fine; And those that are thick, like the thigh and leg:
So one should wrap it with a wide and strong linen bandage, for the wide bandages embrace the entire limb evenly and compress it on all sides without any gap;
Then wrap it with light splints, 3 or 4 turns according to the limb, and tighten your hand a little on all the bandage, then go above the fracture and tighten less, so that the fracture may move away from the fracture a little;
And loosen the bandage a little bit at a time until you grasp a large part of the healthy area, then take another bandage and wrap it around again over the fractured area;
Then return to the part below the fracture and tighten it moderately, not too tightly nor too loosely, as we have said in the first binding above;
Then place between the ligaments swabs of linen or cloth pads, as even as possible, then bind all with bandages above, and then place well-made compresses on top, if there is no abscess or inflammation.
And if there is inflammation or abscess, then place on top something that cools the hot abscess and removes the inflammation, leaving it so for several days;
Then press upon your compresses with something halfway between a wide reed stalk and a flat piece of wood used for hoes, or palm ribs, and they should be shaped thus:
But the compress placed on the fracture should be somewhat thicker and wider than the others;
And it should also be as long as necessary for the limb's smallness or largeness; Then press upon the compresses as you did on the first binding, then bind above with a linen bandage, just as in the first binding over the fracture; Narrower above, always less;
And the thread should be medium-sized, neither too thick nor too thin, and made of soft linen;
But if the thread is thick, as I have seen in the work of foolish people who use rope-like threads of linen yarn, this is a great error; for the stitch cannot be even if it is too fine, and there should not be less than two fingers' breadth between each stitch.
If the patient is injured by the edges of the stakes after stretching in safe places, then place pads of linen or woolen gauze beneath them so that they do not blister.
When a wound is accompanied by fracture and the bone is broken, I will describe its treatment below.
And know that it is not advisable to stretch all broken limbs with stakes on the first day. For when the limb is large, you should not put any sutures until after 5 or 7 days, or more according to your certainty of a hot abscess occurring;
And here is the method of ancient plasters for restoring fractures, dislocations, and twists:
And you should take flour that adheres to the walls of the mill and mix it with plenty of eggs. This mixture, neither too thin nor too thick, should be used for the common method of plastering fractures in many positions, especially for women and small children, as it is not too hot nor too cold.
Another method of plaster restoring breaks, dislocations, and twists: Take equal amounts of alabaster, ladanum, mullein, asafetida, gum arabic, and myrrh. myrrh and aloewood, equal parts Z aléchil IX Z and grind them into powder, then mix with egg yolk. If the complexion of the man is hot, then use this plaster, for it has good composition and quickly heals broken bones. It benefits many men.
Another method of plaster that is beneficial for twists: Take myrrh and balsam, equal parts Z myrrh and aloewood, equal amounts Z acaic VIII Z bolus armoniac X Z, grind well, and combine with honey or egg yolk, then apply.
Another method of plaster for joints and bones dislocated from their places, to alleviate pain, prevent bone wear, and heal fractures: Take new linen, wetting it in both saltwater and cooked oil, then place it upon the wound.
This plaster does not restore (set bones), but it is good for soothing a hot boil, and removes pain properly.
Another method of plaster that restores broken bones: Take dried fig leaves and terrestrial pennyroyal leaves, grind them together, and make a plaster.
Another method of plaster for the restoration of broken bones and to soften the remainder of an abscess. Take root of mistletoe, chamomile, violet flowers, wheat flour; each one part
and grind them together. Then combine with wine and use it if the limb is inflamed; otherwise combine it with moistened coriander water or plain water and apply.
Another method of plaster more powerful than the first one when hard abscess comes to the restoration of the member. Take equal parts of mistletoe root, linseed, balm, melilot, silphium, violet flowers, and chamomile flowers and grind them together. Combine with saltwater or fresh water depending on the inflammation of the limb; otherwise use wine for restful limbs.
Hippocrates says in his book that one should not apply anything to the broken limb for setting besides wax and oil ointment, and nothing else more. He also says that it should be of medium consistency, neither too soft nor too hard.
And it seems that Galen believes that one should apply dry and slightly warm things to the broken limb for setting, such as myrrh, aloe, frankincense and similar substances, as we have said.
Another plaster good for injury and pain: Take mullein leaves and chopped male goat hairs, or bird feathers, and almonds, and salt equally, grind them, and make an ointment with the juice.
And then, after a few days, check if the patient feels no pain and if the bone has not moved from its place If it does not dislocate again within several days. And if pain or itching appears at the location without rest or swelling, hurry and dislocate again, removing the ointment immediately
And take a light cloth, a wet sea sponge, dip it in water, and wipe the area until the itching stops and the pain is eased Then let the limb rest for an hour, then apply dry linen moistened in water or rose oil, and hold it on with a compress until you are sure there is a warm boil
and the inflammation of the limb has subsided and the pain is gone, then resume the gentle bandaging, adding a bit of ointment, but not binding it as tightly as before. and polish it until it's smooth.
"And if you see that the abscess is hot and red, and there is pain and swelling, then you must resume binding it with poultice, just as you did initially."
And if no improvement comes to the limb from what we have said, then do not remove the splint until after 3 or 4 or 5 or 7 days; and sometimes leave it on for 20 days, according to what one sees, until the fracture has healed and the flesh approaches union;
then remove the splint more securely, and let the flesh grow thicker, as I said before;
And if you see that the place is drying out too much, know that nourishing it cannot happen; then apply warm water compresses every time you remove the splint, and this should be done every third day, and loosen the bandage a little;
by this work, nourishment comes quickly to the limb, and it remedies swiftly what foolish physicians do, who restore the limb crookedly:
That is wicked, and such are cowardly works, and I see nothing else but leave it and work correctly.
Many types of fractures exist, with diverse shapes, and their causes are distinct.
For there are fractures caused by the blow of a sword, which breaks all the bone up to the hip joint beneath the bone, like an axe or a tree trunk; And therefore this type of fracture is called "hachure".
When the sword strikes the bone from above without piercing it, this type of fracture is called "absolute".
And the wound in these two types of fractures is either large or small.
"And if there is an embedded fracture, or a break from falling on stones, or from stones falling, or from similar causes."
"And if there is an open fracture that approaches the bone marrow, whether it is below or above the bone, this wound is either large or small."
And there is also a wound that closes up in the bone as fine as a hair, with a small crack, and therefore this fracture is called "capillary".
And if the wound is made by striking with a stone or falling or something similar, and pushes the bone fragment inward, creating a hollow like that of a cauldron when struck. If stones are present within.
And this occurs more often among those who have moist bones at their head, such as children's heads.
and it happens in all types of fractures where small fragments are dislodged like stars. And I will speak about it in its place.
"And we recognize all kinds of fractures through direct examination and probing and by the corrupt flesh on top."
"The capillary appearance is recognized by this: when the bone is uncovered and rubbed with vinegar, the fracture becomes black."
"In treating a fracture, beware of accidents that may occur in illness. If you see no bad accident such as vomiting blood, loss of consciousness, extension and paleness, feverish chill, eyes protruding and turning red, and other similar dispositions in many ways, he cannot be cured without doubt."
"And if you see no frightening accident and you hope for recovery, then begin the treatment."
"And when the injured person first comes to you and it is wintertime, you must remove the bone before the fourteenth day of the moon that you can."
"And if it is in summer, hurry to remove the bone before the seventh day so that the flesh under the bone does not become corrupted and the accidents we mentioned do not occur."
And if the fracture of the bone extends to the tissue covering the brain, then you must cut open the fractured part as follows:
and that you grasp the patient's head gently and uncover the bone in all possible ways and along the length of the wound as softly as possible; if bleeding occurs during this process or a hot abscess appears, help accordingly, and then fill the space with gauze moistened in rose oil. and let the wound rest until the hot abscess is pacified, and ensure that there is no further bleeding; then begin to remove around the bone, and this is done in two ways of operation.
One method is thus: you cut narrowly at the front, and this is its shape.
"And then I place another chisel larger than the first."
And the second manner is thus: have many cuts of diverse widths, some narrow and others wide, pointed, and made of tempered iron.
and work gently, so that you do not wound the head.
And if the bone is hard and strong, you should surround it with holes before administering cuts with tongs, not too deep that they penetrate beyond the soft part of the bone. It must have above its point a margin or circle to prevent the point from passing through the bone.
and you should have several such points that each one fits its place on the edge of the bone, so that you have tongs for all uses.
And this is the shape of the three kinds of tongs:
The qualities for piercing around broken bones are that you place the tongs on the bone and turn your hands until you know the bone is pierced.
Then move the cautery elsewhere a short time later, and do so all around, then cut with scalpels the space of bone that is between the pores, and do this more finely than you can, and gently, as we have said, until you draw out the bone by hand, or by any tool you have such as forceps.
And be sure not to touch the brain nor the spine.
And when you have pierced and drawn out the bone, then reset the remaining sharpness of the bone with another tool similar to a scalpel, but it must be thinner and more delicate than the other scalpels.
And if any small bones or scales remain, remove them lightly with one of your tools. Then dress the wound with bandages and ointments as we have said.
And another way of working is what the Gauls say, which is safer; And tie it very tightly, and this is his command. "It is necessary first to uncover part of the bone where the fracture appears more. Then you will place beneath the head of this lenticular chisel, of which this is the shape:"
And do not cut on one side only; the part is sharp on both sides, so that the cutting is towards the bone;
Then strike gently with a small hammer all around the bone, and be careful not to injure the tissue beneath.
If it is adherent to the bone, scrape it gently, for it can be removed without harm or fear.
"And if the fracture of the bone does not reach to the skin and the bone is cut only on top with small pieces, then smooth down that roughness and remove the chips with a fine razor, of which you should have many different sizes to use in each place according to the work and the shape of the fracture."
"So use larger razors first and then finer ones, continuing until it is all smooth."
For each of the other hair cuts and subtle breaks, you must adjust your approach accordingly.
And this is something that cannot be learned from those who have studied this art.
And if the sinew is exposed, you should take one linen cloth according to the size of the wound, wet it in rose oil, and place it on the wound; then take another cloth doubled over twice or three times, wet it in wine and rose oil, and place it on top of the first cloth; And do this more gently than you are able, so as not to injure the surface; then apply the other lien above it, and do not pull too hard, only enough to touch the wound.
And leave it thus for one or two days until the boil is cooled; then untie it and apply medicines such as lily roots, wheat flour, incense powder, and other similar things.
And grind these substances into a powder, apply it to the wound, and continually apply warm ointments without biting or chewing them.
And ensure that the wound is always clean, so that no ointment remains or any flies gather on it; for when flies gather on the cloth of the cerecloth, they will corrupt and cause great harm to the patient.
For when corrosive substances are placed on the skin, they necrotize it. "So beware, then, if any bad accident happens to the patient, as we have said, and be doubtful without doubting too much."
And if blackness appears on the skin due to the medicine applied, which has such power, then take one part honey and three parts rose oil, mix them together in a cloth, and apply it to the skin. Then follows the treatment of various diseases, until he is cured.
Know that sometimes both parts of the nose above are broken, or one part alone, for these are two bones;
And that below is made of cartilage and does not break, but can be bent crooked or twisted, after which it heals.
And if one of the two parts is broken, you must put your little finger or thumb into the hole of the nose, and press that break evenly against your index finger, and gently pull from behind, until the nose resumes its natural shape; and do this gently, ensuring that the patient does not feel pain due to your treatment.
"If the fracture is in the upper part near the elbow and the forearm cannot return to its place, then you must align it with the head of a splint that is somewhat thick."
And if both parts are broken, do the same. And hurry to reset it on the first day if you can;
But if not, after the seventh or tenth day, when the swelling has subsided, then place a bandage made of linen cloth on the tip of the nose if it is broken on one part.
If you cut one side off another, then if there is a fracture there. and let the bandages be so thick that they fill the openings of the wound.
And some doctors say that one must grease the tents with butter, and change each day. It seems not good to me that they should be dry, but they must be moistened in a mixture of eggwhite and flour powder. Then leave the bandage until the bone is firm, and the cartilage hardened.
And sometimes one puts goose feathers in place of bandages, and also wraps it with soft cloth, and if the fracture holds, then the patient breathes more easily. do as you see fit
And if gangrene comes nearby while you are working on it, then put cerate or cotton moistened in rose oil, or a little bit of diacalcic on it.
And if an abscess does not form there, then apply a plaster made from flour of barley and powdered incense mixed with egg white, then place light dressings on top without binding the wound.
And if the fracture of the flesh is small, and it is broken into many pieces, then extract with appropriate instruments, then sew the opening, and care for it as things inside the body are cared for, using suitable plasters and ointments.
And if he has neither a wound nor any other injury inside, treat him with tents and apply splints of lead until he is healed.
When the jawbone is broken from behind and there is no wound in front, and the break is only on one side without being broken into pieces internally, it can be easily recognized.
If the fracture is on the right side, you must put your two index fingers into the patient's mouth; and if the fracture is on the left jaw, put your two index fingers of the right hand into the patient's mouth, gently push the fracture in and hold it with your other hand evenly.
And if the jawbone is broken into two pieces and dislocated from each other, then you should apply traction from both sides until it is even again.
And if movements of the teeth occur, or dislocations, tie them with a thread of gold, silver, or silk; then apply cerate to the broken jaw and cover it with a double bandage. And apply a well-made splint or an even piece of leather, long and wide according to the jawbone, and tie it securely. Command the patient to rest and eat soft foods.
And if you see that the alignment has changed, untie it on the third day and then carefully reposition what was dislocated; And place emplastrum on top, of flour ground with abundance of eggs or sesame flour, after what you have removed the cerote.
And place a light linen bandage on top, and if the emplastrum dries out, and the patient's condition does not change, leave it until it is healed. Healed many times in three weeks.
And if inflammation comes with heat, then apply what we have said many times [i.e., treat the inflammation as previously described].
And if there is fracture and wound together, examine if no piece of the bone is broken off; if with suitable tools you can extract it.
And if the wound is narrow, then widen it with fire according to your necessity [i.e., cauterize it].
And when you have removed all the broken pieces and none remain, then sew up the wound if it is large, and place over it one of the poultices suitable for promoting granulation until it is healed.
The shoulder blade has broken many times before, and the fracture is of three kinds:
either it is broken but not dislocated in two places with pieces, which is easiest to reset;
or there is fracture with wound.
And the procedure when the fracture is without wound is that you have two assistants, so that one holds the shoulder blade which feels the broken bone; And the other extends the neck towards the part.
Then place the break evenly on your two teeth so that the shape is as it should be, with neither appearance nor displacement.
And if you need to extend further, place a round pad of cloth or wool under the patient's shoulder according to your necessity; And stretch and lift the wrist gently, pressing the pad with your hand so that you place the break evenly as it should be.
And if you are unable to grasp the head of the forceps at the front because it is too deep, then the patient should lie on their back with their shoulders supported by a pillow. Insert a medium-sized ear spoon under the shoulder, and have an assistant press down on the shoulder until the bone of the forceps lifts up.
Then align the break with your teeth, and if you find it unstable, you must cut into it;
and gently pull apart the pieces. If the bone cannot join due to any obstruction, then cut one of the incisions that you have; But place this tool under the wrist to guard against dislocation:
And it should resemble a spoon, not be raised, and be as wide as necessary according to the size of the bone and the power of the work;
And let there be two heads [of the cautery], as you see, and let one be wide, and the other narrow, like the route of the wound that you made when you treated the bones;
And when you are sure that the abscess is hot, cut the wound, and if the route is small or you doubt the heat of the abscess, fill the wound with rags and compresses according to its quantity.
And if hot inflammation occurs, then soak one cloth in rose oil and vinegar and wine, and place it on top.
The bandaging of the bone when there are no wounds and no cuts is that you place on the bone the poultice made from flour and oak bark, and put light dressings on top, and place a splint under the limb if necessary; Then take a very wide bandage about a palm's width in length, then place two cloths on top of the dressings and poultice; Then take a thin strip of linen about three fingers wide and long, and wrap it around that bandage so that the ends of the bandage hang loose; And place the needle on the break, and wrap the bandage above the neck, and below the healthy shoulder, and below the dislocated shoulder. And then reset each part, and when you see that the bandage holds the break well, and you clearly see that the needle does not move from the broken bone, then reinforce it every day. And once the ligature loosens, restrain it.
And make the patient lie on his back and put a small pillow under the shoulder when he sleeps to lift up the shoulder. Thus lighten the break's pressure by lifting the shoulder, or tie the arm to the neck and do not untie it in case of an accident for up to 20 days.
Then recommence the reduction if necessary, and hold it and leave it thus until it is restored.
And it is restored within 28 days, but for some men less time passes.
Here ends the treatment for a broken shoulder.
It happens that the shoulder joint breaks or moves out of place, and one cannot know unless touched.
If it appears according to the shape of the break, and you reset it according to its natural form in all ways possible.
Then place on the joint powder from a millstone with abundant egg whites, and light bandages, and cover with a doubled cloth. Then place over it a wide and thin splint, slightly larger than the shoulder, and if there are any hairs under the splint in some part of the shoulder, wrap those hairs with linen bandages so that the splint lies evenly.
And then bind it tightly with a large bandage so that the splint does not move from its place, and check the binding each day.
And every time he moves, bind it tightly, and keep the splint even if it has moved from its place, and have the patient lie on his side.
And the shoulder is reset in twenty days or twenty-five.
And when this number is completed, then remove it, and be sure of it, for it is not bone that can set itself easily.
And if a piece of the bone sticks out and is not under the heart, then cut it off, and do what we have said in the treatment for a broken collarbone to calm the hot inflammation.
Here ends the treatment for a broken shoulder blade
The leg sometimes breaks in the middle, but this happens rarely; But it often breaks at the lower end.
And when it breaks in mid-air, it leans downwards and the patient feels great pain, faints quickly, often vomits blood, and sometimes the bone marrow is visible through the broken bone.
And the restoration is that the patient lies often on his back, and puts a cushion between the shoulders, then presses the shoulders together, and brings the ribs of the two sides close with your hands, carefully bringing them even in all ways you can, until the figure of the bone is as it should be;
then places plasters and bandages above the subtle layer of salt or another light wood, wrapped in a cloth, and holds it on the broken bone so that it does not move; and ties the bandage evenly around the back, and tightens it moderately, and releases each hour a little, and if it loosens, then tightens it;
And if it needs to be untied, due to corrosion or itching that occurs there, or pain or abscess, then hasten and untie it, and remove the emplaster, and apply remedies suitable for the situation.
Then reset the emplaster, and hold it firmly until it is healed.
"of the breaking of the ribs"
Know that fractures of the ribs occur only in large areas after the back and at the head within, and they break only because they are smooth. And one can feel it well upon examination, as you will see.
And the treatment for this is to set the break evenly, as it should be. Then apply a splint, and secure it with a bandage if necessary.
And if the fracture of the ribs is inward, the patient feels great pain and piercing, like a stitch in the side, because the bone pierces the flesh. And it leads to paleness and fainting, and vomiting of much blood, and this indicates serious illness, and those who are experienced have put great effort into it.
"And there are those who say that it should be administered foods that swell the belly, to push the break outwards."
"We do not do this, lest many boils come if they were not there before." "And if they have come, then heal them."
And some say that one should apply cupping glasses to the area to suck strongly, which seems reasonable. Despite this, there is doubt that the cupping glasses will draw out the excesses to their proper place due to weakness of disposition.
"And some say that one should cover the spot with damp wool soaked in hot oil, and place tents between the ribs to keep the bandage even around it, then treat with the pleurisy remedy of meat and medicine."
If the patient feels great pain that they cannot bear due to the bone pressing on the skin, and there is doubt about this, then one must cut upon the site of the broken rib, and place a tool underneath to support the side.
Then one must saw through the bone, gently pull it out, and afterwards sew up the two lips of the wound if it is large, cleaning it with poultices until it is clean.
And if a swelling comes out in the form of an abscess, then place moistened cloths dipped in rose oil on top, and apply them to the site.
And treat the site as if it were an abscess until it is healed, keeping it warm on that side constantly until it is clean.
And also to the spine of the back.
And when this happens to someone, and you want to know if they will heal or not, take note if you see their hands softened, swollen, and lifeless, and cannot move or extend them, and when you prick them with a needle, they do not feel it.
Know that it is mortal in many cases, and if he moves them and feels when they are pressed or pricked, know that the bone joints are saved, and that the patient will be cured if treated.
And if such thing happens to the spine of the back, and you want to know whether it is healthy or not, then observe if the feet are softened, and if there are accidents in the hands, and on the back windiness and involuntary expulsion occur;
And when they fall asleep on their belly, involuntary expulsion occurs. And when he is asleep on his back and wants to mount, he cannot. Know that it is mortal: If one does not labor in its treatment.
And if these accidents do not occur, then the case is lighter.
And the treatment is that you apply if there is a hot abscess; put rose oil or oil of rue on the spine until it is appeased;
then place one of the comforting and drying emplasters, and the glue of a linden tree, and instruct the patient to rest; And do not let them sleep on that part where they feel pain until it is healed.
And if any bone separates, then cover the chest; And remove the bone, then join together the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with one suture, then heal it with ointment surrounding the flesh until it is clean.
And if the bone head is broken, which is called the 'cow's head', insert your left hand's pouch and place it even with the other hand at full power, then put the splint and bandage on top if needed.
Then bind it, and if there is displaced bone, cut and remove it, and heal the wound until it is clean.
Regarding the fracture of the thighbone
If the thighbone is broken, there will be a slight loss of function at the top; And cut it along its length, declining towards the divided end, and it brings the patient pain and throbbing where it is broken, with swelling around it.
And to set it right, stretch your hand upwards until you are above the break; And know what is the breakage and the shape of it;
If the break is at the head only, then set that break even with its natural shape.
"And if the fracture is long or slants inward, then make the patient lie on their stomach so that the reduction of that fracture may be convenient." And when you have set it even, then place a splint, then place a wooden or bone rod on top of it and hold the break so that it does not move;
and tie the sling under the armpit until the sling is even. "And command the patient to sleep on their healthy side, or on their back."
And if a red abscess comes up there, do not touch it until the red abscess has abated, and then place what we have mentioned before; and then return to setting it right, and hold it as it should be held if there is no bad complication;
Of the breaking of the shoulder
The shoulder blade is what is between the chest and the head of the shoulder, and if it is broken, one should reset it according to one of these two ways:
Of which one is that you take a piece of large-grained wheaten flour, according to this form:
And tie two lengths of linen around the head, and hang them upwards, and have the patient sit on a seat;
then cast his broken arm onto the board until it reaches the elbow and is in the middle of its curve, then hang some heavy weight on it or have the assistant hold it down;
then align the break with his hands together, so that the break returns to its proper position.
And another method is to prop up the patient on their bed and have them hold their hand at their neck; then command two ministers such that one pulls the part above the break towards him while the other pulls the lower part downwards, each one stretching in his respective direction.
And if you see that the extraction should be stronger, then hold the ligature below the fracture and above it, and extend each of the assistants to their respective places.
And if the break is near the head of the shoulder, then you must place one length of linen underneath the elbow and another towards the side, underneath the break;
and similarly if the break is towards the side, one length of linen should be placed lightly and without force so that the break is aligned with its proper position on the side;
then align the break properly and bind it firmly, lest any swelling occur.
And if an abscess appears, do not incise it until seven days have passed; instead, apply moistened linen with rose oil, until the abscess subsides.
Then incise it, and the method of incision is to place the spatula on the break, then bring the arm up towards the shoulder, and place your hand on the shoulder or chest.
And then bind it with bandages, holding the shoulder and arm in place so that the arm is in its proper position unless something prevents it or if the bone has moved.
And if you doubt that the bone may move, use splints; place a broader and stronger splint on the break, with two fingers' space between each splint, ensuring each splint is wide enough to extend three fingers beyond either side of the break.
Then bind around the splints, as I mentioned at the beginning of this chapter concerning fractures, binding more tightly and without stretching.
And if you see the swelling of the joints, and the tension, as we have mentioned, in the place where you reset the broken limb, and you suspect a hot abscess, leave it alone until the seventh day, as we have said.
Then examine each joint on the third day after bandaging to ensure that no itching or inflammation occurs there, so that the healing cannot come to the limb because it is too tight. If the hip joint, as we have said.
And if no such accidents occur, then do not untie the bandage until after three days or more, and let the patient sleep on their back with their hands on their stomach.
and place underneath the shoulder-blade one cushion filled with even wool, and watch every hour of the day or night that the shape of the broken limb does not move or the bandages become softened.
If by the power of medicine the patient recovers, and receives the food that we have mentioned earlier, let it be administered in such a way that the food is first softened. And when it begins to heal, let it be thick.
It is customary that the arm and leg should be reset after forty days in total; Then, one should untie it and apply baths and ointment medicines to direct it to its proper place.
And if the dislocation is severe and stuck, let it remain dislocated for forty days or two months.
Here is an English translation of the French text about the treatment of a broken arm:
The arm is composed of two bones called the 'fossae', one of which is small and supports the elbow;
and the other is large and lies beneath towards the little finger;
Sometimes only the large 'fossa' breaks, or sometimes only the small one, and sometimes both together.
If the small 'fossa' is broken, the restoration will be easy, and healing will occur;
But if the large one is broken, then healing will be poor, and more grievous than when they are both broken together.
If only the small bone is broken, it should be gently straightened and aligned.
And if it's the large 'fossa', it must be pulled harder;
And extend [it] upon the cushion; draw back the pouch of the hand higher than the others, and let the little finger be lower than the other fingers, and let the patient be crossed over themselves, and the cushion should be in front of them so that the patient feels no discomfort.
Then extend the minister's strong arm to the part below his hand or elbow; another minister should be placed above it.
And then the doctor should set it straight according to its natural shape.
And if in the fracture there are pieces, place each one in its proper place; and if there is any misplaced piece that touches the heart, and you cannot restore it to its place, then cut it off and remove the bone, as we have said before.
And if with breaking open a wound, I have spoken about that in the specific chapter then take care
And if at the beginning of recovery boils appear, then apply a cloth of cerote made from rose oil and white wax, so that it is not too hard nor too soft; and bind the cloth gently until the boil is relieved.
And then remove the cerote, and place the plaster of the powder of millet with abundance of egg yolk; then apply the bandages, and let the bandage of the wound be always stronger and a little wider than the others.
And you shall know that he ought to have six braces on his arm in various positions: Whether the break is in one bone or two;
And bound more tightly above the fracture than elsewhere, and less so when aligning it, as I said at the beginning of this chapter; And let the bandages that are on the fracture be soft and moist, not hard or harsh;
And let the bandages that are on the fracture be soft and moist, not hard or harsh; Let the thread used for binding be of linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
And reward the limb and the bandage after a few days. And if any bad accident comes to the limb, such as itching that comes to the limb, then you should bathe the limb with hot water until that itching is soothed;
and let the limb rest not too tightly.
And then recommences the stretching, and if the ligaments are softened and the bones dislocated, and similar things, adjust it.
And if care is taken that the healing cannot come to the limb because it is too tight, then you should loosen it a little and leave it like that for some days until the healing reaches it, and then bind it again.
And if none of these things that we have said come to the patient, then do not untie him for up to 20 days.
And whoever is around should then wrap his hands around his neck, and keep them even; he should guard against movement and trembling, and sleep on his back;
And know that this dislocation is healed in thirty days or thirty-five, and perhaps in twenty days, according to the compositions and complexions of the virtues.
Chapter 18: On the Fracture of the Hand
Know that on the back of the hand and on our elbows there are few fractures, and only then do they occur frequently.
And when the palm of the hand is dislocated or folded, it is necessary for the patient to sit cross-legged and sit upright directly before him evenly.
Then he places his hand on the extended towel, and the ministers extend the broken bones, and the physician joins them evenly, so they are properly aligned.
And he applies the emplaster and bandages, if an abscess does not form, then he places a splint according to the quantity of the location. and it should be wrapped in one linen cloth.
And if the dislocation is around the wrist on the palm side, then make a splint of cloth and instruct the patient to bind it tightly to their injured palm. And then he binds it with a long cloth strip, and the splint should be of soft wood as large as the palm of the hand, binding it as necessary.
And if the fracture is on the outside, then a roller should be placed on top of it and another underneath in the palm so that the hand is open and straight, then wrap everything around the hand tightly and secure the connection between the fingers.
And if the bone-breaker comes to any of us on the side, if it is the dislocated one, then set it even as it should be. And hold it with the palm of your hand, and if you see fit, place a small straight splint to raise the bone-breaker, and do not move it;
And if the bone-breaker is on another side, like in the index finger or one of the others, then set it even and tie it with the healthy hand that follows; Or you can bind them all together holding them still, or place a splint on top, as for dislocations.
And be careful in resetting and disposing of hot abscesses, and treat those who come to it, as I have said.
The thighbone is often broken, and it is clearly visible when it turns forward and backward;
And the reset is this: tie one bandage above the bone-break, and another below. And the patient lies on their face, then each servant extends his rope to his side equally.
and this is when the break is within the bone
And if the dislocation is near the root of the thigh, then one of the ligaments should be towards the little finger, and the other ligament under the dislocation.
And also if it is near the knee, then let the rope be by the knee, and let the extension be below.
then the doctor places the bone evenly with both hands, until it is according to its natural shape, and then applies the splint, and the bandage, if no abscess comes out.
And if there is a hot abscess, let it cool down before returning to your work and your treatment The bandage is made in this manner.
You must wrap the break with two or three layers of hard doubled bandage, and tie up any excess, then turn the leg so that the heel comes to the root of the thigh, and insert a long string between the hip and the leg, below the knee, and bring the ends of the string upwards.
Then wrap the bandage around the leg and hip, then place the splints on both sides, and place one splint on the bone of the leg;
Then fill the empty space between the leg and hip with soft cloth to create even tension, then begin tying firmly three or four times over the splints. And as you go higher up on the splints, tie less tightly;
Then pass the thread you've placed between the leg and hip around both hips twice, tying three splints that are above them, then return to the bottom of the thread so that it reaches near the foot.
And tie it tight enough that it does not move from its place, then leave it thus so that no abscess or swelling or similar thing comes. And if any such thing happens, untie it and treat what has come about as we have said many times before.
And if there are sharp edges of bone protruding, they must be filed down if possible. If this cannot be done, then one must split the joint open and draw fire. And treat it as we have said until he is healed.
Sometimes the thighbone breaks in this way when splints are applied, as in the shoulder or arm;
Nevertheless, the patient does not limp with such restoration.
And know that the thighbone is healed in about one month or a little less or more, depending on the variety of temperaments.
Know that in the joint of the knee there is little fracture, but it bends many times.
And if it breaks, then it is no more than a crack or hole, and this happens to every wound, and without wound, which everyone feels.
And the restoration is this: one should place what is around it evenly on its two sides until it is assembled and can move;
then put the splint in place, and if necessary use a round splint, and secure it appropriately; then review all the arrangements that we have mentioned for other fractures, such as cauterizing an abscess or similar treatments; So apply to each injury what is necessary until he is healed.
Fractures of the leg
Know that the leg has two bones, one of which is correctly called 'mustelz', and the other 'foscile';
And likewise breaking happens equally when it comes to the arm, and for that reason restoration is also equal to that of the arm, and the work is all one. And if both bones are broken together, then the limb turns in every direction.
And if the fibula is broken, turn it forward.
And if the big bone is broken, great pain is felt, and it is clearly visible; and it turns underneath.
Therefore arrange for extension, place it evenly, and tie the splints evenly;
But nonetheless, if the fracture is ugly with many pieces, the extension should be less and lighter. And fasten it according to your skill.
And when you have completed your work, then take two smooth planks of wood that straddle the leg on both sides, and are as long as the leg from the knee downwards;
then wrap it in two places with bandages above and below, tie it in the middle as well, and thus the leg will not bend to the right or left, which is good;
And some apply hot poultices of the long bones of the leg; if it is wood, they place the leg to prevent movement, and this is properly done in fractures where there is an open wound.
And move each day the leg to see if there is any heat or other complication. If the wound heals completely.
"Of the fracture of the bones of the foot"
To the ankle there is no fracture,
And if there is a bone fracture in the foot, and you see these bones protruding over one another, place the patient's foot on the ground as if they were about to walk, then place your foot upon theirs where the bones are sticking out, and press down until they return to their proper places.
Then apply the splint and bandages, place a small board with two legs underneath the foot's stomach, then bind the foot securely, and after wrapping it in cloths, use other necessary items.
"And when three or four days have passed, undo the bandages, for you will find the bones aligned, whether they were broken or dislocated."
And if any of the toes are broken, restore them as we have said for the fingers of the hand. Then place on either broken piece a splint according to the length of the bone, and let it be a bit wider; then place underneath the foot the aforementioned table, and hold it firmly.
And if there are two or three, or more broken pieces, then place on each a splint according to its size, wrapped in one linen cloth, and hold the table firmly underneath the foot. And let it be, while standing on top of the table, that the sole of the foot touches it well.
And you should not forget the other things that I have mentioned for other fractures, as we have said; And treat each case according to what is necessary.
"Regarding the fracture of the wrist bone"
When the bone of a woman's thigh is broken, make her sit wide-legged; then lean her towards the back part, and let her be held from behind;
Then fill the space between her thighs with cotton, also adding as much as one stone's weight;
Then push down the woman, and raise the back little by little, until suddenly the dislocation jumps back in place, and the bone returns with its socket.
And when she wishes to urinate, remove the dislocation, and once she has urinated, reset it, and do this for about seven days. If the dislocation is restored, then take a sheep's bladder, attach a tube to its opening, and insert the entire bladder into the joint. Then blow firmly into the tube until the bladder expands inside. The dislocation will then be reset.
Then fill it with cotton and leave it like this for a few days until it is healed.
And when the bone of the wrist in either men or women is broken, restore it as we have described for the thighbone.
These nearby breaks are not hidden from those who apply their study and practice, and understand my book.
Because fracture indicates, in many cases, the direct path to restoration: Then take heed.
In the leg, when it is broken, take a goose feather and insert the leg into it then wrap bandages around it, and leave it for three days or so, and it will soon be healed
"Regarding fractures with wounds"
He who has a fracture with wound, especially if it is large, such as the bone of the thigh or shoulder or similar, should have his wound cleaned immediately, so that the stitches we have mentioned may testify to this.
And if the wound heals, then apply a dressing of vitriol, if you have none other, and then begin to reset the fracture in the same hour or on the same day, unless some obstacle arises.
And if some obstacle arises, then leave the reduction until a new day, until the inflammation is subdued, and do not touch it on the third or fourth day, lest you bring on an evil complication.
And if the broken bone appears above the exposed heart, it is necessary that you place it at ease quickly with your hands, with slight extension.
And if the extension does not fit to put it evenly in your hands, then use this tool made of iron, which is seven or eight inches long, and its width is according to the quantity of the wound and therefore it is necessary for the physician to prepare three or four, depending on what he needs in each case of fracture
and it should be round and somewhat thick so that it does not bend under pressure on the limb during your operation, and it should be pointed at the front and thick in the middle toward the front, like this
And it is called 'palainche', therefore the curved head must be placed on the visible top of the bone And push back all at once until it returns, and they are even one against the other. And if the break is subtle and tools cannot grip the bone well, then you must cut off the head of the bone until tools can grasp it.
And if you cannot bring back the bone as we have said, then cut off one of its ends with an appropriate instrument, such as a scalpel or saw, with all your strength;
Then scrape what remains on the bone with sharpness and fine shavings.
And when the bone is reset but the patient still feels great pain afterward, know that it is not in its natural place.
If you do so much that it is in its place, then wet a cloth in black sternutatory wine, and use it properly if it is inflamed; and do not put on the wound any cerate or other thing that has oil in it, lest decay and corruption come.
Then apply dressings when you have restored the bone, leave the wound uncovered, and cut away the surrounding skin according to the size of the wound, and make sure that the wound is not constricted by the fracture.
And many foolish doctors have done this and caused harm, death or corruption to the patient on several occasions; And let the binding be softer and gentler than other fractures.
And if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that some harm may come of it, as we have said, and you find pain in that place, then do not apply plaster. But wrap around it instead, using hard cloths, and tie them.
And when you see after two or three days that the wound is healing, then remove what you had put on previously and apply healing ointment to it, such as tetraformacon ointment and similar ones.
And it is necessary that you dress the limb twice a day, in the morning and evening, until it is sound and healed.
And it is necessary that the limb be prepared in such a way that the bowels can pass downward easily.
And if many days pass and it still cannot heal but the bowels become obstructed again, know that there are small bone fragments causing this pain. Therefore, you must open the wound with a tent, and remove all these unwanted fragments that cause the pain.
And if a fistula appears in the place, or another type of corruption, then you must treat it according to what is said in this chapter before.
And when the bone is broken and lies open on the limb, as in the case of the thighbone or shoulder bone, and other similar large bones, do not pull it out, for many times death ensues, but let it be until it rots.
Perhaps it will fall off by itself after 20 or 30 days, then dress the wound if you can.
And if you cannot, then leave it alone.
We often inquire about the health of the fracture afterwards, especially when it is near the joint, and it is unpleasant to see the deformity of the limb. And by chance, the limb may not be able to perform its natural tasks.
Therefore, take care if the bone is fresh: If you apply astringent medicines, such as aloes, incense, and myrrh, and sarcocolle, acacia, and similar ones; then take some of these things, or all together, and mix them with astringent wine or with egg white or with honey; And put it on the bone in bandages, bind it well, and do not untie it for many days;
And put it on the bone in bandages, bind it well, and do not untie it for many days; Then remove it, and begin another one, until the dislocation is healed.
'Or you can bind it onto a well-made wooden board;' 'For the property of wood is that it draws out all swellings from the limbs;
And if the dislocation has already turned into hardness like stone, and it is necessary to remove it, then cut on top of it, and remove the excess; When you have any razor sharpener, make sure it is properly removed, and clean it thoroughly until it is healed.
Of the limb that is weak after the healing
When a bone fracture has healed, but afterwards the limb remains weak and frail, this happens for many reasons: One reason is that it was bound too tightly, and not bound as it should have been; or because there were too many bandages, preventing the limb from receiving proper nourishment; or due to excessive swelling; or due to moving it too much, not at the appropriate time. or because there is little blood in its body, making it weak.
The treatment for this is to make the patient eat well and exercise their body so that their blood supply increases within them; and apply baths, provide them with joy and pleasure.
Then apply pitch to the limb so that it attracts abundant nourishment, and frequently wash it with warm water until proper nourishment reaches the limb; And returns to its natural shape.
Of the limb that is crooked after healing When the limb is twisted after restoration, and the broken bone is apparent, although its natural function remains
but do not believe those foolish ones who say that one must break the limb again entirely, and many foolish physicians have done this in our land
and such practices are blamed, causing great harm, and sometimes death
although, if the joints and muscles are fresh, they should be washed with warm water, or softened with herbs cooked, such as fig leaves, roots, and melilot, and similar things
and apply a softening poultice, such as well-made diachylon, and take the mucilage of figs, and mix it with goose grease or sesame oil, and make a poultice
or take fat figs, grind them with fennel seed, and similar medications that soften the union
And sometimes the dislocation is removed by rubbing continuously and for a long time with moist hands. And arrange gentle movement of the limb each hour.
And if the twisted parts are withered and hardened like stone, it is necessary to remove them with iron, cutting gently up to the bone with a fine incision. and apply care and diligence in the treatment.
"Dislocations occur when a joint moves out of its proper place, preventing it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing great pain and injury to the patient."
"If dislocation occurs in anyone, it must be immediately reduced without delay."
But if one delays, the area swells, and perhaps it will not be set back in place properly;
Therefore, one should not move it until it is no longer swollen: often brings about spasms and other pains;
However, when this happens, apply a poultice to the patient, then leave it alone until the swelling is relieved;
then rise the limb with hot water and oil, then gently reset it, and treat each limb as they come back into their proper place.
"And I have arranged the chapters on dislocations from head to foot."
It can happen that the lower jaws are dislocated inward, and the dislocation of both is of two kinds: either they are a little displaced from their place, or somewhat softened; If they are completely dislocated and hang toward the chest, saliva flows from the mouth so that it cannot be held back, nor can the mouth be closed, and the tongue becomes entangled with speech.
"If the dislocation is slight, it returns on its own through various manipulations."
And if it is complete and accomplished, then you must reset it quickly, and do not delay;
and do it in such a way that the assistant holds the patient's head and the surgeon puts his little finger of one hand into the root of the jawbone dislocation inside the mouth if the dislocation is on both sides; and let the other two fingers of the same hand be spread apart to press evenly.
Tell the patient to soften his jaw and move it in all directions. "And the doctor places it back into its proper place until it returns."
And if resetting is difficult, especially if both jaws are dislocated together, then warm water and oil should be applied until they can be easily reset.
Do not delay the resetting, as we have said.
And when they are reset evenly, and the patient's mouth closes well without softening, then place moistened cloths made from wax and rose oil on it, then tie it lightly with soft linen.
And let the patient lie on their back, with their head between two pillows so they do not move to the right or left, nor attempt to chew, but take only light food until the pains are relieved and the jaws are numb.
Then let them chew what they want easily, and do not exert themselves to open their mouth while eating or drinking until the jaws are completely numb and healed.
"And if the two jawbones cannot be properly reduced within an hour and are not returned to their proper place, then fever and chills will ensue, sometimes with diarrhea, and occasionally with vomiting of bile."
And when you see this, then know that it is a lost cause; and many die within nine days upon whom it occurs.
"The angle [of the jaw] cannot be dislocated towards the cheek from within and from below the chin, but sometimes it can be dislocated backwards, which is easily felt."
And the treatment is that the patient lies often on their back and extends their arms; And then press firmly at its place with your hand, and it will return;
Then put on the bandage and wrap it tightly.
And the shoulder blade that is towards the back cannot dislocate; If not, and if it dislocation again, reset it into its place as we have said.
Then put on the bandage and wrap it tightly, and instruct the patient to rest until they are healed;
And likewise is reset the shoulder blade when it is dislocated from its place.
"of dislocation of the shoulder blade"
Know that the shoulder dislocates in only three ways:
One way is that it dislocation at the part of the socket below; And the second way is at the part of the breastbone; And sometimes it dislocates above, but this happens rarely.
And the shoulder does not dislocation behind, nor inward for the nerves;
And many times it dislocates downwards towards the buttock, especially in those who are fatty, for it happens suddenly.
For those who have enough flesh, it hardly jumps or goes back in place.
"Sometimes, however, some men suffer a blow or a fracture and the shoulder becomes inflamed with heat, causing them to believe that it has been dislocated."
It is therefore necessary that you examine it until you are certain; And then begin the treatment.
It is known that dislocations are when they are downwards towards the buttock, and there is a difference between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, which you will find clearly evident between them. And you will find a hollow at the top of the shoulder, and when touching below the buttock, you will feel the top of the shoulder like an egg. The patient cannot bring their hand to their neck nor move it in any way.
And likewise, if it is dislocated upwards, it is not concealed because you will find it clearly by touching.
Only this kind of dislocation can be reduced when it is recent or if the child is sick.
And the manner is such that the servant lifts the hand of the patient upwards, then places his thumbs underneath the elbow, and forcibly lifts the joint upwards to its place; And the servant raises the hand and extends it upward, then places it underneath; If it comes quickly.
And if it does not come as we have said within several days afterwards, then the patient must be bathed in warm water; And the servant should apply moistening and soothing ointments, such as a decoction of mallow, fenugreek, and melilot in water, and it should be applied;
Then the patient should be supported on his back, and underneath the elbow a pillow of even cloth should be placed, neither too soft nor too hard; then the physician places his heel on the pillow and gently lifts the shoulder joint, pulling the hand of the patient;
And another servant should hold the head of the patient so that it does not move downwards; This shoulder returns suddenly, if you see it, reset it according to this method:
And have someone larger than the patient present. Let him stand upright facing the side, place his shoulder beneath the arm of the patient, and lift the arm upward so that the patient hangs by it. And another helper pulls down the patient's hand towards the stomach. And if the patient is too light, hang some heavy object with him, and the dislocation will return.
And it can also be reset in this other way:
And take a long stick and plant it in the ground so that its top is level with the elbow joint, neither too thick nor too thin; Then place the patient on top of it, but ensure there are soft cloths underneath, and have the patient stand along the length of the stick;
Then extend the patient's arm downwards on the other side and quickly reset the shoulder joint.
And if it does not return despite all these things we have mentioned, then perform this treatment: Take a firebrand of two spans long and four fingers wide, which has a round head to easily enter deeply under the armpit, according to this form:
then tie onto the head of the prepared wood a cloth so that the wood does not burn the patient; then place it under the armpit of the patient
and extend the patient's arm over the wood lengthwise, and tie the shoulder onto the wood, then place the arm on one end of a wide plank, with the hand extended downwards, and let the body hang freely on the other side The joint will now be ready.
And when it is in, however it may be, then place under the armpit a wisp of wool; then put on the emplaster made with flour powder, with incense and egg yolk all around the shoulder, then wrap it tightly under the armpit, and twist the bandage onto the plaster, and bind the hand to its collar, and let the hand remain like this.
And he should fast little, so that the limb may rest comfortably, for it will heal more quickly
and then start eating again after five or seven days, and move the limb And if it is firm and not softened, then it is healed.
And if the joint has been forced out of place due to moisture that has come there, or for some other reason, then you must administer cauteries with three openings, as it is described in the chapter on cauteries.
And if you do all this, but after seven days the dislocation remains and he cannot raise his arm upwards, then know that the nerves at the head of the shoulder are cut or stretched or weakened And know that the joint will never again be fixed in its place.
The dislocation that is towards the hip, and the breasts, or behind, if it occurs by impulse and extension of hands, one should apply another bandage.
And treat until it is healed.
And if after the healing there comes pain in the member and slowness of movement, then the patient should often apply hot compresses until that pain is alleviated and returns to its original state.
About dislocation of the elbow
Know that the shoulder joint is dislocated by force, and returns by force;
and if it has been dislocated in all directions, especially front and back, the dislocation is not hidden, as one can see and feel it well; And it becomes dislocated according to each shape. And when you join the sick shoulder with the healthy one, so you can see it clearly. For the joint is dislocated and cannot bend the arm or touch the shoulder completely
And you must reset it before an abscess appears there, for if an abscess appears there, it would be difficult to reset;
and perhaps it cannot be completely reset, especially when it is behind. So this dislocation is worse than others and causes great pain, and sometimes death occurs there.
And its restoration is when it can be brought back such that you extend your hand with both of yours; And spread his arms wide, and with your hands grasp the elbow around, above and below, pushing the joint into place at the base of the thumb or palm until it returns to its proper position;
And if the dislocation is in front, then it returns when he folds his hand towards his hand and presses the elbow that is dislocated against the root of the palm.
And if it does not want to return to its place, then administer strong traction;
and have two ministers extend the arm, and two ministers hold it so that it does not move during the extension;
then twist the arm in both directions, then after you have wrapped a long and wide doubled cloth around it;
and when the surgeon has placed the joint in his hand, then anoint it with some oil to soften the joint, then forcefully push the joint until it returns;
and when it is in place, then put on a dry compress with egg yolk, press it firmly, and bind the arm around the patient's neck, leaving it there for some days before removing it.
And if the joint is firm in its place, then loosen it with a bandage.
And if you see that the joint is not set properly, then recommence the placement and loosen it with a bandage, and leave it thus for several days until it is firmly in place. Then remove the bandage.
And if it feels sore after resetting the joint and moves, then bathe and gently rub it and press until it feels soothed. Or place a grease made of mutton fat on the joint, then leave it for one day and one night, then remove it, and let it enter into a bath. And when it begins to sweat, gently rub the joint, then replace the grease, and then enter the bath. And do this twice or three times until it is healed.
And if you see that it is still not well, then place moist fenugreek flour warmed with butter on it and bind it tightly.
If it returns to its position
hand dislocations
The dislocated joint of the hand returns, and its return is light, more so than other joints. Nevertheless, it must be quickly reset to its place in the same wound where it was dislocated, before the area becomes inflamed or an abscess forms.
And the resetting is done thus: you place the injured hand on a table, and extend it with the help of assistants. The physician then places their palm flat against the front of the joint, pushing until it returns to its proper position.
Nevertheless, you must ensure that it is properly in place; Then the patient places the back of their hand on a table at full extension and during the reset. And if the dislocation is in the back of the hand, then the patient places their backhand on the table, and the physician places his hand over its joint surface.
If it returns now, that is good. If not, then apply soothing plasters to alleviate any heat or swelling, and leave them on without restarting the process.
And if he cannot bear it, nor can you put it back into place after several days, then the joint remains dislocated.
Nor does any harm come to the patient from this, except that his hand becomes weakened and he cannot grasp anything until then you know that the nerves are cut or the arteries
If there is no other injury except pulling with forceps near the case, and sometimes nothing else helps.
"And when the hand is in place, put on the splint that we have mentioned, then bind it and leave it for five days, then untie it and let it remain so."
"And if he cannot move it well, and there is any stiffness, then apply warm water and rub until it is smooth."
"Regarding the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Sometimes both hands are dislocated on either side, sometimes at the back of the palm or the front
Then grasp both hands and push the dislocation back into place as far as it goes; then hold the top of the hand steady and tilt it towards the side where it was dislocated
and let it rest for 2 days, and then set it straight on the third day
and wrap it up as we have said, and on the fourth day remove the dressing, wash it, and move it gently while keeping it wrapped.
And do this often, until it is tight, and also do so if the shoulder blade dislocates at the stomach of the hand; and do it in the same way you did before, until it is in place.
And likewise do when it is dislocated elsewhere.
"Regarding the dislocation of the heel bone of the back"
"When the heel bone of the foot or leg is dislocated, or when there are multiple dislocations, there is no treatment for this, as the damage is already done."
And the sign of this is that the joints move suddenly without intention and cannot be held in place, and many times some member, such as both thighs or both arms, becomes paralyzed.
And often the backbone moves into four parts;
That which moves at the rear is called 'gilbositez':
The treatment for this is to watch if the gilbositez has come from infancy: If there is no hope of cure or healing.
And that which comes from falling or blows or similar things, the ancient doctors proposed various treatments with grand words, but they did not have great benefit in all cases;
But I have summarized it according to my intention and formed tools in various ways.
I say that in the swelling that occurs in the chest before, none has health;
And also that which comes directly to both sides, and one cannot cure it outside except that which comes to the back, as I say.
And it is necessary for the patient to be laid on their face in one even place, and have something underneath them so they do not bruise.
Then stick one ember at the head firmly into the ground, and another at the feet, and tie a band across the patient's buttocks, and another at the hips, knees, and ankles.
And two attendants hold the bands, one at the head and the other at the feet, between the two embers;
And let them be held firmly together, the ember as we have said, and the physician place their palms strongly on the spine until it returns.
And if it does not return with this cure, then take a board three spans long and lay it under the patient's back, with the patient on their side, and put the end of the board under the backbone, then place the middle of the board on the spine. And let the master put his feet on the other end of the table, and press firmly until it returns to its place.
And if you see that, do it to the one that turns towards the hand. And you should place two stakes at the top of the patient's arm and two others towards their feet, with a handspan distance between each stake.
And there should be one hole in each stake where the dislocation occurs, and the stakes should be firmly fixed into the ground so that they do not move.
And between each of the two stakes should be one turning stake, upon which the rope will turn, and there should be two small stakes a handspan long on either side to help rotate the dislocation.
And then tie the rope that is among the stakes to the turning stake towards the top, and the other rope towards the feet at the other turning stake. Each of the assistants should rotate their turning stake with all the ropes, and the master should keep the tension even as we have described.
And when it is equal, then place a drying plaster with plenty of egg, and then the dressings, and then the hot iron of a tablet of three ounces long, that it may touch the place of the gibbosity and the part of the healthy spine, then tie it with a linen thread, as we have said, and let the patient use subtle nourishment until he is healed.
And if anything prevents recovery at the end of healing, then it is necessary to administer softening and soothing medications with the hot iron that we have mentioned before. And sometimes one administers a piece of lead, and sometimes the appearance comes in the back spine of the back, and it is thought that this is dislocation. And this is the bone that appears, therefore one must not presume to do so: For it might bring death upon him.
Know that in the joints of the hip and the joints of the shoulder there comes forth only dislocation, unlike other joints;
And the joint of the hip is dislocated according to four parts: within and without, before and behind;
And further inward, otherwise dislocated in front and behind.
And the knowledge of its dislocation inward is that when one joins the sick leg with the healthy one, it is longer, and the sick knee opens wider than the healthy one, and the sick person cannot bend their knee towards the fire; and the place that is near it is swollen with a hot abscess because the head of the thigh goes there.
"And the sign of external hip dislocation is that these accidents are opposite to those mentioned earlier."
And the sign of that which happens in front is that one can hardly straighten their leg to its full extent; Nevertheless, they cannot bend their knee without pain, and if one tries to make them walk, they cannot go forward, and they retain their urine, and the ankle swells, and when they walk, they limp on their heel.
"And the sign of posterior hip dislocation is that the knee cannot be extended or bent, and the leg appears shorter than the other one. The ankle is relaxed, and the thighbone is located below the ribs."
The treatment of this kind of dislocation is that if the dislocation is ancient and it remains in its place, there is no treatment for it; And there should be no presumption in this.
And in the case where the dislocation is fresh, and there are four types of dislocation, quickly reset the joint, extend it inward and outward, and move it to the right and left. Perhaps it will return, and no other treatment is needed.
And if it does not return in this manner, then you must prepare a strong assistant and firmly extend the leg with both hands or have one foot tied above the knee and another assistant extends their hand in such a way that they place their hands beneath the buttocks, then pulls strongly with one swift movement towards the hip And another holds onto the end of the rope.
And they all pull upwards and downwards simultaneously until the patient is lifted off the ground all at once and hangs suspended.
This manner of extension is common for four members, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, that is good.
If not, then treat it in a similar manner.
When the dislocation is in the hip area, place the patient on their healthy side, then put the rope on the root of the hip and the location below the angle, then pull the rope upwards towards the angle and towards the thigh
Then take another helper's arms, and embrace the large bone of the sick hip, and extend it forcefully: and it will now return to its place.
And this manner of dislocation is easier than others.
And if you cannot fix it in the manner we have described, then you must tie the two feet of the patient together with a soft strong bandage on both heels and knees, and let the sick leg extend two fingers more than the other;
then hang it from the top of a post, and have two long arms above the ground
then instruct one helper to embrace the top of the hip, and have another helper hanging with the patient, who forcefully embraces the hip, for the joint will now return quickly.
And when the dislocation has returned, have the patient lie down as we described for those with gout, and carefully remove the bandage from the sick leg and also from the foot.
Then place two brands: one at the head and another at the feet; then insert one brand between the thighs of the patient in this shape; And have moistened cloths ready around it so that the patient does not burn; then extend each assistant towards him, and the physician set his hand equal to the dislocation.
If it returns, that's good.
If not, place a stone on it, and press it as we have said in the chapter on gibbosity (kyphosis), with the patient lying on the sound side.
And when the dislocation is before (visible), it is necessary to extend the affected leg quickly; as I have said and the physician place his pain (palm) on top of the sick joint; then press with the other hand, and stretch down towards the knee.
And if the dislocation is behind, then it is not necessary to extend the sick leg downwards or lift it up; rather, it must be as if the hip were dislocated backwards, as we have said regarding childbirth on both hips. and lie him on his face; and stretch out the linen as we have said earlier, and everyone must press on the joint together. And it will be ready when the patient extends their legs, and they are even. Then join the thighs together, place the splint, and bind it with a bandage so that the hip does not move. And let it rest for three or four days, then untie it and place the splint on top;
and if you see that they are even, bind them as before, and leave them for three days;
then untie it, and let him walk gently until the limb is comfortable.
Dislocation of the knee
The knee joint can be dislocated in three ways: That is to say, inside and out, and behind;
and it does not dislocate forward.
And the sign is this: tell the patient to bend their leg towards their thigh, and if it does not articulate with their thigh, know that it is dislocated;
And the reduction of all three kinds is this: have the patient sit up straight, extend their leg if possible, and place your back against their face, and place their foot on yours;
Then take his knee in your palms, and draw it between your thighs, then strongly bend both sides of the knee. and another assistant extends his foot until the knee returns to its place, and the sign that it is well put back is when he can easily move his leg at the hip.
and apply the plaster on top, and bind the leg to the thigh, tying them together tightly for three or four days, then untie it.
and do not let the patient move until the member is strengthened.
And if the limb is not yet straight, then extend it strongly, as we have said in the treatment of the thigh, until it is straight.
Dislocation of the heel
"The heel is sometimes twisted and sometimes completely dislocated, both inward and outward."
And the sign that it is well put back is when the ankle is swollen and sticks out on the side where it was dislocated
The reduction should be easy, and one can easily extend the arm with both hands when it is only slightly moved.
And when it is completely dislocated, you should make the patient sit upright, and one assistant should pull him forward by the leg above the ankle
Then draw the foot towards you with your right hand, then with your left hand twice, then stretch it out upwards, and gently place the foot up high.
And do this twice, as we have said, while pushing and pulling the foot.
If it stays in place, that's good;
If not, then start again, for it will dislocate again.
And if it still cannot stay in place, then have the patient lie on their back on the ground, and firmly plant a pole in the earth between their thighs, and tie straps around so as not to hurt the patient.
Then two ministers grasp the thigh, while another extends the foot towards them or lies down on it, so that they can tie it at the ankle joint. Then each minister stretches out equally, and let the pole be between the patient's thighs to hold them down when stretching out.
Then the physician gently places his hands on the dislocation and another minister grasps the healthy leg below, and the dislocation will quickly return to its place.
And when it reaches its peak, then place the plaster and bandages on it, press firmly, tie the foot to the leg, and keep watch over the nerves that are above the ankle behind, so that the bindings are not too tight.
Then leave it for two or three days, and if the bindings get loose, then press firmly;
Then untie it on the third or fourth day, and prohibit the patient from walking for four days; And if he walks before that time, there is no certainty that it will not dislocate again.
"And if inflammation comes afterwards, then you must calm it as we have said elsewhere until it is healed."
about the elbows "When the elbows are dislocated, they should be gently reduced without force, and this is an easy thing to do."
And if the dislocation is in any knot of the back of the foot, then have the patient sit on a flat surface or on a table entirely straight, and place your foot on what opens up from these joints, then press firmly with your foot until it returns.
Then when it is even and nothing opens up, place two-footed table under the sole of the foot, then press firmly, leave for three days, then untie. And let him rest until he is healed.
About wounds and dislocations at the same time
When an injury comes with the dislocation and one wants to reset it, many times the patient dies:
Do not be presumptuous in treatment if you are not wise in the art and have not practiced it for a long time, and if you are not compassionate, merciful, and careful, not hasty.
And at the beginning of treating hot inflammation, use soothing remedies, and leave the patient in God's hands if you see no hope of recovery; and when you see hope, then reset the limb to its place before the inflammation becomes hot.
and once the limb is in place, then apply soothing remedies for hot inflammation and treat the wound with drying ointments as necessary;
And if there is also a fracture along with the dislocation and small bones dislocated, set them, and do what we have said for simple bone fractures;
And guard yourself from entering a path of fear, as I have said, for it is against your movement according to your Creator, and for the knowledge of your arms and body.
