O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	Oh, you, very wise sons, I have completed this book that is the end of the science of medicine and its fulfillment, and I have finished it by his explanations and by his declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came to me in a vision that I should complete it with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, that is to say "surgery".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of hands is fortified in our region and is drawn from all things, it has perished and been lost, and nothing remains of it except the small descriptions in books of the ancients that the hands have moved.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this comes the error and the foolishness, and the minds are closed and the knowledge is distant.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation;	It seems to me that I can revive it together with the order of this treatment according to the way of exposure and declaration and abbreviation;
et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	and I will bring together the forms of cauterizing irons and other tools of the work with the explanation and preparation of it, as it is necessary.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	Because for the reason that no good masters of hands are found in our time, the art of medicine is extended.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And it is necessary for him who undertakes this to surpass in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, until he knows the judgment of the bones, and their forms and conjunctions and separations of all, and has knowledge of the bones and nerves and tendons and the number of joints, and the movement and resting of them, and the origin of their issue.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc;	Because, as Hippocrates says, "not to do something is bad, and with the work it is little.
et meismement en l’art de main.	And even in the art of handiwork.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes;	We tell you at the beginning of this book that those who are not familiar with the things mentioned before, if they attempt to do so, may go astray and harm people;
ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	such that I have often wanted many times more of those who deal with this science and if they abandon themselves to their own knowledge and experiment.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa I apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col;	For I saw a foolish man who lanced an abscess of scrofula or boil from a woman's breast, and lanced the arteries from the boil;
por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	because so much blood issued out that the woman died in her hands.
Et vis I autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans;	And I saw another foolish man who treated a stone from a man's gallbladder, and the stone was large;
si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens III jors.	and took along with it a piece of the bladder, and died within three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	I had already been called for the extraction, and saw the misalignment of the limb and the size of the stone, and if they cut it, it would die.
Et vis I autre mire qui prist en cure I duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie;	And another miracle that took place in our care, of the duke of our land who had his leg broken, and with the breaking had a wound.
et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi I termine;	And the miracle of ignorance kept the break over the wound with splints for a long time, and did not leave the wound without salt, and thus it ended.
et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie;	and the command that he not remove it quickly;
et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	and thus it remained until the leg was completely healed and the foot and came to destruction.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe;	I was called to come to him, and hurried to remove the leg;
et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	And when I felt it dislocated, it was in pain and did not feel any pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner;	But all the ways of the corruption were already confirmed or the member, and could not be healed;
et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	and the corruption did not stop moving through the member until the member was completely lost.
Et vis I autre mire qui effondra I apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And I saw another method that crushed the abscess and became putrid, and then it inflamed due to its evil nature.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For putridity, when it is free of melancholic humor, does not need much if one only touches it with iron if it is in a place where everything can be completely removed that is corrupted.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en II divisions:	And therefore, very dear son, you must know that the work of hands is divided into two divisions:
c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions;	that is to say, where it has been exposed to many positions;
et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	and I will show in each of these books where it has fear and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos.	Because of this, you should keep it a secret so that the foolish people cannot harm you.
Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez;	If you take your arms in a firm and steady manner, and use the best method so that by the grace of God you come to safety and are healthy.
et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit;	And leave the spreading diseases of poor health;
et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	And take your arms from what makes you doubt, and be in yourself so that you can come from this world to the other of glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens:	Galenus says in some of his admonitions:
«Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	«Do not take on the care of sick people who are not fools.»
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	I have devised this treatment in three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez;	The first chapters are of fire cauteries and de-cauteries of medical water, and the chapters are ordered from the head to the feet.
et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	And the forms of instruments, and the irons of cauteries, and of everything that is necessary in the work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses;	The second chapters are of cutting and piercing, and of wounds, and of arrow extractions, and similar things.
et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	And the chapters are ordered and the forms of instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses;	The third chapters are of resetting dislocations and twists, and similar things.
et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	and is ordered to place the upper limbs in their proper places, and to shape the instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	As we remember the work, it is necessary that I tell the quality of the aid and the harm of each ingredient.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus;	The quality of aid, and its harm, is the longest and most subtle of speech and secret sciences;
et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu;	and many wise men spoke about it, and agreed on this.
et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	and I do not know much about it, because I lack the length.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que II complexions:	I say that cauterization helps universally in all matters where there is matter, whether the matter:
c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	is to know whether it is hot and with matter, or dry and without matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide;	In a hot and dry environment, they assembled together and said that fire cauterization is a great help.
et li autre dirent le contraire:	And the others said the opposite:
que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	that fire cauterization does not help diseases that come from heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour;	Because the nature of fire is hot, and should not be cured by heat, nor by dryness;
et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	and those who said the opposite claimed that fire cauterization helps greatly with hot and dry diseases that come from within men.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you compare the body of the person and its moisture to the hot fire, you heat the body.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this saying.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have found it once by experience.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens;	And in any case, no one interferes with it except those who have experienced it, and know from long use the chapter of cauterizations, and the diversity of men's complexions, and their dispositions and causes of diseases, and the symptoms and time of healing;
des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	of other constitutions we have no fear at all, even in cold and moist diseases.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all the patients gathered and agreed to the cauterization.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, my sons, that cauterization with fire is one of the secrets of cures, and of greater benefit than cauterization with hot medicine.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For the fever is simple, and comes only to the member that is cooked, and does not harm other members unless it is named.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation;	The burning remedies come from one member to another by moving away, and bring diseases of great relief to the affected limb.
et par aventure ocit lou malaide.	and perhaps it is the pain.
Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	The fever for its height and because of the goodness of its substance does not cause harm, if there is no excess.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses;	And I have found that you would find by experiment and by the length of service and study that I have put into the art, and it was above the truth of things;
et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant;	And because I apologize for the length of the language, as it does not please me only that I give you the secret that is hidden or fire, and the quality of the work, how it cures diseases of the body, as the philosopher says in demonstrating;
or le recevez en vos pensees.	or receive it in your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, child, that they should be done with cauterizations in what manner they should be made, and they will ask for them.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere;	And I say that cauterization is beneficial in all cases, because the harmful substances are removed by the help of cauterization;
et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	and indeed it is even necessary for pain that cannot wait until the time when the greatest harm comes to the member.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire;	And never think, dear child, as the foolish ones do;
car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue;	for the disease that is healed by cauterization has no return;
et il le dient ensi;	and it is said thusly;
mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	but it is not as they think, for cauterization is but medicine that moves the humors, and dries up the humors that are the cause of the pain, and is more effective than any other medicine due to its swiftness of action and the virtue of its work and its authority.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut;	And it is possible that the disease comes only according to the humor and the constitution of the patient and its power;
et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie;	and are assembled in it the superfluities by the acquisition of meats and similar things, if not cauteries administered to him where he has little superfluity and moisture, as cauteries for dense pain, and similar things, and the pain does not return.
mais ce avient poc.	but this happened little.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir;	And many people do not understand why cauteries are called the tail of medicine, and this is to see;
mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	but they do not believe little that cauteries are of value after medicine, but rather their understanding is false, and cauteries are the tail of medicine because when we administer methods of cures in any disease and they do not work, then we administer the cautery, and it is valuable.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Therefore, it is important to understand that cauterization is a part of medical treatment, not according to the intention of those who are misled.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance;	The old ones said that the cautery of an instrument of gold is more effective than iron, and they did not say what else but for the quality of gold and the expensiveness of its substance.
et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes;	And they said that the heads of the cautery do not make pain, but it is not to see because I have experienced it, and I have found that it is to see in some people.
et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	And the cautery of gold is more effective than iron, as they said.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez;	And whenever you heat an instrument of gold, you should not be afraid when it is hot because of the color of gold, and it has already cooled.
et s’on le chaufe trop;	and if they are heated too much;
si font au feu;	if they are done by fire;
et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	and then they have enough restraint.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And therefore we use the fire cauterization that we have prepared for our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	Or I have ordered this chapter on the shoulder joints from the feet, because it is easier to find.
dou cautere olivaire	The fire cauterization oil.
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	This cauterization is valuable against moisture and cold on the head, and it is done for two reasons: because of a disease called "soda", and because of many humors that descend from the joint to the ears, and due to many dreams and tooth pain and throat pain, and indeed for all diseases that come from cold as paralysis and soda and apoplexy and similar diseases.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief III nuis ou IIII, selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir;	The form of this cautery is that the hairs are removed by medical means, changing the shape of the head three or four times, according to the virtues and the age and the custom of the hair, which the patient can bear.
et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	and then make the hair of the patient again.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis;	And then let him sit crossed between your hands, and put his hands on top of yours;
aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses II eulz;	after put the root of your palm above the root of his nose between his two eyes;
et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	When you come to me with your two fingers, if they bleed profusely, heat the cauterizing iron called "olivare", of which this is the shape:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant;	And place it on the joint, which is marked with ink, and move it back and forth gently in twisting your hand little by little;
puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os I sol petit;	Then slowly remove your hand, and reward the joint if you see the bone slightly;
et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit;	And if you do not see it, then continue with the cauterizing iron until you see the bone as I have told you.
aprés pren I poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse III jors;	Then take a little thread, and wrap it softly in cotton, and place it on the joint, and leave it for three hours.
aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre;	after put this cotton in butter;
et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	and leave it on until the wound is healed;
aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	after treat the wound with the ointment called "tetra-pharmacon" until it is healed.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge;	And the ancients said that the longer the wound remains open, the more it purges;
et por ce si aide mues.	and for this reason, it helps to heal.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And none of these said that one should burn the cauterizer until a part of the bone is charred, and then remove what has been charred from the bone, and treat it.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme I vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors;	And the other says that one should apply the cauterizing iron as gently as possible above, and push it as hard as one can to remove bone as wide as a needle that women put in their hair for the reason that the humors come out easily;
et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte;	and one should leave the wound open for a long time;
aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	after that, one should cure and dress it.
Et ces II manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor;	And these two methods of cauterization do not seem to be good in all cases, except in some men where there is a way of fear;
et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier;	and it seems to me that I should leave it.
car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres;	because the joints are weakened by continuous natural solutions, as we testify in other members;
et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	and even when the joint affected by pain is weak by nature, and the first appearance of cauterization is safer and more appropriate for me, and from this I work in the future accordingly.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	of the ancient pain of the main
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres;	When in general the head comes with chronic pain that lasts a long time, one should use ointments and pills called "cochie", and cleansing of the head and eyes and plasters.
et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	and if they do the fire cauterization that we have mentioned before, it does not help.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit;	Take care if the patient is of a strong constitution and is not too cold;
adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	then cauterize with that fire cauterization that we have mentioned above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai I cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»;	After cauterization on each eyebrow to the bone, as we have mentioned before, and do the cauterization called "vasselz".
et est I leus en coi on met ventouses;	and is the place where suction cups are used;
et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os:	and lift your hand so you do not press too hard on the bone:
li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors;	the hairs cause greater pain in this cauterization than in others, and I will speak of it there.
et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	and it is necessary that the cauterizing irons for the horns be more delicate than the one with which one cauterizes the midline of the forehead, and this is the form:
dou cautere dou chief	for the fire cauterization
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie:	When in one part of the head sudden pain comes, and the disease is extended to the oil, and the patient is purged by medicines that are changed, and the other cures that I have said in the division of diseases are done, and all this does not help much:
adonques li fai cauteres selonc II manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	Therefore, if it is necessary to cauterize according to two methods, that is to say, by means of medicine or fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope I poc as II chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir;	The cauterization by medicine is such that you press a piece of alum, and remove the scab and reapply it with a small amount of the same thing, and then make the temple or place where the pain is located in a certain way so that you can replace the piece of alum outside the skin;
et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi XII houres;	and when it is replaced, if it holds and restrains well, leave it thus for twelve hours;
et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi II jors ou III;	then remove it and treat afterwards with the piece of garlic, and leave the wound thus for two or three days;
puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	Then place a hot poultice on top until the pain subsides.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	After the application of ointment until they are healed.
et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	And if you see that some burning remedies that I have written or prescribed are not working, then treat them with other burning remedies.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	The fire cauterization is done in this way.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Heat the cauterizing iron of such a shape:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait I poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance;	And it is called "closed" because the head is made in the shape of a clod or it has little burns, and in the middle has a small appearance.
et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse;	And it is placed on the painful limb, and hold your hand and gently stir the fire until half of the surface is burned.
et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	and gently touch your hand so the artery does not burn, which is nearby, and bleed abundantly of blood.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par III jors;	After put cotton in a sling, and put it on the limb for three days;
puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	then put cotton moistened in butter, and then heal the limb of inflammation until it is healthy;
et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	and if you want to cauterize this wound with the cauterizing iron called "cultellare", at all the point, and keep from covering the artery in this wound which is not ancient.
de emigraine	of the wound
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans;	When you treat this wound as we have said in the division of diseases, and it does not improve, and you see that the cauterizing iron before says of medicine and hot iron does not hurt him a little, then it is necessary that you extinguish the cauterizing iron called "cultellare" until it is white;
et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os;	and if the bone is fractured with a line of half a finger's width, and you take your hand once, and hold the artery so that it does not come near the bone;
et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez;	and guard the jaw that moves when moved, and the nerves have no regard except for the moving ones and that spasm does not cause harm, and guard against the corruption of blood from the artery when it is cut, or cutting into it has great fear and immediately to those who do not know, and who are not studied and experienced;
et laisse l’uevre em mi voie;	and let the work be in moderation.
mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	but I will tell you how to stop the bleeding when the artery is cut, and I will show you where it appears in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee;	And if you see that this cauterization is not enough for the disease, and the patient is suffering, cauterize it with fire as we have said, and treat the wound until it is healed.
et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait II coutelz;	And if you see that the cauterization is not enough, administer the cauterization that we have said or in the chapter of the extraction of the artery, with the cauterizer that has two blades.
et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	And this cauterization is better than the other and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	of the pain of the ears from cold
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When the ear hurts from cold, and medicines have been applied and other treatments that we have said in the division, and the pain does not move, then warm this cautery called "poins", of which is the form:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les II se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche;	After pricking all around the ear, wherever the pain is felt on both sides, and move it slightly away from the root of the ear, then you have correctly identified the earwax.
et ait X poins entor chescune oreille;	and apply X drops around each ear.
aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	then cure the ear until it is healthy.
de la torture de la bouche	of the torture of the mouth
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie;	This torture should only be treated by cauterization is no more than those that move with the flux, as we have said in the division of diseases.
et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	and do not use cauterization with similar substances that come from sechors and spit of men.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de III cauteres:	When you treat this resemblance of torture that moves from the stream of waters and of purging of the head and of gargling, and it does not help, then it is necessary that you cauterize the pain with three cauteries:
l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des II levres;	one at the root of the ear, and the other a little later the temple, and the third in the position of the two lips;
et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce;	and put the cauteries in the part that opens healthy, and do the cauterization at the top of the ear above a little out of the horn of the head, and another in the temple as long as one finger;
et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse;	and leave the fire cautery as long as half of the wound is healed.
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	This is the shape of the fire cautery.
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros;	And this is the shape of the cauterizing iron that we have placed before, but it is a bit more delicate and it is necessary that the knife be a bit larger.
aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After curing the limb as I have said before, until it is healed.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai IIII cauteres:	When apoplexy is old and you treat it as we have said, and it does not improve, and the pains do not have fever, then make four cauterizations:
II sus les II cornes dou chief, et I emmi le chief, et I ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac;	Above the two upper horns of the shoulder, and below the chief, and also the one that is called "vasselz" as we have previously said, and behind the fire above the mouth of the stomach;
et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	and treat it as we have said before.
de litargie	For laziness
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil;	For this disease, one should give the patient large and modified brain-shaped pills;
aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres;	after rubbing the entire shoulder of the patient with the mustard plaster written or used to treat ointments;
et c’est li maniere dou cautere:	and this is the way of the fire cauterization:
si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est;	If he is thus healthy, good.
et s’il ne l’est, se li fai III cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere I doi de gros;	And if he is not, do three fire cauterizations on the neck from above down to the collarbone, and leave space between each cauterization of one large span.
et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai I cautere en mileu;	And the treatment is as for the others, and if you have seen it stuck, and the pain is great, do one cauterization in the middle.
et se mestiers est, II autres sus les II cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	And if it is a mechanic, two more above the two horns, and the treatment until he is healthy.
et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	And let the cauterizations called "olivare" be as I have already said.
de la froidor dou chief	of the cold of the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit;	It is necessary that the head be cleaned of years and of what we have previously said.
aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et I derrier et III sus l’espinee dou col;	After cleaning the head of the hairs, then perform a fire cauterization on the head and each horn, and behind and three times above the spine of the neck.
et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai IIII cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos;	And if you have more trouble, and the body is wet and the hairs are in pain, and the disease is far, then perform four cauterizations above the spine of the back.
et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main;	And let it remain until the most favorable time, and release your hand.
aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	After the treatment until they are healed, and the cauterizations called "olivare" that we have previously said.
de l’epilempsie	of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	Those who suffer from epilepsy should not use cauterization except for that which is fleshy, and it is first necessary to modify the brain of years and other treatments that we have mentioned in the division when the pains are large and severe with pain medicine.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes;	And if it is a child who cannot bear it, make him gargle and chew, modifying the brain often with good meat.
aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai I cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et I cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne;	After the child's head is in the middle, and do cauterization according to what we have said before, and cauterize above the vein, and above each horn.
et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if the pain is outside and severe, do cauterization as I said to those who have paralysis and softening of the neck, above the spine of the back and neck, and let the cauterization be with olive oil according to the way I said.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai I cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the pain is intense, then perform the following delicate cauterization method:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When due to melancholy, the excess or corrupted moisture and fluid is large, then use the following cautery made of parts as we have said for those who have paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if due to melancholy, the excess or corrupted moisture is declining towards melancholy, and the course of the bad pain is wet, then give it to drink something by which the brain is cleansed, according to what it is before in the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide;	After removing the cause of the pain;
aprés fai I torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com I cercle, si le met emmi le chief;	after making a well-made bandage, like a circle, and placing it on the head;
et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars;	and the pains are crossed, and held tightly from all sides;
aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien;	after applying the liniment, and it is good to use old bearberry ointment;
et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir;	and the heat of the fire is tempered, so that he can bear it if possible;
aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier;	after emptying the circle from inside and placing it on the head, and letting it cool;
et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and do this to the pain every week once with good management until they are healed.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	Where you have seen cauterization with making points all over the cauterizer.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument;	This method of cauterization moistens the brain excessively.
et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	Then place a moistened cotton ball in butter and goose fat.
de l’awe des eulz	of the eyes'
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When the eye comes firstly to the eyes by the signs that I have said in the division, then begin and give to the patient a remedy mundifying the head, and keep it from all moisture, and make it sweat or bathe it several times at fasting.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai II cauteres sus les II temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as II eulz ensamble, ou en I se li dessendemens est en I;	After that, instruct the patient to turn his head, and apply the cauterization on his head, and perform two cauterizations on both temples simultaneously, or if one eye is not present, then one.
et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple;	And cover all the cauterization with veins and arteries that are outside the cranium, and let the cauterization be long according to the width of the temple.
et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	And watch for bleeding from the wounds, and if you see too much blood flowing, use a towel or cloth as needed.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras;	And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and in the incision, how you will perform it.
et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les II os derrier.	Never perform cauterization or heating on the two lower bones.
dou cors des larmes	The path of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors;	When the tears of the eyes are old and accustomed and are above the veins, or over the arteries that are in the appearance of the main difference.
et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz:	And we see that it is a superfluous cold, flabby flesh, therefore the cauterization that I mentioned at the beginning of this chapter, descend upon them.
I cautere emmi le chief, et II cauteres sus les II temples, et II cauteres ou haiterel desoz les II os;	I cauterize the main, and two cauterize above the two temples, and two cauterize or heating outside the two bones.
et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout I petit cautere.	If there is more, then cauterize carefully above the shoulder with a small firebrand.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	through the courts of tears by through the eyes
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide III nuis cochies;	When you apply the remedies according to what we have said in the chapter, and it does not help, then give him three drinks with bad taste.
aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire;	After the king's head, and the face, and the cauterization or middle of the cauterization with oil.
et fai II cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les II sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous;	And make two cauterizations with the cauterization called "clavilis" above the two shoulder blades, a little off the neck.
et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	And watch out for the artery that you do not cover.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the form of the cauterization called "clavilis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	When the paper of the oil is softened by disease and moisture, then cauterize with this cauterization called "olivare".
de coi ci est li forme:	For this reason, this is the shape:
Et se tu vues si fai II cauteres sus les II sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont;	And if you see that this is done, make two cauterizations above the two spikes as long as the spikes are;
et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	and do not leave the hand except until the third part of the paper is burned, according to the manner that I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	the hairs that do not point the oil
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc II manieres:	Never have it so that the hairs of the eyes are converted to pardons, and they hold the eye, and then make one cautery in two ways:
c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	that is to say, by fire, or by burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals;	Or the fire cauterization commands the patient to let the hairs grow long and even;
et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	And if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain;	When they are born and are even, then put the misaligned part in its proper place;
aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz;	After, above the paper of the eyes, there is a figure that should be as such as the one of the mirror, and it should be the beginning of the sign among the hairs;
puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Then put soft cotton moistened in egg yolk and mint oil on the eye, then heat the cauterizing iron of which this is the form:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit;	Then cauterize slowly and gently many times, until the healer is at the right place;
et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil;	and the signs of the health of the work is that you see the paper retreating, and the hairs raised to the height of the oil.
adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi III jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	then lightly touch your hand, and leave it thus for three days, then put cotton moistened in butter on the burn until the scar is formed.
aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	after the treatment of ointment until it is healed.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers;	and if after this the hairs come back, and the paper is softened, then restart the cauterization on the same place, as you did first.
et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	and if the hairs are lacking, then cauterize until the paper is raised to its natural height, and is even, and does not prick at the base of the oil.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte;	The cauterizing iron of medicine is that you command the patient to let the hairs grow long and even, then make a piece of parchment in the shape of a leaf of myrtle.
puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien;	Then take French soap and live chalk, one of each, and grind them together well.
et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz;	And make it into a paste, so that it does not cool, then spread it over the shape you have made like a leaf of myrtle, and put it on the paper of the eyes.
et se li maladie tient en I oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en I, et se en ambedous ausi;	And if the patient holds the evil in only one eye, then you should cover it with a bandage, and do the same for the other.
et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef;	and place a soft cotton cloth under the elbow.
et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse I poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	and the patient with the pain should be in a healthy position and place the hand above the medicine, and press and move it gently every time the pain feels burning from the medicine, for it feels burning like fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done this for a long time, then take the medicine to your mouth.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision;	And when the burning pain has passed, lift the limb from the fire, and reward if you see the paper raised as it was raised by constraint of fire or by incision.
et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	and if so, then it is well.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point;	If not, then put the medicine back on the limb or the medicine has not worked, until your actions are equal and your eyes are focused.
puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then place a moistened cotton swab on the affected area until the pus is removed, then treat the wound with the ointment called "diaphanis" and other, until it is healed.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	And if you have the task to stay within your work, do so with great care, lest you not cut into the wrong parts of the medicine.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant;	And if the paper becomes thin afterwards, and the hairs are pricked in the oil, then restart the treatment on the softened area of the paper properly, as you have done before.
aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	After the treatment until it is healed.
et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And this is the form of the foot of the mouse:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens;	And it is known that the eyes of men are different in size and smallness, and according to what you are constrained by.
et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	and is not immediately returned to the proper way to the one who has studied this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	of the treatment of a fistula by fire cauterization
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat a fistula as we have described in the division of diseases, and your treatments are not effective, then it is necessary to cauterize it in this manner.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain;	instruct the patient to put his head on your shoulder.
et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief;	and clean the wound around his head between your hands in such a way that it does not move and does not dislodge his head.
aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil;	after put moistened cotton on the wound or in juice of parsley over the oil.
aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz:	after heat the cauterizing iron that is ready.
et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere;	and it is shaped like a pen of vulture, together with the quill so that it is the cauterizing iron.
se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente;	if you see that one is appointed to the other, and if you see that it is as if a tent;
mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	but always, this that is sewn is better for your work.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche;	After pressing the fistula if it is open, and in taking the pus, and drying;
et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe;	and if it is closed, then open, and take out the pus;
aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie;	after put the fire cautery very hot, and hold your hand on the cautery to the part of the knee above the oil, that your hand does not do foolishness;
et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	and put the fire cautery in the grease of the oil, and corrupt.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	If you come to the beginning of the cauterizing iron at the bone, that would be good.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors;	If not, if you must restart the cauterization again, and if you have the skill, leave it for three days;
aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers;	then put cotton moistened in butter on it, and apply the ointment of the desiccating cure until it is healed, and if forty days have passed and it is not healed, then put on corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed;
et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	and the rest according to what it would come in its chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	And there is a certain method of cauterizing a fistula that no one of the ancients mentioned.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu;	For a fistula, and feel the limb;
aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	then put in the wound the subtle camomile of which this is the form:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc;	and they do with the quantity of a certain amount of mud;
et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil;	and hold your hand or grip firmly, and the hairs do not move, until the mud sets and does not flow to its oil;
et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe:	and it is necessary to put above the oil on the hair a soft cotton pad in front of or behind:
li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	the mud if the limb of the fistula, and the healthy through marvelous healing.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	And if the fistula is healed by the cauterization that we have mentioned, it is good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	If not, then it is necessary to administer purgatives to the nose, and to bring the fistula back to its proper place in the nostril as it should be.
des crevaices en levres	cracked lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Many times there are cracks in the lips that are called "hair", and at the same time in the lips of children.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe I petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these cracks as we have mentioned in the divisions, and the treatment does not help, then heat a small cauterizing iron in this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font;	And put it firmly in those cracks until it comes just to make;
aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	after healing the limb of the cerate until it is healthy.
de l’aposteme de la goule	of the abscess of the groin
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule;	When an abscess occurs at the root of the tongue or in the bladder, or in the palate, or at the roots of the teeth, after it has become putrid and runs and becomes swollen and becomes a fistula;
et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie:	and you cure it as we have said in the sections, and it does not improve.
adonques covient il que tu aies I cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule;	Therefore, it is necessary that you have the cauterization according to the size of the fistula;
aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu;	after the puncture or opening of the fistula, and keep your hand until the iron goes to the bottom of the wound and behind the bone;
et fai ensi une fois ou II, aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and do so once or twice, after curing what we have said in the cures, until it is healed.
et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin;	and if they are treated thusly, it is good;
et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	and if not, then you must discover the limb and remove the rotten bone, according to what you find in its chapter.
dou movement des dens	movement of the teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain;	When the teeth are softened by moisture and the roots move, and you treat it with medicine but it does not work, then put the head of the pain in your mouth.
aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent;	After heating the cauterizer of which the form will come later in some manner, you put a sponge on the tooth.
et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent;	and insert the cauterizer deeply, and hold your hand so that the pain feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth.
aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit;	After lightly touching your hand and begin the cauterization according to your will;
aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	Then fill the hairs of their mouth with salt water, and let them drink for an hour and then rest.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in this way, the tooth that was moving is confirmed, and the softened gums are held back, and the moisture is corrupted and dried up.
de la dolor des dens	of the pain of the teeth
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc II manieres:	When pain from a tooth comes from cold, or if there is cold or swelling, and the medical treatments do not work, then it is necessary to cauterize in two ways:
et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	and cauterization with butter and cauterization with fire.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain;	Cauterization with butter is such that you take butter from a fresh cow, and the end in an iron or brass spoon;
aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez;	After taking cotton and wrapping it around the tip of a tent peg, and wetting it with warm water, and placing it on the painful tooth firmly and holding it until it is cooled;
et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus I fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	and then do it often enough until its effect reaches the root of the tooth, and if you see that wetting the cotton and flax in warm water, and placing it on the aching tooth, and placing hot iron on it until the effect reaches the movement of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide;	The fire cauteries are such that you can grasp a piece of iron or brass, and it should be large enough that the effect does not reach the mouth of the wound.
aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez;	After heating the cautery, from which the form will come after, and place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cauterizing is cooled.
fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	Do this often, because the pain will be as strong the same day or the next.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer;	And it is necessary that the pain fill its mouth with good butter in the urgency of this cauterizing, and then apply it.
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	This is the shape of the cauterizing tool:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir;	And make the cauterizing as you wish, and according to what you have.
et c’est li forme de la caine:	This is the shape of the cauterizing tool:
des scrophules	of hydroceles
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie;	When the scrofulous glands are swollen and cold, and do not obey digestion by medicines, then heat the hair burning cautery after this, and have two openings for the fumes to issue out of the other side;
et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume;	and place the cautery hot on the abscess once, or as often as necessary, until it reaches the center of the abscess;
et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors;	and if the abscess is small, place the cautery according to the size of the abscess, and leave it for three days;
et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee;	and place a soft cotton pad with butter on top until the burn is healed.
aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	After care of the wounds and bandages until they are healed.
Li forme de la cainne:	The shape of the jaw:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives;	When the moisture overcomes the channels of the body, and especially when it comes from a cold constitution, then it is necessary that the pains be relieved first by remedies in solution.
aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	After the cauterization at the root of the throat, and be careful not to come too close to the throat, and do not burn more than necessary but a little.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant;	After the second cauterization at the joint of the neck to the top of the spine, and let the cauterization which is called "clavicle" because of its shape.
et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	And treat the limb as we have previously mentioned until it is healed.
de la toust	of the whole
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai .II cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis;	When all diseases of the gout are caused by cold moisture, and the pains have no fever or swelling, and is an ancient disease, then apply two cautery irons on the affected joint.
et I autre cautere emmi le pis entre II mameles;	and the other cautery goes between the breasts.
et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	and let the cautery called "clavicle" be in the form mentioned before.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles;	And if you see, apply the cautery by holding the entire cautery called "point" because of its form in the disease of the ears.
et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	and they should be pricked at the base with a sharp point, or within.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	After the treatment of the patient according to what has been said previously, and let the cauteries be applied at three points according to this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais III a cop.	And because the cauteries are lighter, because you make three times as many.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit;	Afterwards, the hairs should be pricked above their back and sides.
aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre;	Afterwards, relieve the curved part that is within the tingling with your right hand.
et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners douqueil ci est li forme:	And if the joint is dislocated inside, then heat the cautery that has two needles like this:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble IIII cauteres;	and cauterize the curved part until it pierces through the side, and then remove the figure of the cautery together with four cauteries.
et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a III ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres;	And for this reason, the cautery is made with the cautery that has three needles, because the figure of cauterization is these four cauteries.
et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a III ners:	and are the nerves according to the thinness of a tent, and it is the shape of the cauterization that has three nerves:
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce I nerf por coi il i a VIII cauteres.	And never place the cauterizing iron on this one nerve because it has eight cauteries.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil;	After putting the cauterization on, press it with silk;
aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	Then rest the patient, and do not move the limbs by stretching too long until it is well comforted.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	And if it is dislocated above, that thing happens quickly, then make a cautery on the thick part of the cautery clavi, or many of cauteries in pricking.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	For the joint is closed, and it is healed by the moisture and is free from the pain.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	When in the stomach come cold and much moisture until it reaches its condition, and they multiply the diarrhea to him, and are customary ways of cures and he does not improve, then it is necessary that the pain be supported on his back, and extends his legs and his hands.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture;	After that, do three cauterizations with the spoon of the least pain for the quantity of one drop, at all the cauterization clavicle, and two cauterizations before the two ribs until the figure of the cauterizations is at three angles, and has space between them so they are not joined together as they will go through;
et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	and let the cautery be as sharp as possible to penetrate both sides of the wound, and let the shape of the cauterizer be according to this form without jerking:
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme;	And if you see that the cauterization is done with a large cautery in the stomach according to this form;
et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche;	and the one who has fear of this cautery, cauterize by pricking and holding above the stomach at the point according to the quantity that you see of enchantment;
puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	then cauterize all the cautery that is called "point".
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the care of the care that we have had before, as long as they are healthy.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez;	When the liver comes from pain and moisture and great swelling, as long as it is removed from its natural condition by excess;
et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil;	and the pain is treated as we have said in the sections, and it does not help him much, so it is necessary that the pain be soaked in its own sweat.
et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient;	and the sign of three burns according to this form and this figure and this quantity above the liver, below the hypochondres, where the neck of the ox comes.
et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi;	and there should be space between each burn the thickness of a finger.
et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere;	and the burns should be long like the body, and do not press much with your hand at all on the burn.
et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez;	and it should be turned only as much as half of the courage, and the pain should be straight up its legs.
et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais;	and if he cannot, then let him lie on his side, and extend his legs, and relieve his arms;
et c’est li forme:	and this is the form:
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors;	And if you wish, then cauterize these cauteries with a surgical knife, if you are skilled and wise in the art, and be careful not to burn the whole body, for you would make it all stiff;
et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	and that it does not become soaked in water, for the wounds are very delicate there, and the salves to see.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile:	When he has an abscess in the liver, and you know whether it is in the flesh of the liver or in the web:
s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort;	If he is in the carriage, he does not feel the pain much.
et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	And if he is on the bed, he feels the pain strongly.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste;	And when this treatment is done, it is necessary that the pain be above his head;
et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	and then bend the limb where the abscess is, and then heat the cauterizer which is similar to rice, of which this is the form:
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers;	And cauterize with the cauterizer until the wound is closed, and it comes just to this, until the putrefaction is all gone;
aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez;	After the treatment according to the treatment of bandages until they are healed.
et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	and it is only suitable for those who have long studied the art of medicine, and by whose hands these diseases are never corrupted.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	Therefore, it can be boldly attempted, and in all ways, it seems to me that it is worth leaving it.
dou cautere de pleuresin	fire cauterization
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere:	The ancients said that one should make a fist with the roots of aristolochia and in a similar manner:
pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois;	take a root of aristolochia long, the longest you can find, and it should be dry, and as thick and long as your fingers;
et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize I cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et II petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe;	and grind it in oil, and take it to the fire, and use the fire cautery between the eyebrow and the neck, and two small cauteries a little bit below where the hair is not;
et II cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc;	and two cautery needles between the fifth rib and the sixth, in declining backwards a little.
et I cautere emmi le pis, et I autre sus l’estomac, et I entre II espaules, et II as II costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre II espaules;	and one cautery needle at the lowest point, and another above the stomach, and one between the two shoulders, and two on the ribs in front of the cautery that is between the shoulders.
et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	and do not press your hand, but make it open widely as when smelling.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme;	And they said that no one should use a cauterizing instrument like a razor, and they would clean it and put it between the ribs until it comes to the abscess.
et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	and the pain would go away, as we have said about the liver abscess.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	But in this work, there is fear or the pain kills now, or a fistula comes that cannot be healed.
de la mice	of the mouse
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent III manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the disease of the mouse as we have said in the divisions of treatments, and it does not improve, then they resort to three methods of cauterization that are all good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant;	When there is a certain manner in which you make three or four cautery burns, along the length of the mouse, according to the shape of the liver cauterization that we have mentioned before;
et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos;	and do not press your hand against the entire cautery, and let the hairs be on its back;
et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule;	and another manner of cautery is that you heat the cautery with two needles, as we have shown in the shoulder dislocation;
et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	and lift the skin where the mouse is located, or where the pain from the hairs comes towards the left, and let the elevations that you lift the skin along, according to its length, and the width of the body, and the cautery be according to the width of the body.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII.	After injecting the second nerve, let it burn until the needle is perceived from the other side, and then remove the cauterizer, and thus enter into four.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	And if you see, if cauterized with the entire cauterizer at three nerves.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After treatment when he has had a fever for a long time, and it is worth trying the other remedies mentioned before.
de ydropisie	de l’estomac
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	Cauterization is not useful for hydropsy, except in the manner called "ascletyes".
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis;	When you treat it according to the methods that we have said in divisions, and your treatment does not help, then it is necessary that you make four cauterizations around the wound, and one above the stomach, and one above the liver, and one above the spleen, and one behind the back above the spine, and one at the worst place;
et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	and let the cautery be close to the edge of the wound.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere;	After leaving the cautery in place for a while to cauterize, do not let go of the care for the wound after the cautery.
et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les II ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	and healing will proceed quickly, and both intentions will be accomplished with the help of God.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit;	The shape of the cautery for the belly should be like the one we have shown before.
et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	and that for the back should be oval-shaped, as it is shown before.
de l’enfleure des piez	of the swelling of the feet
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire;	When the feet are swollen to the one who is hydroptic, and are plain of a yellowish color, it is necessary that you cauterize above the back between the auricular and the annular.
et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	And lightly touch the skin with the cauterizing iron, moving towards the direction of return.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	And do not enter too deeply, thus avoiding the yellowish parts, and let the cauteries be done according to this form:
Aprés fai sus II jambes II cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire;	After making two incisions on each leg at the tip of the needle-like instrument;
et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe;	And either cauterize the long one behind the knee and the other in front of it, within the leg;
et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse;	and leave the cauterizations over a longer period to cure what is inside.
aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After the cure of the other treatments that we have mentioned.
de la menoison	of the bandage
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures;	When the solution of the belly comes from cold and moisture, as long as the retentive and digestive virtues that are in the stomach and in the intestines are blocked, and cannot be cured by any means of treatments;
et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai I grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule;	and you see the painful and very skilled patient, if you make great cauterization above the stomach according to what he has spoken before or stomach cauterization, in cauterization circulates.
et IIII cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout I cautere clavile subtil, et II cauteres sus les hainches.	and IV cauterizations around the abdomen subtly to all the delicate cauterization fork, and II cauterizations above the hips.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et I cautere sus chaicun yle, et II petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see the abundance of moisture and the patient suffering from pain, then apply cauterization above the knuckle, and cauterization on each joint, and two small cauterizations below the stomach, for the cure is beneficial when it has good assistance.
de la cure des emorroydes	of the treatment of worms
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres:	When the emorrhoids are at their foundation, or one or more, and are ancient and are large humors cold and moist corrupted, and are cured as we have said in divisions, and it does not improve, if you make cauterizations:
III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois;	Above the spine of the back, which is all before unaccustomedly little by little in triangulating, and with a cauterizing iron of two degrees.
et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile;	And if you think that his stomach is cooled, and the meat does not cook, and one sees the face swell, then the face is burned with a large cauterizing iron across the stomach, as it is previously described, and the other above the liver, and the other across the entire cauterizing iron.
et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	And leave the cauterizing iron long and tense.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After treatment, the limb as long as it is healthy.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the cartilage which is called "thelul
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit;	When you cut the hair, if it scorches the cauterizing iron which seems like a razor, then put it all burned on top of the hair that is being cut.
et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort;	and let your hand remain until the fire cauterizes the vein at its birth, from which the bleeding stops.
fai ceu une fois ou II, et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit;	Do this once or twice, and if there is much blood, cauterize each as we have said.
aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez;	after the treatment of wounds until they are healed.
et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	and if you cauterize with a large fire brand, it will have greater help.
de plaie mal curee	of a poorly treated wound
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the wound cannot be suffered by a surgeon or opened, as we will tell in its place, then a bad disease comes that cannot be healed except by cauterization.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	When any comes with a fistula, and it is inflamed and discharged putrid and corrupted moisture, then you must provide for the whole of a thin tent, and guard that you cleanse the tent as much as possible.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing;	After sharpening the fire brand like a razor, and inserting it into the fistula according to the amount that enters, and then restart the cauterization until the wound is cleansed and healed, once, or twice, or three times, according to the amount of need.
et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	and watch for the vein that is cut, and large veins.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans;	if the fistula goes to the center of the bladder and intestine, then watch for these areas, and do not perform any other procedures except in the area where it is needed, and think that it is not healed.
aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement;	after healing the area as long as it is healthy, and if there are any wounds, remove them, and the matter is removed along with the tension, then cleanse that the area is completely healed.
et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font;	and if the matter is not removed, cleanse that the area is torn, and corrupt the bone at the source.
et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	And thus, as one of those that we will say in its place.
de la maladie des reins	of the disease of the kidneys
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit;	When pain from cold comes to the back, and with great heaviness, and does not take the form of a woman, then it is necessary that you do cauterization on both sides of the back with the clavile cautery that we have previously mentioned.
et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra III cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	And if we cauterize it in the middle, it will have three cauterizations in a line, and they will be greater help.
de la vessie	of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et I a destre et I a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce;	When the bladder is weak and easily affected by cold and moisture, and the hairs retain urine, then do cauterization in the part in front of the bladder, where the hair begins to grow, and on both sides, and let each cauterization be as long as a needle.
et li fais I cautere defuers le dos, ou II se tu en as besoing;	and if you have a fever afterward, do the fire cautery on the back, or if you have a fever, do it.
et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	and let the fire cautery be done in the form previously mentioned.
de la marris	of the marsh
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde;	When the wound is cold and moist, and does not leave any room for healing, and the flowers are corrupted and their termination is late;
et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor:	and when they come, they cause great pain:
adonques covient il c’on li faice III cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et II cauteres defuers le dos;	therefore it is necessary to do the fire cautery around the wound, as we have said or the fire cautery of the bladder, and two fire cautery afterward on the back.
et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	and let the fire cautery be done as we have said.
de la hainche	of the waist
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble;	When the thick, viscous moisture descends to the hip of the back, and for this reason it moves out of its place, and the signs are that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together.
et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a I cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle;	and it is found in the lower part of the hip, so it is necessary to cauterize the pain above the hip bone with a cautery similar to a circle, and sign before the bone as it turns, so that the hip is inside the circle.
et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	and if the cautery is such as those used to cauterize the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai III cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs;	And if this cautery is not present, make three cauteries of large olive oil, and let the cautery be applied as all the others.
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and the care as long as they are healthy.
de la dolor de la hainche	of the pain in the back
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene:	When pain comes in the side of the hip, and it is from cold and moisture, and the hairs are curled as we have said in the division and the treatment does not help, and the disease is ancient:
adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	then it is necessary that you purge the hairs of the large humors from bad-smelling pills or other good-smelling pills similar.
Aprés li fai cautere;	After you do the cauterization;
et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres:	and the manner of the cauterization is as follows in two ways:
c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	that is to say, together with hot medicines and fire cauterization.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz:	Fire cauterization is done in many ways, such as:
que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire;	that you cauterize on the back of the abdomen III triangular cauterizations in this form, and it makes good depth and great, and has between each cauterization a space of the size of a finger, and let the cauterization be oil-based.
aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	Never cauterize in the middle of the abdomen, because it has four in this form:
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche;	And if you see, if it is cauterized with the cauterization of the circle that we have previously mentioned in the dislocation of the abdomen;
mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	but do it in such a way that the circle contains all the belly, and all the spines are straight.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	And this is the manner to do in surgery, when the pain remains in the shoulder and does not reach as far as the thigh or leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc;	And if it comes to the thigh and leg, then make two cauteries where the hairs are, and one cautery on the knee four inches above, on the right side a little bit.
et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur;	and let the cauteries be sharp, and let the spines be straight.
et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	and if the hairs feel that the pain extends to two fingers or near the wrist, then cauterize where it feels the pain three fingers or four at the cauterizing iron called "finger".
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus;	And if your craft is, then do more of it.
et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if the pain is displaced from the groin to the thigh, then perform a cauterization with a cutaneous or circular cautery, and be careful in all your cauterizations that you do not burn the nerves and large arteries, and that you do not cause greater harm and contraction.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	I myself have seen many who have done cautery on the ankle of the foot, and they let it burn so much that the leg was completely blackened, and the feet as well, and all the flesh was rotten.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	After a stomach purge causing death.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	And if the pain is in both parts together, do cauterization on one and the other, according to this method.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce;	And the wise say in the cauterization of the loins, in this manner, make such a needle and let it be at the top as large as a small nail or a little less, and let it be inserted between the ribs and let one end insert into the other at a distance equal to the quantity of a new pence.
et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait;	and they are punctured through two parts, and they are also like needles, and there is one good iron needle.
et c’est li forme:	And this is the shape:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit;	And let them be heated until they are all red and smell like burnt hay, and then place them on the back of the misaligned ribs, and turn them over to the healthy side.
et lou cauterize une fois I cautere reont et lou laisse III jors;	And the cauterization is done once the fire has gone out and left for three days.
et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens;	Then apply a poultice of butter, and leave the wound open for ten days.
aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the healing of the wound until it is healthy.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent;	Albucasis says that we use this cauterization little because of its fearful appearance, and few see those who use it.
et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	And in every way this is the best cauterization, which can suffer, and where it adheres.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi;	The cauterizing instrument of burning medicine is such that you make a tool for insertion into the edge of the door, and it is either of rain or iron at one end, and in the height has II us, and between each quantity of the greatness of one dose;
et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	and it is open below and above, and they join together according to this form:
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche;	After placing the board of the hipbone on the injured side lying down, and quickly placing your hand on top of the board of the hipbone.
aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	Then pour between the two circles of the hot water which is heated by the fire I pot, and let it stand for an hour with slight pressure, and suffer the patient with the heat and burning of the.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu;	For it truly has the effect of a burn;
et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit;	And when the burn has passed, gently lift your hand with the instrument and raise the hip bone gently, and let it rest for three hours, and put on butter until the blackened skin is removed.
et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait;	and let it rest for three days until it is healed;
et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	and this would be the last aid after the treatment of wounds as long as they are healthy.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument;	And if the pain has spread to the thigh or leg, make the instrument that you have used in the buttocks increased;
et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	and this is the method of the hot iron, and I have written about it in treating the correction of medicine.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	Take equal parts of lime and quicklime, and grind them together, and put them in a new earthenware pot.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir;	or he has one small puncture except that the tip of a razor can pierce through;
et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main;	and put that one in the other, well boiled, and place on alum and chalk and sweet oil until there are two of them above the powders, which you will have well prepared in your hand;
et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	and let it remain until it has descended as much as possible without falling off, then take all of it, and pour it onto charcoal and alkali as before.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres.	And if it is very much, then it should be administered in the form of medicines and cauteries for other members.
Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	Because it does work like that, and if there are other medicines that are well-cauterized in the loins such as this and miel anacardi and charcoal with soap, all these things mixed together.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	And Galiens tells us of a cure where some people were cured of back pain and sciatica, and the louse much, and said that no other cure was done, and that they were healed once when this cure was done, and it was bathed as it is shown hereafter.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie;	And in a similar manner, you should take fresh and dry licorice root, and grind it well with a little fat, and put on the loins and thighs and legs where the pain is, and tie it;
et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	and he leaves it for three hours and by the amount that the pain does not feel the burning.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	Then make the patient enter or take a bath until the heart is slightly warmed, and then make him enter or lie down, and the pain will go away completely and be healed.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	And it is advised that no one should use such cauterizing medicines unless after the evacuation of blood.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout;	And Dioscorides says that when the vein of the arm is cauterized with lead from a goat, it helps a lot.
et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	and it should be done in this manner by the cautery.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	Take the same and crush it with old oil, and put it on the groove that is between the thumb and the other one called the forefinger.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains;	After taking dry lead from a goat, and putting it in the fire until it becomes charcoal, and putting it on the cloth, and leaving it until it is soaked.
et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee;	and repeat this, and do not stop doing it until you think that it is approaching the ribs, and that the pain has ceased.
et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	And this method of cauterization is called "goat's head cauterization".
de la dolor dou dos	of the pain is doubled.
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, or from falling or from impact or from too great evacuation, or from similar expansive cold matter, none of these is worth cauterization, because it is from the infusion of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne V cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir;	It is necessary to apply three lines of fetid ointments or similar substances, placed on top of the wound, where the pain is located, using five cauterizing irons or more according to their virtue and quantity that the wound can tolerate.
et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»;	And it should be made with the cauterizing iron called "spoon".
et se tu vues, fai III cauteres ou IIII au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	And if you see, use three or four cauterizing irons according to the middle-claw form of this method.
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor;	Frequently, this disease comes to small children, and the signs of its onset are that they have stiffness in their joints when they move, and fear.
et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	and you feel a hollowness at the last spinous process of the back and in us, the appearance that comes above the other spinous processes.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this and want to heal it, then cauterize with that fire cautery in this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	If the fire cautery prepares each part of the spine equally.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	And if you see, then cauterize around the spine with that fire cautery touching two or three lines, and the points close to each other.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	After healing the limb as long as it is healthy according to what we have said, and be sure that you do not apply fire cautery in a place where there is a spasm of the nerve.
de la dolor des jointes	of the pain of the joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere:	When the pain of joints is due to moisture that has spread to each limb of the body, and when the pain comes in the feet, which is properly called "gout", and when it is caused by cold and cures of medicines cannot cure it, then it is cured by cauteries in this manner:
fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	Make the most of cauterizing around the joint, and let the fire cautery be done in this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	And if there is a place that you can prick on the face of the foot, then let the cauterizing be done with the whole cautery called "needle".
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire;	And if the pains come to the knees and other joints, and often occur, then let it be cauterized above each knee with three or four fire cautery on each part, throughout the fire cautery;
et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	and if you have more skill, then do more, but do not exceed your hand beyond what is necessary for the healing of the wound.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	And if the pains descend just above the genitals and in the back, administer the cauterization that we have mentioned in our chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes;	And if the pains are in the hands, then let it be cauterized around the finger joint with two lines;
et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main;	If there is no pain, then make small cuts over each joint and over the hair of the hand.
et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	And if the pains come from the elbow or shoulder, then cauterize each part, and apply good management to the injury and pain-relieving medicines.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	For if you give good governance and purge the humor, it will be healed by the help of God.
de la routure dou syfac	of the toothache
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor;	When a fracture occurs in the angle, and the bruises descend to the joints and this is new, then it is necessary that when you see it to treat, that it does not move at all that day.
et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre;	and that he use things that lower the belly, so that the swelling goes down from his stomach.
aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors;	After the patient sits on their back between your hands, and you command them to color their spine until the bruise is healed, and you massage it at your discretion, and signify the end of the treatment by a sign that resembles half a circle above the chest.
puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Then heat the cauterizing iron in this form:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	until it is white and sweats scented drops.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu;	Then massage the bruises on their limbs.
et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier;	And the nurses color their hands so they do not return later.
et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains;	And work well on the thighs with the misalignment, and put out of the way the cupping and the leech over the thighs, and the other above the worst one that colors their hands.
puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os;	Then place the cautery above the sign at all your fingers, and hold it straight and hold it until you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, then repeat it another time until you come just to the bone.
et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere;	and guard subtly that the boil does not burst while you are doing the cautery;
que tu ne le brulasses;	that you do not burn it;
et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	and that by this means the hairs do not die, or other harm.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	And if you do not come to the bone with the cauterization, your work is worthless.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure;	And it is necessary that the cautery for children be subtle according to the measure of the eyes, and for large people also large according to their measure;
aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	After three days, care for the burned area until the scab has formed.
aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee;	After the care of other remedies until it is healed, and grind the hair 40 times on its back until the wound is well scarred.
et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And it should be covered for a long time, so that the bandages do not stick when he goes to bed.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors;	And after 40 days, when he wants to get up, give him a well-made bandage, and put it on for another 40 days.
et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire;	And have good rest, that he works little and avoids too much drinking and eating, and too high heat.
et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	and when he gives this instruction, it is completely healthy.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And I will tell you about the cure after cutting into his chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	of the rupture of the belly
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur;	When wounds come from other bellies and are known to not be growing anymore, and you see that they are not growing, then apply the fire cautery according to its quantity, and let the third part of the care be.
aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit;	After the care according to what we have said.
et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	And none of the old ones have said that it should be cauterized with the fire cautery at three angles according to this form.
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	1. But the first sign is the shoulder dropping and make a line across the width of the rent, and another below, and keep your hand on all the cauterizing iron.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	1. But the first cauteries are lighter and more painless.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	1. of ancient pain in any limb
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	1. When pain comes in any limb, whether to fall or to strike, and this pain lasts long, and the medical cure does not help, then it must be cauterized with the cauterizing iron called "poins", and the cauteries should be according to the length of the limb and its smallness and weakness and its strength and its position of twists and its pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien;	If it is healthy with the first fire cautery, it is good.
se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	If it is not healthy with the first fire cautery, then start again with the other cautery above it, for it is usually the case that it should be moved to the member that is closest, because it is necessary that you make the cauteries until the hairs are healthy.
de meselerie	of cauterization
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	Cauterization is never used without great help, and simultaneously the disease that comes from the putrefaction of fluids and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief:	If you see the cautery, take warning if the disease is at the beginning, and if it has been treated according to what we have said in the division, and do not let it spread or stay, and you doubt that the corruption will not spread throughout the body, then you must apply several cauteries above the head:
I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous;	and cautery the head at the back and the other towards the forehead at the end of the eyebrows;
et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel;	and two above the two horns, and one behind the hairline;
et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir;	and let your hand be so that the cauteries reach the bone, and as long as the scabs come out so that the vapors of the large humors can escape;
et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	and the cautery is applied to the mouse according to what it is supposed to be.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse;	And if the wound is scattered all over;
et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et I cautere en som lou neis, et II cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et VI cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et I grant sus la crupie et I autre delez, et II sus les II espaules;	and it is clearly painful, then you must cautiously cauterize with these cauteries that we have said or chief, and the cauterizing agent in the nostril, and two cauterizations on the spine of the neck, and six cauterizations on the spine of the back, and one on the great buttock and one on the other side, and two on the shoulders;
et II sus les coutes, et II sus les tendrons dou pis, et I sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains;	and two on the hips, and two on the knees, and one on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the grooves of the hands;
et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler;	and guard against the nerves that are above the lower back, so as not to burn them.
et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et I autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et I autre sus lou foie.	and never perform fire cauterization above the spine, and on the other side of the stomach bone, and on the other side of the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite;	And make sure that the more you perform cauterization, the less help you provide, and move them less.
et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	And make sure that the pain does not feel the same as the healthy ones, because the body is already corrupted.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	It should be great and small according to the members and the joints, according to what you will find in the manner of irons.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	After treating the limb with flour several times with honey and other treatments until it is healed.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre;	When inflammation comes to any limb and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, and it does not heal, then perform cauterization above the limb according to its size and smallness.
et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur;	and let the cautery enter slightly into the skin.
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	then apply ointments until they are healed.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure;	And never cauterize with the hand and the foot and the back, at the end of the nerve that moves the member, and thus if it is broken then it is inflamed.
et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	and do not interfere with anything if they are not knowledgeable about the members and the outlets of the nerves moving the body.
de albaras	I'm sorry, I don't understand your request
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color;	When the disease called "albaras" is awakened, and the medical knowledge does not help at all, then cauterize with a cautery slightly in front, according to the amount of the skin, until the blister is broken and its color changes.
puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie;	then the cure of flour and lentils with rose oil and plantain leaves, and blood from the colon and blood from the swan, each in equal parts;
et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	and let them all be mixed together, and let it be bound with a cloth, and let it be applied to the limb until it is healed.
li cure de chancre par cautere	The treatment of chancre by cauterization
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	When chancre appears at the beginning, and you see it stop growing, if you cauterize it with a cauterizer that seems like a circle, all around the edge of the chancre.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre;	And all the wise say that one should make a fire cauterization likewise in the middle of the chancre;
et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois;	and I do not think it is good, because I believe that it will not be ulcerated and corrupted, and I have never seen it happen once;
et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	And the more important thing is that it should be cauterized around, with the cauterant called "circle", as we have said in many cauterants.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	of the withered who cannot die
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens;	When someone has a disease called "adubelati", and it lingers or due to the excess that it causes or due to the severity of the illness when they are elderly (that is, too old) and they have little blood, or for lack of tension;
et tu la vues haster de meurer:	and you see it approaching death:
adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant;	therefore, cauterize around with many small cauterants by pricking;
aprés le laisse ensi.	after leaving it thus.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	For it will hasten to die.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see it piercing through the entire cauterization, then heat the cauterization from where it is formed:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	And place your hand in the middle of this disease called "adubelati" until the cauterizer has pierced through, and let the cauterizer be such that the hairs feel afterwards in a similar manner as the course of the porridge is alleviated.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	After the treatment until they are completely healed.
li cure dou feu par fer	The treatment of fire by iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	Another way of disease is called "corrodens", and it is nothing but a piece of member, for it twists the members as if the dry reeds would.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est;	If you see this disease in the limb that can suffer from cautery together with fire, then heat the cautery knives very small and large, according to what is needed for the limb or the disease.
aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	After cautery of all parts until you reach all the corruption, and nothing remains of it, that everything that is corrupted be removed.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	Then leave it for three days, and apply a poultice of cauterized herbs on the wounds, suffering with oil until the burned skin is removed, and all corruption.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	After the treatment of wounds, scars are generated.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin;	And if you see after three days that healthy pus does not arise, it is good;
et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	and if not, then begin the cautery again on what remains of the corrupted parts.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu;	And this method has never been treated with medicine in place of fire cautery;
mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division:	but all fire cauterization is of greater aid, and I have already told the cure of medicine in the division:
pren la quant tu en as mestier.	take what you have at hand.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	of the bones that come to the feet
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	Many times it happens that the feet by deficiency give birth to a disease called "clubfoot" according to our understanding, and it is a great deformity that makes the foot look like a ball.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	And the cauteries for this disease are in two ways.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	That is to say, fire cauterization, and needle cauterization with hot water.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges;	Fire cauterization is such that you heat the cautery as if it were a pen of iron, and it should be made of good iron at the measure that it can pierce the nail of all parts, and that it has thin edges;
aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou;	then put it all heated above the nail, and turn your hand completely around the nail until it reaches the base of the nail;
et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture;	and let it stay thus for three hours until it begins to drip blood;
puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	then make an ointment of wild, crushed herbs with oil, and leave the ointment on all night, and the splints will be removed and uprooted from their roots.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat the wound by applying heat until it is healed.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude;	And if they are converted by previous injuries to the flesh, and often in the hands and feet, then it is necessary that you reapply the fire cautery of hot iron.
et est en teil maniere:	and it is in some way:
pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues;	take a needle of iron or steel, or a quill of vulture, and put it on the splint and the wound, that is to say, pore the verucae.
et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine;	And place the nail across so that it holds everything together, then put a little hot iron, and hold firmly with your hand, and press your hand turning it so that the edge of the nail comes to the root of the nail, and find the hot point deeply near the root.
et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre;	and suffer a little from the burning of the hot point for an hour;
puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	then leave it like that, and it will all come out at its roots.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	Then do another one, until you have relieved all those who are in the body, then cure the wounds that cause harm to the heart.
li cure dou trembler	cure of the shaking
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices IIII cauteres ou IV sus l’espinee dou dos, I cautere entre chescune espinee;	When anyone trembles from cold or a quarter-fever or other, it is necessary that you make four cauteries or four on the spine of the back; one cautery between each spine.
et I cautere ou pez, et I sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire;	and with fire or pliers, and over the stomach with cauterizing iron;
si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	if it allows the wound to tremble, and the health will quickly recover from the cold disease.
des pustules puans	of stinking pustules
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	No time appears when the body is bathed, or pustules appear that come from large corrupted matters.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule:	if it is necessary for the first when they appear that one make cauterization over each head of the pustule:
un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	a fine cauterizing iron of willow wood, of which the tip is held in the fire, or of the root of aristolochia long, or with a lens cauterizer.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez;	And never cauterize at the beginning when they appear, in this manner, and it cannot grow new ones, but is disrupted from the excess from which they come, and are healthy;
mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	but it is necessary that this be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	When the artery is cut
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses;	often there is great bleeding from the artery that is cut at the wound that comes to the part of the body, or at the incision of the abscess, or in the cauterization of the member, and similar things;
et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	and it is a very painful thing to stop.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus;	and in any case when it has to do with anyone, you must quickly place your finger on the wound of the vein, and press very tightly until the blood stops flowing out of your finger, and no more gushes out;
puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge;	then apply the branding irons of various sizes, both small and large, until they are all red.
puis empren I, ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	then apply I, whether large or small depending on the wound and where the artery is located, and place the branding iron above that vein where you hold your hand, and keep the branding iron as high as to not leave it uncovered.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement I autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if the first one suddenly breaks while you are lifting it above the vein, and the cautery is extinguished, then quickly take the other cautery that is in the fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez;	And do not stop doing this one after another until the wound is completely covered.
et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide;	and watch that you do not burn the tendon that is nearby, and that no other harm comes to the wound.
et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des IIII manieres que nos avons dit:	and ensure that when the wound is cut from the artery, it cannot be completely covered immediately if the artery is large, unless by one of the four methods that we have mentioned.
ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc;	ou by cauterization, or by extraction when it is not yet treated, or by strong pulling with a thread, or by medicines placed above that have the power to stop bleeding;
et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	and then tied and held in place.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Whoever administers tight bandaging of cloth or other things burning above, or similar things, does not benefit unless not.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne;	And if this happens to anyone and they do not have any remedy present, then they should place their finger index above the wound of the vein as we have said, and tightly hold it until it is stopped above the wound and above the vein;
et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez;	and they should not move it, but they should frequently wipe it with cold water until it is very cold and thickened and stopped;
et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	and make inquiries about what concerns him regarding cautery and medicines.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	This begins the second book of remedies for tails
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres;	We have told you in the first chapter about all diseases in which it is necessary to use fire cauterization or fiery medicines, and the questions and causes and instruments and forms of cautery.
et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	and I have placed that chapter on the shoulders below the feet, and I will go to this chapter by the same way because it is easier to find what we want.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And therefore when I begin this chapter, it is necessary, dear son, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first of the cauteries, and for this reason it requires greater caution.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses;	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things;
ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	when there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	And I warn you that you should not undertake foolishness.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	For many methods of people come to healing.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice;	if they come from such people who have become so with their disease that they die easily due to the falsehood of their disease, and the greatness of their misfortune;
et de ces doit on avoir paor.	and one should fear these.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit:	And among these, there are those who give you sense, and say:
«atendez, je sui garis»;	wait, I am grainy";
et li maladie est despitouse.	and the disease is stubborn.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los;	You should only consent to those who come to you with this manner, but put more careful consideration in your honor than in your desire, and do not open rashly, but wisely of what you are certain, and which you have taken and lost;
et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie;	and use prediction and indication in the treatment of your ailments for health to be converted;
et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	and it will help you to acquire good reputation, and glory, and memory of the long term.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Very dear son, Our Lords give you good understanding and truth, and if you wish to breathe from the holy inspiration of his hand, indeed.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	I have ordered you to write this chapter by examining other chapters, according to what is before the chapter on cauteries, which I have previously described from head to foot, so that you may find it more easily.
dou chief plein d’aigue	full of sharp
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant;	It is said that this disease often occurs in children at birth, and when the neck of the child is held too tightly;
et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	and it never occurs for no reason that one has not been.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors;	And I have never seen this disease except in children, and all those that I have seen have died;
et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	and therefore it seems to me that it is better to abandon this work in these treatments.
Et je vis I enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir;	I saw a child who was complaining of sharp pain, and the head was swelling each day until it could not be supported.
et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os;	and believed it was so much moisture that he died, and this moisture is gathered outside the bone above the symphysis, between the jaw and the bone;
et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large;	and the work is such that if the moisture is between the jaw and the bone, and the abscesses are small, then you should make a wide incision into the head;
et soit ausi longe com II nous, tant que li mostor corre;	and it should be as long as ours, until the moisture drains out.
et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	and now the form of the spotlight:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai II fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is more extensive, and the abscess is larger, make two incisions in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut:	And if the moisture is outside the bone, and you see the signs of the commissures of the head opened on each part, and the sharp pain when you press it with your hand inside, and it does not return to you:
si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief III fendures selonc ceste maniere:	then it is necessary that you make three cuts in the head like this:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	And after the incision, remove all the moisture.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor;	After straining the cuts with linen and powders, and put wine and oil, and leave it thus for five hours;
puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	then release it, and treat the wound with compresses and counter-irritants, and leave the head strained equally, and give the patient dry meat to eat until the member is comfortable and healthy.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue;	And another way of incision is that you look at the size of the abscess and the gathering of pus;
car aucune fois est elle devant;	for it is never there.
aucune fois derrier;	never behind.
aucune fois en destre;	never to the side.
et aucune fois en senestre.	and never to the other side.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir;	Measure then where the abscess is open and the gathering of pus, and make the cut according to what you have the ability to do.
et warde que tu ne coper l’artere;	and be careful not to cover the artery.
et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	and bring a little blood, so that the hairs do not die from the drainage of blood and the evacuation of moisture.
de reume	I'm sorry, I don't understand
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les II arteres.	When it happens to someone with a disease called "cataract" in the eyes or the pupil, and the disease is ancient, and medical treatment does not help much, then the cure is to cauterize with what covers the two arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief;	It is therefore necessary, when you see them coping, to make the hairs grow back on their heads.
aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel;	After that, he rubs the affected area with a rough cloth until the arteries appear, then holds the hairs steady against all the cloth.
puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues;	Then look at where the blood flows out, and the veins on both sides are behind the ears, and they are not yet restored.
puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	Then sign the veins with a sharp needle, then cut both sides of one inch, until the vein comes just to the bone, and this should be through the width of the head.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com II dois au traver.	And if you see, press the lint away from the artery and cover it above, cutting as much as it should be through the middle.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is cut, the blood spurts continuously outwards.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os;	And if the artery does not open when felt, it is necessary to measure the quantity of space at three digits, then drill into the bone;
et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere;	and the amount of blood that needs to be let out is six cubic centimeters, and perhaps a little more or less, depending on what the patient can bear and the replenishment of the artery;
puis regarde la plaie:	then look at the wound:
s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	if it remains above the bone pointed, and if the gauze that was applied does not come out, then strain the wound and bind it, and apply the ointment until it is healed.
de emigrainne	Of the head
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When an ancient headache comes, and the catarrh is sharp, due to the moisture of tears and chills in the temples and old age and similar things, and it is treated with methods of medical cures and nothing seems to help, then we should cauterize the arteries of the temples, as we have said.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit;	And the method of extracting them is such that the hairs of his temples face the bad ones, and listen to the artery that opens in the temple, for it opens well by its beating, and is quickly restored only in some men who are too thin;
et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement;	and if it is restored, hold the neck with some cloths, then rub the limb with some rough cloth, and raise the limb with hot water until the artery opens clearly;
puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	then take the spoon of which this is the shape:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie;	then gently scrape the skin until you reach the artery, then cut it at the top with pincers, and remove it well from all the bands that are outside of each part;
et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	And if the artery is thin, turn it back to the tip of the needle, then cover that part according to the amount of the two needles.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	For if it is not covered, it will not heal completely.
Et trai dou sanc des VI c/, jusc’a III;	And draw out one drop of blood from the sixth vein, just enough to three drops.
et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en II leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc;	And if the artery is large, it is necessary to tie it in two lengths of a strong silk thread, double thickness, so that no blood comes before the healing of the wound, and no bleeding occurs.
puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les II liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez;	Then cover the excess between the two knots in the same hour, and then, if you see, if the patient is cauterized with the cauterizing iron just to the bone until the needles are covered.
et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And this is the mortal work, if the pains are not accompanied by fever and he has a hot constitution.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors:	For the cautery is used to finish the moistures:
por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	Therefore, it is of greater help against moistures.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites;	Or it is necessary for the extraction of arrows that one fills the wound with old cotton and places bandages well made;
et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And when they are removed, one should apply dry medicines that cause heat and bandages until they are healed.
et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez;	And if without cutting the artery as much as you work, then one must quickly cover it with a cauterizer, or one fills the wound with vinegar and hold it in one's hand that the uncut part is not soaked.
et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient;	and if you do not have this present, put it on the limb as much as the joint should not be frozen, and raise the limb from high cold water until the joint is constantly, and it should be stretched as it should.
et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de II pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	and what is more fluid and lighter in the extraction of the artery is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery cutting from two parts, but the cutting should be well spaced to last longer in their heat.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	When the instruments are too tight, it holds less heat.
Et doit avoir entre les II coutelz I doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les II leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en II leus;	And it should have between the two knives one inch of space, and then when you have stopped the bleeding from both veins, and you melt the hot iron on top until it comes just short of the bone, and cover the vein in two parts;
et soient esloigniet entre les II chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout;	and they are spaced apart between the two shoulders because there is no doubt about this cauterization all in all.
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	and it is the form of the cauterization:
des larmes	of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis;	when the tears of the eyes are flowing down from the veins that are above the back of the head, and it does not benefit from any medical treatment that is done, and you see the face of the patient become twisted, and feels as if there is a trembling.
et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	and they are held and moistened so much that the hairs of the papers are burned, and the papers are scorched by the heat of the tears, if there is a need for this treatment.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front;	And they called the ancient "healer of contusions," and you should do this for the patient who has this disease, to let his hairs grow on the front, then make three cuts evenly along the length of the front;
et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres;	and either one of the cuts as if two are too low in front, and the others two on the ribs above the papers, and be careful not to incise the arteries that are above the ribs;
et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins;	and move your hand away from the continuation of the two mandibles, and each wound the quantity of three drops through the joints;
et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	and have prepared a piece of sponge and plenty of cloths to absorb the blood, then boil the syringe full of two parts of this mixture:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision;	from the incision which is made from the temple just above the second incision;
et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les II fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	and scrape all that is between the two cuts to the entire surface of the face which is above the bone, then make another cut from the same incision towards the other second, and then extract this syringe.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	If you insert the tool called "cultellaire" into the first cut, it is very sharp on one side and blunt on the other, and its shape is:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	And place the sharp edge of the tool towards the cheek and the blunt side towards the bone, and push it until it reaches the other cut.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer;	And cover all the vessels that descend from the head as far as the eyes until the incision is continued as far as the surface of the face, and then make another cut from the same incision towards the other side;
et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris;	and then strain out the blood evenly, and express the joint for the blood taken.
puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne;	then place a piece of clean, old cloth in each wound, and apply poultices made of flour mixed with wine, oil, and vinegar, and make sure that abscesses do not form.
et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then apply a new bandage to the wound, and apply a large amount of fresh garlic, then use the healing salve with rose oil, and other remedies to treat the wound, until it is healed.
dou reume des eulz	repetition of the eyes
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees;	When using the fire cauterizer, you will see the eyes tense and small, and weakened, and the papers burned.
et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue;	and the hairs prick, and when they are shaved, there is great pain in the forehead, and the hairs are discharged.
adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	therefore avoid these accidents that those matters and that cautery do not come from many wounds, and the healing that is, if it is this.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	And it is that you command the patient to turn his head back, then make a deep cut across the forehead, and another one wide at the top of the nose.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os;	and begins from the wound on the right temple to the left temple, and the incision just to the bone;
et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier;	and avoid your hand from the nerves of the temples that move at the wound;
et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin;	and when the bone is exposed, soak up all the blood with a sponge, and then clean between the two lips of the wound and put old cloth, and apply linen;
puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut;	Then place bandages soaked in wine and oil above, and guard against abscess.
quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	When it is removed, it is necessary that you rub the bone until it begins to burn like charcoal, then treat with things that cause sweating, which make one perspire.
En teil maniere:	In a similar manner:
pren II parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine IIII parties, et en fai emplaustre;	Take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of mustard, and make an ointment.
et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	And administer it in these wounds to cause sweating throughout.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of ear obstruction
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des IIII choses:	All that which drips into our ears is one of the four things:
ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer;	or grains, or beasts, or arrowheads of stone or similar things like iron.
ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois;	if seeds, such as beans, peas;
ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	or things that flow down, such as honey and similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	When it enters the ear as a stone or other thing that does not fit well in the ear, it does not grow in the ear, so put the ear to the sun.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction;	If you see the stone, if any drop of purple oil or hemlock oil drips, then moisten extraction.
et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine;	and the patient's condition is made to vomit, and he stops his nose when he vomits, and puts cloth or wool inside the ear.
et estent l’oreille au desus.	and the ear is held upwards.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure;	Often, this treatment causes.
et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	and if it does not come up, then moisten extraction with delicate tweezers, of which this is the shape:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin;	If they jump as far as possible with pins, it is good.
se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure;	If not, then apply gentle pressure extraction at the subtle groove of the small double-joint.
et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne;	And if they do not jump by that, then make a rain cloud and press the top of the cloud onto the ear canal or opening of the ear, and stop the wax inside the ear with soft candle so that it cannot enter with the cloud.
puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit;	Then remove it carefully, as it often comes out like we have said.
et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor;	And if it does not come out in that manner, then take some gauze and wrap it around the eyes, and put any instrument that is sharp to cut through wax, and put a small amount of cotton inside.
puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	Then press the gland above the stone or whatever it is, and drain it.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme;	And if she does not drain from all these things that we have said, then quickly cut open the ear as if it is an abscess, and blood flows, and spasms.
et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant;	And the manner of the cut is that you first suck out the pus from the ear canal, and then draw out the blood according to the measure of its virtue, then place the pus between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and make a small cut at the base of the ear at the grease or where it depends.
et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche;	and let the knife be as sharp as a crescent moon, until you reach the stone, then chip away according to your ability, and suck it vigorously into your mouth.
et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and the cure until they are healed.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction;	And if it is small and swells up, administer extraction;
et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre I spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	and if it cannot be removed, then administer the following subtle remedy according to this form:
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	and administer incision of that grain.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces;	But do not make a mistake when you think the grain is moist due to earwax, until you have made many pieces of it;
puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	then extract it with delicate forceps and suction, as we have said, so that the extraction is aligned.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	In the ear therefore that is blocked, it is appropriate to use the blowing of the nose of the condition first, and widen the ear with old cotton.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	And let it lie flat across the ear itself or where the sharp pain is.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	If it jumps out due to the sky, it's good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu;	if not, take many needles according to the length of your thread and thin, and heat them slightly in the fire;
et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille;	and insert the hairs one by one through an opening in his ear, and go up from there. from the other foot, and pierce with another needle above the needle that is in the ear;
et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer;	and do not stop piercing with needle after needle until the sharp one has passed through entirely, and thus it will pass through entirely;
et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars;	If you see, take a reed, and blow one of the shoulder blades into the ear, and the other hold with fire until the most flexible reed is burnt.
puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	Then make another of the other joints until the sharp edge is all gone, as we have said in the stone.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division;	In the extraction of the beast, if it is small, like a mouse and similar things, treat it as we have said in the division.
mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures;	But if it is of large size, so that one can feel it, then minimize the extraction of pins.
et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	And the least thing to remove is what is in the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil:	In extracting worms from the ears, if you are unable to cure as we have described in the division and treatment of distillations, and the cure does not help, then you should look into the ear using sunlight.
s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	If there are no worms, then use thin forceps to extract them; if they do not appear, then take the form of the tool that is used for this purpose.
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	And be narrow below and wide above.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine;	And use the most subtle tool in the ear according to the amount of pain caused by the worm, then it is successful for the entire tool.
fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	Do this often until all the worms are out.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere;	And if they do not obey to exit, then bend the needle around the neck of the cotton as I have said in the stone.
et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations;	And if they do not succeed as we have said, then administer distillations that the ancients have experienced in the opening of veins, and you will find them where to treat distillations.
et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And if you distill your oils and medicines into the ear of this instrument, as you see in this form:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a I petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller;	And it should be made of silver or brass, with small holes below to pour and above to pour out.
et por presser dedens la distillation a I estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren I raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton;	And to press within the distillation of the well-made brass instrument for this, and if you see take a razor and wrap it around the tip evenly with cotton.
puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille;	then pour your oil or juice into the ear, and whatever you see in the canal, and the canal should be in the ear.
puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille;	then press the cotton into the toothbrush and press your hand firmly until the oil is dripped or moved out of the ear.
et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations I poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille;	and the smell of the oil inside, and the distillation should be slightly warm when boiling, as it is distilled into the ear.
et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	and be careful that it is not too cold, because the medicine would not be very good.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of ear obstruction
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles;	No child is born without some ear problems.
et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir;	and this also happens to some people due to injury of the wound, or a foreign body inside the ear, and this injury comes only once in the ear, if one cannot see it;
et aucune fois avient I poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	and never comes out without breaking the bone, and one sees it well.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil;	Therefore, that which comes in the front, if one cannot see it, is a difficult healing in many positions, and in this, it is necessary that you put the ear with the bad side to the sun;
et regarde dedens:	and look inside:
se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	if you see the opacification, if the work has this entire span of why it is there:
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille;	And let the forceps be applied evenly on both sides, front and back, so that it does not pierce the ear.
se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	If the discharge is from the ear or the ear canal, if you have fine forceps and gently cover it, until the wax is completely removed.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	And if the wound is in the front of the ear, take a fine knife and lightly heat it over the fire, then place it on the bone of the ear.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille;	If you feel the discharge that causes the patient to have a grating sensation in the ear, slightly pierce it, and be careful not to damage the nerves of the ear.
puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	Then put a tent according to the size of the perforation in the ear, and tie it with an Egyptian knot.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet;	Do not do anything until the wound is healed, or take a tent and moor it in sharp rose, and powder with broken glass vitrified.
et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	And if you see the ear swelling, it is advisable to remove the tent and move another tent moored in sharp rose oil and wax, until the swelling is removed.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then the healer as long as he is healthy.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if there is a flow of blood, dip an sponge and wrap it in cold water, and place it on the ear, and use other treatments that remove the blood flow which are used to treat distillations.
de la char des papieres	of the char of papers
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines;	This is the eyelid that comes in papers from the eyes when they are wet and dry, if it is advisable to extend them with forceps and tweezers, and the cover of a sponge from its roots.
puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	Then apply the acidic vinegar to the joint.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues;	And if without skin, then cauterize with a thin, pointed needle cauterizer, and the cauterizer after incision is better.
et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines;	And many times they recur, but nothing remains from their roots.
et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And when they are cauterized with fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
de la gresle	of the gravel
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz;	Many times come from the eyes things that seem like grains in their form and hardness, and because of this disease is called "grandine", and is an assembly of large moisture above and below.
li ovraiges est telz:	The work is such as follows:
pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir;	If the shoulder moves back and forth, it is a simple matter to know;
fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	Then make the incision wide, then scrape each part lightly, then take it with pincers and bandage.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide;	If you do not cover it with a small piece of paper, it will not hurt the patient.
et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	And if the wound is large, stitch it together and treat it until it is healed.
et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	And if it is small, do not make any force, for the pain will return quickly and cause harm.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre;	And if the large bone is falling downwards into the depth of the ear towards the upper part, turn the paper, and place the large bone in some pinchers, and hold and press it from both sides.
et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien;	and if the paper is separated by the incision, it does not matter.
et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	and when the large bone is cut, pour some oil of vinegar on it, and cure the limb from which it was removed until the hairs are healed.
de la graisse des eulz	of the fat of the eyes
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz;	Exinach is a grease that is injected into the papers above, and it has more effect on children than adults, and hurts their eyes greatly, and they vomit in the mornings, and cannot look at the light of the sun because the tears gather in their eyes.
et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	and because they lie on their faces adhered, and sleep on them, and their papers are soaked with moisture that inflames and irritates the skin which opens in the oil.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	And when you press the limb to its place and feel the bone slipping between them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain;	And the manner of the work is such that the hairs put their head on your healthy one;
et puis pren I drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li;	and then take a piece of linen, and make a tent in the shape of a circle according to the quantity that contains the oil from each part, then put it on him.
et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle;	and press with your two fingers on one side and the other, so that the oil is gathered in the circle.
puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne;	Then make a cut in the middle of the moisture using a sharp spatula, and it should not be larger than the wound made during the opening of the vein.
et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach;	And make a cut in the skin until you reach the extraction.
et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	And in many positions, extraction comes from the cut, according to the shape of a piece of white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars;	Extract the whole piece with a cloth wrapped around your fingers, and turn your hand to the right and left until it is spread out.
et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	And make sure you do not insert it into the cut, that you do not come to the whole spatula just to the oil, that you do not wound it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere;	And if it does not open at the beginning of the incision, then sharply cut the incision lightly until it opens.
puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	Then extract it as we have said, then gently wipe the cloths in vinegar and water, and place on the limb, and bind with bandages.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	And if there are such men who break the cloth and put it on to corrupt the moisture that remains.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then the healer as long as they are healthy.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it comes to the abscess that is swollen, then the healer should apply wet compresses until they are healthy.
des poilz des papieres	of hairs of papers
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz;	When hairs are plucked out other than by nature, and are awakened, they harm the eyes, and bring on diseases such as tears and softening of the papers and cornea, until it is caused by the destruction of the eyes.
et est li cure selonc IIII manieres:	And there are four ways of treatment:
ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	For the fire cauterization together with fire, or by medicine according to what it is before or in the chapter of cauterization, and it is done either by incision and stitching or by caustics, according to what I will say.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre;	It is necessary that you put the head of the dislocated joint in your hand, then turn the paper of oil to your right hand.
s’elle est convertie, c’est boin;	If it is turned, it is good.
se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil desus;	If not, if you prick with a needle at the end of each thread above.
et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai I fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur;	And let it be either on the edge of the paper or where the hair grows from these hairs, and pull the thread above the entire paper, and turn to the razor.
puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit;	then cut in the part outside the paper, outside the hairs, removing all the skin, from the large thigh to the small one.
puis estrai I fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	then extract the thread, and place outside the paper a small tent of cotton and linen, then above the paper a figure of an envelope, like the fullness of mercury, and all the while it is necessary that the figure be according to the quantity you see lifted the paper which is divided into all.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie;	And if to the thread that has business, one covers great quantity of the paper according to what the paper is softened;
puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit;	then make a cut across all the skin on the two lines you have marked, and begin from the large thigh down to small.
et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute;	and let one of the cuts near the hairs at the base of the large thigh, then push the knife into one of the two corners of the knee, then scrape the skin off entirely.
puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce;	then sew the two lips together with a needle and thread of fine silk, and stop the bleeding, and make sure the excess hair is above the stitches on all parts that are sticky, if you see this happening.
et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII;	and if not, then do not worry about it, then leave the stitches and the thread for three days or four.
puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor;	Then treat the wound with dry and constricting things, for the paper will revive at the moment of the wound and gather with it, but the sewing is broken (as the ancients said), and this is work without fear.
et si a une autre maniere:	And if in another way:
et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	and you shape the paper into a form that is as like the mold of wax as we have told, at three fingerbreadths thick, according to the form which is here:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	then cover the wound with a bandage evenly according to the form that is there:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure;	And if you cannot hold the needles, and the thing is not even, take a needle or a thread that has one strand, and put it into the figure;
et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment;	et boute I autre fil delez lou grand larmier, et lou seconde fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les fils igalment.
puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	then evenly lift your hand, and lift all the skin above where you have sewn, as we have told you, then gather the two lips of the wound by sewing, and treat it until it is healed.
et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans;	and if an abscess comes to your incision, soothe it with plaster and similar soothing ointments.
et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit:	and never has it happened that the hair of the stone is converted:
si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision;	if you should use what we have said about incision.
mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	but the stitching in one and the other is more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme:	The treatment of wounds is as follows:
et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai II caines par art, et II liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est;	and you should convert the paper and the fence inside according to what I have said, and then make two wounds by art, and two thin lines as long as the paper and the width of the space is;
et cope as II chiés de II pars ou tu tiens les filz;	and take care of the two parts where you hold the threads;
puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les II cainnes des II parties forment;	then assemble them subtly above what lies over the paper of the oil, and strain the two wounds from the two parts formed;
et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	and he leaves it thus for several days, and the skin that is stretched will die, rot, and putrefy, and will fall off from it.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	If it takes too long, then the copper (cauterizing instrument) must be used with force, and cure until it is healed.
et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil;	And when the wound has been closed, and if paper has been lifted from it, and the hairs will not grow back.
et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	And this is the shape of the two needles that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of length and width:
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute I fil de soie souef et subtil;	The work is such that you grip a thin needle, and pull the silk thread soft and thin;
puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc;	Then gently gather the heads and place them one by one, and let the hair grow a palm's length long.
puis ordene en la chasse I autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil;	Then order the other hair in a quick hunt of silk thread briefly, and do not let the heads touch the thread.
puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain;	Then place the misaligned heads on your clean side.
et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil;	And let the work be done in the shade so that the work is not spoiled, for it is a delicate and small work, then push the needle through the entire hair at its base pricked, and pierce it into the paper gently until you remove it above the natural hair;
puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a I ou II ou III ou plusors;	Then shave the hair up to the chest, and cut off the hair in the chest, if there is one or two or three or more.
puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	Then shave your hand until the hair comes out all over the chest, with the natural hair on the paper.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil;	And if the chest is treated and the hair does not come out with it, then shave the chest to the very end, as far as you have ordered, until the chest comes out completely and you can see through the oil.
adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo II jors ou III, tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus;	Then shave the chest and the hair, and close the oil and leave it for two or three days, until the hair grows back in its place and grows on top.
et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne I poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	If the hairs are small, accompany them with long hair from sheep, and elevate it with the one you leave, until they are lengthened and then lift it.
de la porriture de l’oil	of the purity of the oil
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres:	When this disease, which is called "aleacrati" or the "porridge," comes in the oil, there are two ways:
l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	One natural, and the other unnatural.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	And it occurs by a wound, or a cut, or cauterization, and similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee;	And the way of the work in it is that you break that seal, and dry the lips of it, and put inside tents of linen, and bind it until it is healed.
et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	And you should only use in its care things that dry and restrict.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere;	For if you do this, the disease will become worse than before.
mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic;	but I work on things that are softening, such as fenugreek.
et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	and the strong herbs and seeds of flax be cooked, and the ointment of yarrow dissolved in any of the oils, and it is wrapped in a tent, and this is the cure for this.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant;	And the treasures of your cure are such that you should take care not to spoil it according to its former form.
et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And these works that we have said are not other than to prevent this disease from returning according to its former form.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	of the oil which comes in the jar
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	This disease that is dislocated, which truly is called "axacrati", and is natural and accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans;	Accidents come from wounds, cuts, burns, and similar things.
et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char;	And the method of the work is such that you grasp a needle with a double thread, and place it in the chair, and make it pierce from the right arm to the left, so that the thread comes out at two points on the chair.
puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	Then the chair is above all the needle, and the cloth is wide enough to cover it.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin;	And if the paper shape returns according to what is needed, it is good.
se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere;	If not, take the razor and place it in the cut, and turn the paper, and make two more cuts inside the paper.
et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»;	and let the two cuts of the two corners of the incision that you have made be such that when they are assembled, that the figure is as it should be, like the shape of a letter that has not been Greek.
puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne;	then take that char, according to the amount that its cost is away from it, of what is taught on paper, then add the two parts together, and stitch them with a thread of linen.
puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then take care of what we have said about the medicines that soften and the bandages, until it is healed.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant;	And if the illness comes from a cut or stitching or cauterization, then it is necessary that you make a plain incision away from the hairs of the paper, and according to what is above.
puis desevre entre les II leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit;	then carefully place between the two leaves of a tent, as I have said.
et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil;	and one should perform the work according to the form of the disease, as it is very diverse in shape, and wise masters compare all possible means to how they can make the figure return to its natural shape.
et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	and the bones themselves, according to what is needed for work and tools in many positions.
dou soudement de la papiere	of the paper
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut;	When this glue is done by hand in a somewhat manner that the paper above is soaked with the white of oil, and cannot move or do its natural workings, then it is necessary that you bring the point of a razor outside the paper, and tie it on top.
et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil;	and it is used with pins, until you copy what is hard at the subtle space, which should not be too sharp nor too blunt, so that the pain cannot suffer that the space is too sharp or blinds the oil.
et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil;	and your incision should be lightly scraped off that assembly, so that the paper reverts according to its natural form.
et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere;	and it is all clean that assembly, and never in the oil acid salty, and lift from acid sweet, and of colloid.
puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef;	then put between the paper and the oil a linen tent, and put on the oil wool ground in abundance of urine.
et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the first day, use a cold compress and unclean things until healed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	of the elbow of the oil
Saiches que li ungle est selonc II manieres:	There are two ways to treat the joint:
elle est nervouse et semblans a I dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om;	The first way is when the joint is like a hard, painful spasm, and the other way is not nerve-related but resembles frozen moisture, so that when touched with iron and heated with pincers, it cannot be moved.
et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	Both ways start near the great thigh bone and grow slowly until they cover the entire eye and light, and all movement of the oil.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz;	And the way of the incision is that the hairs put their head in your clean place, then they work the eyes.
et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus;	and gently hold the paper to your hand, then bend the nail with small force, and extend it above;
puis pren une aguille, et i met I poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et I fil fort;	then take a needle, and put horsehair, or sheep's wool, or beef fat, and thread it tightly;
et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement;	and double the tip of the needle a little and insert it into the nail, and push the entire needle through, and tie the nail with a thread and extend it above, and scrape all the hair from the side of the nail that leads to the pearl and silk to the skin just below the arm, then cut the remaining in the root of the arm at every subtle space and with small forces, and leave the natural bend of the arm, so that by the incision, tears do not usually come out;
et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit;	and never once has the joint remained out of place alone, but rather as we have said.
puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	then the skin is all the soft tissue that gives shape to this.
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie;	And be careful that the soft tissue does not touch the fascia and tear it, and that the bone is not pierced.
et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor;	and after the incision pour some ground black pepper into the oil, and a poultice made of linen, and leave it just above the other side.
puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	then apply the appropriate treatment until it is healed.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines;	and if the joint is not nervous, and you cannot insert the needle, and the joints cannot enter, often this resemblance of a dislocation from medicine.
et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	and they grow as I have described in the section, and if you see them covered, then oil the hair with the bad one, and take the sharp instrument lightly, quickly according to this form:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor;	and gently rub the joint above, and if you see that it does not soften and the skin is close, then distill from your mouth into the oil mixture made of litharge and red wax and silk broth, and stifle the oil with the other one;
puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	then begin the other work according to this same work, until it is completely healed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing is contrary in the oil, as with an abscess, then milk, and cure first the abscess until it is healed, then proceed with the work as before until it is healed.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne;	And if the appearance of the flesh on the arm appears black in the oil due to great harm, then suspend it at the end, and cover a part of it and not all at once, so that tears do not come.
puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	then distill in the oil red chalices which are made of litargire.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	of the flesh that comes out above the pupil
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste;	Some men are born with no red hair, and cover the prunelle and hold it up on the papers and turn it to the back, and it seems like a baluster rose.
et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force;	and the work is such that the hairs put their heads in your clean, then work those, and hold all that hair with convenient bends for this, and support it at force.
puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige;	Then shave the first chapiter, and go through everything shaving to the end, and be careful not to cut the oil in the work.
et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre;	And it should be the same incision of the span that we have mentioned in the incision of the nail and with small forces to take out the base, as it forms after this chapter shows.
et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut;	And when the incision is completed and all the chapter is taken out, use oil of sulfur or you distill red wine and similar corrosive medicines, and put it on the oil with a piece of cotton with absinth, so that it is secure against pus.
et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut;	and if there is nothing delayed, and the swelling does not subside, and you doubt an abscess, leave the oil and treat the abscess with soothing remedies.
puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	then return to your work until it is healed, and thus make certain that the char is set in oil by this means.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil;	But always it is necessary that you apply a weak remedy of the natural way;
et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer;	and of the accidental way, in ironwork;
et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	and do not put your hand in any of these works until you see that this limb suffers from that work.
des voines des eulz	of the eyes
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	red veins that are covered over the eye, and they harm the view and weaken the eye always.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel;	The first task is therefore to examine the patient's eyes, to see if they are open or closed, and there is no other disease besides this one.
adonques le coil en teil maniere:	Therefore, examine the patient in this manner:
comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	Instruct the patient to place their head in your hand, then gently stretch the joints at all angles according to their wisdom, and let the subtle joints be doubled in this form:
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en I cors selonc ceste forme:	And they should be done twice a day, gradually increasing in intensity according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil;	Then examine the patient's joints gently, and squeeze the blood out after each time until you can remove them from the eye.
et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes;	Be careful not to pierce the eye with sharp objects, and perform this work at noon in front of the sun, and be very hot in your work so that you do not cause any harm to the joints.
et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	And when you have done this, if you distill green and red wine into the oil to corrupt what is remaining underneath.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez;	And if you cannot collect all the wine in that hour, then make a poultice on the oil of things to ease the pain of the eyes, and let it sit for some time until the pain is eased and it is ensured that there is no abscess, then restart according to this method as long as it is not healed;
et c’est li forme des forces:	and this is the form of the force:
de la fistule de l’oil	of the oil fistula
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule:	The master named "Aristarchus" made a fistula:
quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	When you cure it with fire and medicine according to what I have said before, and it is not healed, then apply the same thing that you did above the abscess, where it should die, and remove all the moisture that is there, until the bone is exposed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme;	And when the bone is exposed, and you see the corruption and the blackness, then the instrument of all that is in this form;
et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a I chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	and is called "sharp chisel", and it is made of iron into the form of a chisel, and it is pointed as a lime if it is in this present form:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese;	And place it above the flesh of the bone, then turn it between your two hands, and press your hand a little until you feel that that corruption is removed;
et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	and do not do it again, then restore the flesh of healing drying agents.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez;	if the wound is sound, and the flesh has grown, and the body of the bone is sound, and it remains thus for forty days, and it does not remove and is not displaced, and no bad accidents come, then it is healed;
se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme:	If not, there is no other method than to bring the fistula to the point of the nose according to this form:
et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	and then you should discover the bone again with iron and medicines, and when it is discovered take the forehead according to this form, and let the patient's iron be at three angles, and the fuse should be thinned down to the top as you see here:
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif;	then put it above the bone of the arm, and keep your hand away from the oil for a moment, then turn the whole forehead until it pierces the bone and the patient feels the pain as if it comes from the inside if he keeps his hand on his nose;
et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif;	and when the bone of medicine is dried, as I have shown you, and when the child grows and hardens the bones, then the matter goes to the knee.
si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	It is a lighter matter for the joint.
de l’issue de l’oil	from the end of the oil
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide;	When the eyes are widely open and not disturbed or drowsy, it is necessary to hold the joint.
puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil I liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz;	Then the healthy one, then apply leeches or a hot iron to draw out the poison, then place on the oil that has been made with acacia and aloe and incense and sarcocolla, and strain the oil, and apply the ointment with bandages and cloths;
et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en IIII, et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier;	and the manner of the cloths is such that you grasp cloths that are sufficiently soft, and fold each one into four, and then place one on top of the other according to the quantity that they have need of.
puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir;	then strain through a cloth made of linen firmly, and restart the suction to draw without harming.
puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout;	then remove the suctions and let the oil remain strained day and night, and if the joints are dislocated, it is necessary that you strain it greatly.
puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin;	then remove the joint after the day and night, and if you see the oil return, it is good.
se ce non;	if not
si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	if the bandages and the cloths and the linen and the suction devices are not clean until they are healthy.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	The breaking of a silk cloth
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com I grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir;	When disruptions come in the woven cloth, then open, and come strong like the grain of resin, and is spreadable to see.
adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait I fil double des la partie dou larmier;	then if you see the cloth covered, the work is such that you put a needle in the root of the part below this above, then put another needle where the double thread of the arm part is.
et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition;	and make it pierce, and let the first needle according to the arrangement.
puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef;	then copper the joint with a doubled and tied piece of cloth, and strain it well, then remove the needle and put some soft marrow on the wound in plenty.
et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee;	and leave it until the thread heals with the wound, then care for the oil of things that comfort until the wound is healed.
et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and never strain the wound by any piece of cloth, until it is healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost;	And if they appear greatly, then pierce the thin needle that comes from under the oil, and wick away the moisture and descend on the hairs, and enter immediately.
puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then I removed it until it was healthy.
de la bowe de l’oil	from the front of the oil
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue;	This disease, which is called "alcunnati," is nothing more than a bowel that is gathered in the oil, resembling a sharp downward point, and it is not a sharp point.
et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz;	And the manner of its appearance is such that you make the patient sit on the seat with their back straight, then take the chief between your hands from the two parts, and move it until you see the bowel come out above to your eyes.
puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit;	Then let it be removed, and do not descend and it should be dismantled in the light, and see the things as they were.
et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	And if they do not dislocate, it is sharp, and if they do not descend from the bow, it is not as we have said.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse;	If you place the pain between your hands, then take the thin spatula and make it under the eye, by the continuation of the conjunctiva with the eyelid and the eyebrow, until the bow is released.
et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when it is released, distill in the hot, sharp oil mixed with honey, or sharp or fenugreek is boiled and honey, then treat it with other treatment until it is healed.
des aigues de l’oil	of the hot oils
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier;	We have similarities of waters in the division, and what is necessary to pierce.
si en oevre selonc la santeit.	if in work according to health.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort;	You must make the misaligned bone between your crossed hands, outside of the light for the sun, and the sound and stretched very tight.
puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres;	Then put the paper of oil to your right hand if the eyes are right, or to your left hand if the eyes are left.
puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre;	Then take in your right hand if the eyes are right, or in your left hand if the eyes are left, the instrument called "almagda".
puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide;	Then place the tip of the instrument on the crown by the thickness of a ring in the small bone of the elbow, then drive the instrument which is called «almagda» virtuously, and tremble your hand until it pierces through the small bone of the elbow, and feel that almagda comes to the empty thing.
et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour;	And it is appropriate that the measure of the path of almagda be at the forepart of the measure of the space that is from the prunella to the end of the nostril.
et c’est li corone de l’oil;	And this is the crown of the oil.
si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	If you see the bone in that paper for the clarity of the canvas cloth, then place the instrument next to it where the sharp is, then express it out one after another.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	if he is now sharp-sighted, then he sees the hairs in front of him and the instrument in his eye.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc;	After a short rest, and if the pain increases again, use the second method. Place the forceps with the instrument, and when it is securely gripped and does not move, gently rotate your hand back and forth.
et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	Then apply a little force with the string gem, and let it go inside the vein.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	Then put in its place the oil steeped or ground with rose oil and an abundance of honey, and bind it with clean oil.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	We, and those who are of our time, put on it with an abundance of honey.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if the arrowhead cannot enter the oil due to its hardness, because there are some men who have very hard eyes, it is necessary that you use the tool called "alberit", of which this is the form:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit;	And then only pierce the connective tissue, and do not go too far in front, but make the cut gently, then use the forceps as we have said.
et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous;	And at the completion of the work, compare the patient's sleep with the darkness that occurs, in which he sleeps on his back in the darkened room.
et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor;	and it is necessary to avoid all movements, and take light foods, and not move the head to the right or left, and it should be tied according to its position just after the injury.
puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor;	then the reset it in this very dark house, and examine its view, and let see some things, and then put the chain just after the seventh day.
et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	and it is necessary that you do this in the early hours of the cure or after the incision now, but it is necessary that you raise the head, because the sharp pain quickly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme;	if abscesses come, then you reset the oil before the seventh day, and it is necessary to raise the head which alleviates the abscess.
et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	And when it is calm, remove the bandage and place it on its face again to cover any opening, and let it stay in that dark house.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas;	Then slowly leave the house and turn into your own home;
et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	and let no one interfere in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens;	Some came to us who were from the Yrach, who told us that in their country people used to do something called "almagda perciet," which is like the aigue, but I have never seen any in our land, nor have I read about it in the books of the ancients;
et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And by chance, this is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie;	And these are the similar forms of almagda, because those who do not know them see them as such;
et soient d’arain proprement:	and they are purely rain.
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en III angles ague.	And they are the heads of those from this same subtlety, and the others in three angles awake.
de la char sor le neis	for the nose
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez;	Never born or born different charcoals, of which there are some that seem like scorpions at the bottom of the feet;
et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	and if there are such and he has enhanced char of dark color, and if he has charcoal of good color.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil;	In that case of these charcoals which is good, and not enhanced, it is appropriate to make the pain between your hands against the sun;
et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers;	and clean his nostrils, and pour water into those holes, and remove them;
pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	so that you can hold it with a fine, sharp needle until you know that the arrow is completely out.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout I des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien;	And if there is nothing that can be removed with a fine, delicate instrument, then open it with all the sharp tools until nothing remains.
et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient;	and if you do not see, or an abscess forms, then treat it as it should be;
et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	and if they are malignant abscesses, then hurry and cauterize it until the wound is clean and all the arrows are removed, then pour in salt water or vinegar.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez;	If the neck is injured, and moisture comes into the palace, cut it open to see if it is healthy;
et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier:	and if the moisture does not pierce as it should, see if there is a fracture in the bone above, because the instruments do not come out to cut:
adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins;	therefore it is necessary that you bring a thin wire, and hold it with your hands, and put space between each nut as needed or less;
et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche;	and put the bad teeth of the wire into the neck at a low angle, and pull it out until it comes out through the neck inside the mouth;
et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire;	and often do so to children at schools, and it is an easy thing for those who wish to do it.
puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	Then hold the head that comes from the neck in one hand, and the other head that comes from the mouth in the other hand, and alternate between them as we have done before.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant;	Do this until you clean that cloth, then draw the child's tongue out, soak the blood, and remove the thread in an Egyptian manner, and put it back in the same way as before.
fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char;	Do this three times or more, until the incisions have eaten away all that remains of the cloth.
et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use;	Then place or remove a splint as needed for several days until they are healed, and if they need to use medicines, then do so.
et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	This is the shape of the instrument used to purge the head, where one distills the oils and medicines that are placed inside.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi;	And it should be of silver or tin, shaped like an open lamp, such as a cane, and use it in the same way.
et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief;	And if you see, then make a closed cane, and the instrument is used to purge the head.
et ait I mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	And it should have a handle at the top to hold when heating the oil or any liquid.
de la char sor le neis	for the nose
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder;	Frequently, a disease is born at the head of the neck, which is called "telul", and grows and becomes large over time, becoming such that it is difficult to see.
et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant;	And for this reason, you should cover it at the beginning, and apply the entire bone, then place the heat or burning medicine on the limb.
et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens:	And if it is delayed in covering until it becomes large, then take heed whether it is hard, of poor color, and without sensation:
si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide;	if you do not touch it with iron because these are buried abscesses, for when it is covered, great harm comes to the pain.
et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	and if it is an abscess, touch it gently, not with hot water, and you will see how you can cover it all, if you remove the pain and the cover without fear, and cure the limb of things that are tight and restrictive.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	when the nose is cut off and sewn
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	that remedies for continuing come in one of these cartilages, and is of little use, because in some people.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc;	Then it is necessary to look at the wound if it is fresh with all its blood;
et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then apply the two lips to a seam, then cure it until it is healed.
et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet;	and if the lips are already scarred on one side and the other, then it is necessary to scrape all the parts of their edge until they heal, then assemble the two lips to a seam, and hold it, and powder with powder of dragon's blood, and broken incense.
et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Put powders on top of the wound, using a strong or other adhesive plaster, and leave it until it heals through it, then treat with ointment until it is healed.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution:	The manner of the stitching is such that you assemble the solution:
ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre;	or by needles, as we have said in the stitching of the belly;
ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	or by thread, as I have told you.
des apostemes des levres	of abscesses of the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant;	To some people there are within the lips abscesses that are hard and large, like grains, and smaller and larger;
adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie;	therefore it is necessary that you turn the lips, and cut into each one, and take with forceps and cover in each part;
puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	then fill the wound after the incision of broken glass, until the wound is clean.
et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then apply a bandage to the wound, and treat the wound with dry things until it is healed.
de la char des gencives	of the crown of the teeth
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»;	Often teeth grow above the gums, which the ancients called "albulus".
si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc;	if it is necessary that you support it with pincers, and cover its root, and let the blood or pus out.
puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives;	then apply glass powder broken, or other astringent and desiccating powders;
et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize:	and if that tooth returns after the incision, and often happens, then cover it again, and cauterize.
si ne revient mie aprés le cautere;	if it does not return even after the cauterization;
et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	and these are the forms of instruments to cover.
des sordens	of the deaf
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres;	Sometimes they are assembled at the head of the teeth, within the mouth between the gums, scars that are ugly and sharp;
et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant;	and sometimes they are the black and yellow and green teeth, until the corruption comes to the gum, and are the stinking teeth.
si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien;	if it is necessary that you make the pain between your hands, and its roots are in your holy one, and extract the teeth or the scars that appear, until nothing remains.
et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees;	and thus make of the black and green, and yellow and other stains, until they are removed;
et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin;	and if it has taken out what is at the first layer, it is good;
se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis;	if not, start again from the second layer and the third, until you have removed everything.
et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens;	and clean the teeth of various forms of instruments to remove, according to what the operation demonstrates, because the razor that is removed from between the teeth has other shapes than the one that is removed from between the teeth.
et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	and these forms and others should be with you prepared.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire;	When you are treating a tooth for pain, do not delay in pulling it as soon as possible, for one should not do this to everyone.
car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	for it is a very high substance, so there is no excuse for not pulling it.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	Therefore, when the tooth is painful and must be pulled, then you should be certain of the tooth breaking.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent;	Often the pain of the misaligned joint is relieved, and one should ensure that it is a holy tooth, and pull out the good tooth.
et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors;	and one should not leave it until the pain is relieved, as long as the evil remains, for we have already done this to these sinners.
et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars;	And when you are certain of the tooth that is hurting, it is necessary that you cauterize around the tooth on all sides. with a strong burning agent to protect the gum from all parts.
puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles;	Then move the joint to its proper place or use thin needles at the first point and then another, until it is properly dislocated, then firmly secure the needles.
et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	And if the painful joint is in your knee, keep it still so it does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	After straightening the tooth correctly without breaking it, and if it does not jump back into place, take any of these instruments and gently tap on each part lightly, and then shake as you did first.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont;	And if the joint is dense and swollen, then it is necessary to fill it with cloths where the pus is.
et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre;	And if the thin needles are delicately held, so they do not break when being pulled out.
et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	And it is necessary to carefully observe around the gum to dislodge the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	And be careful not to break it and leave a part behind, and re-insert it with more pain from the root than before.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit;	And be careful that you do not act in such a way as the ignorant scribes, who by their haste and boldness break everything at once, and never correct what we have told.
mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut;	but bring forth everything once by the cunning of this great disease for the roots that they delay, or for the chariot that they break, as we have often seen.
et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil;	and when the tooth is drawn, wash the mouth with wine or with oil and salt.
et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet;	and if blood flows and it often does, use the mouth with broken glass wine.
et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	If it does not improve, then cauterize it.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent;	The forms of the instruments that one uses to move the first teeth should be long and pointed, and have large handles, so they do not bend when you pull out the tooth.
et ce sont les formes:	And these are the forms:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And they should be thick-bodied so they do not bend when you pull, and they should be made of well-made iron, and they should be sharp to hold.
de la racine des dens	from the root of the tooth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou II, tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne;	When the root remains in the tooth, it is necessary to place cotton moilliet on the tooth or II, until the tooth is softened, then break the forceps called "algefri," which are used to extract the tooth.
et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	And they should be made inside like a lime and this is the form:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not want to come out with all these needles, then it is necessary that you dig around the root of the whole chariot, and put the tool called «althali», that is, a spoon, of which this is the form:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin;	And if it is also large and thick so that it does not break, and if its root jumps upwards, it is good.
se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	If not, with all the instruments, of which the forms come afterwards:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait II rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if it helps, then use this tool that has two prongs, of which this is the form:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other tools that are before in the range of the teeth, and of this tool that seems like large needles, of which this is the form:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont;	And this instrument is except that it cannot break, and sharp that many of the instruments of density are;
et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez;	and also other instruments, which are not counted as one.
et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	and the wise masters subtly find their own instrument, according to what their work and the disease shows, because there are some diseases where the ancients did not teach the instrument for the diversity of the others and it has not broken the cart or the other bones, or it does not harm, if one seeks the instruments that one needs, which I have told you, and helps with gestures, of which this is the form:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster;	And let them be large and well-gripping to hold the bone, that it not slip, but let him hold and remove.
et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	Then restore the limb to its proper position, and if there is rotting in the bone, and it is small, then cut off all this tool.
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer:	When the tooth appears not in line with its natural position, and its shape is ugly, and especially in young women, then it is necessary to remove the tooth if it is not in the right place, and cannot be straightened or filed.
adonques lou raie;	Then cut off the root.
et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a I petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	and if it is stuck with the tooth, take this tool that has this shape, and it is similar to a small beak, and it should be made of iron, sharp on one side and smooth on the other.
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And the copper coin gently and slowly for the hardness of the tooth, and because you do not move the others, and if it appears that it can be lamed, then the lame part of a spoon like this is used:
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles;	and it is also like the bill of the bird from which we make arrows;
et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece;	and in the bill of the tooth gently and slowly move it back and forth, so that it does not move until it breaks;
puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	then the flat end of it has no razor, and if the tooth is too sharp and it cuts the tongue, then you must file the sharpness until it is even, so that it does not cut the tongue or corrupt the speech.
quant li dent lochent	when the teeth are locked
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut;	When the teeth in front are knocked out, whether by impact or falling, and the pain cannot be relieved by pressing on the gums to prevent them from chattering, and you treat them with restrictive medicines, it is not effective.
si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques;	if they need to be restricted with a gold thread, for the silver thread becomes green and rotten, but the gold never changes.
et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens;	and let the thread be neither too thin nor too thick, according to the quantity of the space between the teeth.
et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part;	and if you see that the teeth are becoming loose, take the thread and double it between the two healthy teeth, then place the missing tooth between the other teeth, as many as there are, until you feel confident that the healthy tooth on the other side is secure.
puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point;	then reapply the bandage to the part where you began, and gently and carefully insert your hand, until it does not move.
et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	and let your finger be at the root of the tooth so it cannot escape.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue;	Then cut the thread into small pieces and use them to assemble, and put them between the healthy tooth and the tongue, so it does not bleed.
et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil;	Then leave it so tight as it can stay, and if it dislocates, or the thread breaks, then tie it with another thread.
si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	If it stays and serves in this way throughout its time, and this is the form of the teeth and the appearance of the crowning of the two healthy teeth, and the two missing ones, as you see.
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit;	And when the tooth is knocked out, if it is put back into its place, bit by bit, as we have said;
et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	and does not interfere with it if it is not wise and painful, and never made the shape of a bone tooth of a goose, and put it back into its place where the defect is, and hold it as we have said, and wait and serve thus for a long time.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	to cut open the vein of the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi;	Never are these joints which come from the tongue or nature, that one should not thus make;
ou par accident de plaie soudee;	or by accident of a wound sewn.
et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue;	and the works are such that you work the mouth of the misaligned, and have his head in your safe, and relieve the tongue;
puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement;	Then cut the nerve of the arm, as long as the tongue is dislocated from its place, and if it is hard or not, and it is a sudden injury, then boil the herb and cut it lengthwise.
et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz;	And be careful that the wound is not too deep, for the artery that is exposed;
et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin;	And when you have done, lift the limb of vinegar and oil, or of cold water, then put out the tongue a tent of linen;
et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	and the taint the pain every night, that the limbs not stick together.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet;	And if blood comes out, put glass powder on the wound;
et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu;	and if the bleeding does not stop, cauterize it with slow-burning fire, which is good for this.
puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	then use other treatments until it is healed.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre;	and if you see that the wound is of black or dark color and hard, and the patient does not feel pain, do not touch it, because it is a chancre.
et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre;	and if it is inclined to suppuration and there is moisture, then pour the liquid from a thin syringe on both sides and deliver it.
et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer;	and if it does not move in your work, place a piece of broken glass on top as long as it is soaked, then return to your work until you remove all the pus.
puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	then lift the limb from the left and right, and treat other wounds until it is healed.
des apostemes de la gorge	of throat abscesses
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde:	No one ever comes from within the throat, which are called "godath", and they are properly called the two mandibles, and when you treat them, as we have said in the division, and they are not healed, then be careful:
se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	if it is an abscess hard and small in size and of yellowish color, do not touch it with iron.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc;	And if it is red and the root is large, do not touch it with a little iron, as it may cause the flow of blood;
mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi;	but let it be until it is soft, and then you will be able to part it, or it would break by itself;
et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	and if it is of white color and the root is thin, then you should prepare the instrument to cover, but first check if the abscesses are calm and at rest.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme;	Then place the pain in front of the sun, and its head should be straight, and the work the mouth and the prince between his hands, and press the tongue away from all the instrument, because it is the shape;
et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	and let it be of silver or thin tin like some knives:
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues;	if you press the tongue with this instrument, and see the abscess, take the needle and poke it into the amber, and trace it upward as much as you can;
et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces;	and take nothing with it from the threads, then cover the instrument with a cloth, of which this is the shape, which seems like a forceps;
et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	and all the prongs are bent, and one part is on the other, and they are very sharp, and it is made of iron or tin:
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have this instrument present, if you have coping with pliers, of which is the form:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom;	and let it be called "trenchan" on one side, and "name" on the other:
et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	And when you have pulled out one of the splinters, pull out the other in the same manner, and after the incision gargle the sharp pain with hot, sharp, and cold water, and if there is blood coming out, gargle with hot water, or use pounded green pomegranates, or mint leaves, and similar things, until the mouth is no longer stained.
puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then cure it until it is healed.
et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les II amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les II amandres igament.	And never do any other abscesses come out of the throat besides the two splinters, so pull them out in the same way as the two splinters must be pulled out.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens;	And I treated a woman with an abscess that was located within her throat, specifically a small abscess.
et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	And she had almost completely closed her throat, so that the woman could not breathe due to the condition that was choking her, and she could not eat or drink, and died if she remained like this for a day or two.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	And the abscess was so large that it had been filled with two handfuls of pus through the two nostrils.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe;	I therefore acted quickly, and pierced one of the sides, then removed the pus, and a large portion of blood.
puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue;	then I pierced the other side through the throat, and the work of the mouth and pressed her tongue.
aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc;	After I had finished this work, I collected the remains in these abscesses, and took out a part of it, and did not finish until a small amount of blood was drawn.
et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens;	And thus the woman's throat was cut, and she began to drink vinegar and then wine, and did not stop cutting into this abscess by long stretches.
et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros;	And the abscesses returned to their place, and filled the skin that I had emptied, until it became very large.
adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge:	Therefore I advised her and cauterized it inside her throat.
ensi demora sens croistre;	Thus she did not grow without.
et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	And I leave these parts, and know only that God will do with them after me.
de l’uve	of the eye
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»;	When referring to the eye, and it is inflamed and long, it is called "perpendicular".
et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	And if it is swollen and round, it is called "uve".
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes;	When it is treated as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not help much, and you see that the chauffer's abscess is calmed, and it is thin, then you should apply a poultice.
et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe;	And the one that is round and not long;
et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	and it is bloody or purple or black in color, then you should avoid the incision of the li.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	For there is great danger in the pain.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant;	Therefore, when you see it, according to the manner that I have said, of its color and length, you should place the painful part in front of the sun, and press the tongue with the instrument that we have mentioned before.
puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	Then cut the wound in the uvula, and remove it, and wrap it with the second or third instrument that I have mentioned in the incision of the two mandibles.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil;	And it is necessary that you do not cover more than the excess that is beyond the natural limit;
car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle;	because if you cover more, it will cause great pain to the voice and speech;
et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And after the incision, use what we have said about the incision of the second mandible, and treat it until it is healed.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	And if the pain is not alleviated by copper, then you should use an engine for cauterization of the sensitive pain.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	And the manner of the cauterization is sharp and hot.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere;	And if the hairs put their head in your healthy hand, then press the tongue against the instrument we have said or in the chapter of cautery, and cut with a sharp, hot knife, so that it is not too thick or too clear.
et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	And use the movement of this instrument, which has this shape:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve;	And have at the head a hair or olive oil, as with the movements of a spoon, and put the instrument on all the medicine over the eye.
et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece;	and the hairs lie flat on his chest, so that his saliva and muscle secretions from his mouth flow into the medicine inside, so it does not drip down his throat and into his belly.
puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie;	Then hold your hand over the entire medicine and press it against the eye for a quarter of an hour, until you see that it is softened and the bitterness of the medicine is eased.
et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve;	And if you see it, take a piece of cloth and wrap it around any instrument, and moisten the cloth in the medicine, and blow the instrument into the cloth until the cloth is soaked with it.
et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés IIII jors ou V.	And do this often, until the cauterization is perfect, then let it dry and scab after four or five days.
Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine;	And if you are skilled in the art of restarting the cauterization, then restart it, and after the cauterization, apply a poultice of bread and butter around the eye, and clean what is around the medicine.
et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	And be sure to use a sharp, cold knife, and treat with gargles until they are healed.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere;	This treatment is safer than incision, than cauterization;
s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en I pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir;	If it is treated with fumigation in this manner, take camphor, hyssop, origanum, rue, chamomile, and veronica, and similar herbs, and gather them all or some of them in a pot, and add oil, and boil;
et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait I estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	and the pot should be well glued with strong earth, and inside the pot there should be an instrument shaped like this:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie;	And it should be of silver or tin, and one end of the instrument should be inserted into the mouth of the patient until the steam rises to the urethra through the ureter, until the urethra is dead.
aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent;	After that, it is often repeated until the urethra dries, and be careful not to do this at the beginning of the onset of the abscess, because many things happen.
et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	and do not make steam except at the decline of the abscess.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut;	And if this instrument is not present, take a knife and place it within the head, so that the mouth does not have too much heat.
car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	for the knife does not cause much vapor to burden the mouth, and this is a good cure together with safety.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose;	often it is asserted at the neck of bones or thorns of fish, or nothing.
si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose;	therefore you should take what you can see, and press the tongue against the sun with all the instrument, so that you can see the thing.
et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac;	and what you cannot see and is hidden in the neck, you should make vomit the evil immediately after the meat is cooked in the stomach.
par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement;	By chance, if the object is inserted through vomiting;
ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou I morceil de pain sec;	or the hairs swallowed a piece of sponge, or a piece of navel, or a lettuce root, or a piece of dry bread;
et lie a l’esponge I fil, et puis la transglutisse;	and it sticks to the sponge thread, and then swallows it;
et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer;	and when she comes to the belly, it will stick, and then pull out forcefully;
et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren I estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	and if she does not come out forcefully as we have said, take the instrument of plunger according to this form:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit;	And let the instrument be curved at the head so that it can more lightly enter the throat, and have the head raised high;
et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens;	and guard that you do not touch the epiglottis, that the whole does not come in, nor push the bone inside;
et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse;	and move it so that the hairs push the instrument, because it is often or the thing is there;
si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	if the push goes down, or it pulls the instrument equally throughout, as long as it is full.
de la sansue de la gorge	of the throat opening
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines;	Never use the saliva, as I have said in the division, by the care of medicines;
et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	and when it does not profit you, then look at the throat of the hairs to the sun, then that you press the tongue to the instrument that I have told you.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	And if you see the sinew, trace it with a small needle or thin needles that are worthy of the eye.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	And if the eye does not hold, take a hair from the beard, and boil it in the patient's throat, then boil or move the hair with the iron, and do this often.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	And if the wounds bleed all day.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent;	then take full I of sharp cold water, and work the mouth, and pour it in the direction to swallow, and move it to your hand often.
et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	and if soon as he feels the cold, he spits.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve;	And if he does not spit as we have said, then fumigate the bad breath with sulfur, with the instrument I mentioned in the fumigation of the onion.
fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	do it many times, for it will not last long.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument;	And the way of the fumigation is that you hold I pot where he has charcoal visible, and let it be covered with a linen cloth in the middle, and in that pierced is the sought instrument.
puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue;	then you should use your fumigation, and the pain puts the head of the snake in their mouth, and closes their mouth, so that the smoke does not come out, but comes to the nose.
et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois;	and the nose will now drip, and if it does not drip, then repeat the fumigation many times;
et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue;	and the patient suffers thirst, and eats salty and bitter things, and does not drink anything acidic;
et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	then the patient will have the strength to be healed by this treatment.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge;	And the shape of the instrument used to treat the nose, so is, when it can be seen, resembles a crooked hook to enter into the throat;
et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier;	And it resembles the beak of care, and there is sharpness like lime, so that whatever it takes, it cannot wear out.
et vez ci la forme:	and it has this form:
li chapistres des apostemes	the chapters on abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille;	There are many forms of abscesses, according to what memory comes after one and another in this book, and they vary in puncture and cut.
et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	And it is in two ways that one is in its own form, and because it holds moisture.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	And the second method is for the arms or when they are at the sides.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	For the main abscesses are different from those that come from the foundation, and the abscesses of the shoulder joint are different from those that come in joints, and each has its own judgment in the work.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement;	And if there are abscesses that one should not puncture, until the belly is complete according to its fulfillment.
et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	and if there are such as must be pierced when they are ripe, and do not die immediately upon completion, like abscesses that are beyond joints.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	For when abscesses come beyond joints, and it is left until it is surrounded by, perhaps because the ligament and the nerve of the joint are corrupted, by which this is the cause of contraction in that limb.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil;	When the abscess is beyond the main member, and if you delay piercing until it dies, it will harm the main member.
ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs;	or it is beyond the foundation, if you pierce when it has died;
et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule;	and it should not be pierced until the abscess is ripe for digestion, except that which is beyond the foundation, so that it does not putrefy and remain inside, and there comes a fistula.
et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	and cannot heal in a long time.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes;	And it is necessary to lance the pus from the abscess according to its completion, and this is when the pain is relieved, and the departure of the fever, and the lessening of the pain and swelling, and the decrease in debility and easing of the main symptom of the abscess, and the other signs;
et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues;	And it is necessary to make the incision higher or more dependent on the limb of the abscess, and where it opens most widely;
et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	and whether the incision is long or short, and if the abscess is in the hands or feet, or in joints and nerves and arteries, and in all places equally where there is no pus.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	In these cases, according to the affected member.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	And when an abscess is in the limb, it is best to leave the puncture until it is confirmed that digestion has been completed, as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure;	If you were to pierce it before heaven, then the blood would flow out of it, and it would be stained with much filth.
et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	And perhaps they harden the lips and the deeply pierced ones of him.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	And if any abscess that is punctured along the wide course of the blood vessel, according to what the limb has need of.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus;	And it is necessary that you apply small abscesses, small incisions.
et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme;	And in large abscesses, large incisions, and many cuts according to the resemblance of the greatness of the abscess.
et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper;	And if such abscesses or it is necessary to cover and bandage them.
quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes:	When it has become as soft as a cloth, and is softened, then you should do as they do with bandages.
et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres;	and if there are some that are cut into three angles, and if there are some that are treated as if they were the back of a mirror, such as abscesses.
et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	and if there are some where a round cut is made, and other cuts and shapes that cover.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement;	Those who do not have a head, such as superficial abscesses, it is necessary that you pierce them clearly.
et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie;	And when the abscess is large, and it has much pus, and you pierce it, do not draw out all the pus in that hour, but draw out a part.
puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief;	Then stun the abscess just after the other day, then draw out nothing else.
fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute;	Do this frequently with great force until the bow is completely broken.
meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	Even if the pain is of weak virtue, such as a woman carrying, or small children, or old decrepit people.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	For the experienced never tremble once with the outflow of the pus, because perhaps the wounds might die, and you would not perish.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite;	Therefore avoid this chapter with great caution, and when you have pierced your abscess, if you dry the wound, and look to see if the abscess wound is small;
et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton;	and if it is a boil, then soothe with linen or old cotton;
et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre;	and if it is large abscesses, and there is much pus, then it is necessary that you put in each one a tent so that they come against each other;
et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor;	and if you have cut into an abscess a part of the skin, and you have sewn it around, then you must fill it with old cotton or sawdust from a linen cloth to prevent moisture.
puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	then the bone, and the ointment until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	And if there is bleeding in your work, apply sharp cold and wet cloths, and clean the wound, and place it on the affected area for many times.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut;	and if the bleeding persists, and is not improved with government and care, and the powders I have mentioned in this book are of no use, and if it is very painful, then you should place bandages and moistened cloths soaked in wine and oil on it.
et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit;	If it is in this state, and the limb is swollen, then it is necessary to apply fomentations of hot and cold cloths, or of wine and oil, as we have said.
et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then drain the abscess, dry it, and treat it as necessary, until it is healed.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes:	And one must know universally about the treatment of abscesses:
or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	as I have told you how to proceed before treating abscesses, and see the chapter.
des soros	from swellings
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	When small abscesses come from the head, and are of various kinds, like the lentils of a girl, and many such there are.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz;	There are some and such as have moisture like chickens;
et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	And for those who are tough and have hard skin, there is no doubt if the artery does not move against it.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	And the work of the cutting is such that you try all the instrument called "entromissoire", from which the form comes after, what thing it contains.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	If it contains moisture, then let it dry out from above the long one.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien;	And when the moisture is drained, scrape off anything that contains that moisture, for it will return if you leave anything.
puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens;	Then soak cotton in Egyptian oil, if present.
se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor;	If not, use vinegar and honey, and apply to the wound, and leave it for the next day.
et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	And continue to do this until it is gone.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit;	And then restart the cotton, as before, the next day, and the third, until you are sure it will not remain for the night.
puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then cure the wound of inflammation at this convenient time, until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc;	And if the abscess holds much pus, then apply the poultice in this form, long and wide.
et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist;	And you should pour your urine, and the skin from all parts, and put all your care to draw out the cloth where it lies.
et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	And if the artery makes it against you, do as I told you afterwards.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	And also make an incision if it is pierced, and cut and cure as I have told you.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	And if the incision is made over a pierced abscess and wet, it is lighter, for it is of little blood.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme;	And if any of these abscesses or wounds or they have no moisture, and of these were the abscess or wound that I copied or from an old woman;
et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier;	and found the abscess like a hard, rough, white stone, and could not break it.
et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	and if one had made any, they would have made just as much pain as from a stone.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe;	In other abscesses coming or in the head, because those who come from the head and the roots of the ears, if the opening is always at the most dependent part of the head, to let out the pus;
et les cure si com il covient.	and treat them as appropriate.
des scrophules	of hydroceles
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	often have abscesses at the neck, and dislodge the testicles, and pierce, and sometimes come from other parts or the chest, and are very large, and are inflamed together.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit;	And each boil is properly within its own side, like the abscess of the head, as we have said;
et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	and similar cases of these scrofulous swellings are many.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	There are some that contain moisture, and there are some evil ones that do not wish to obey health.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde;	in that case which you see of good disposition at the touchstone, and resembling the color of the body, and motionless from every part and not attached to any nerve, blood vessel, or conduit, and not deeply penetrating;
si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief;	if it is necessary to remove it from above, and scrape every part, and place the two lips of the wound together as soon as possible, if you have the skill, as we have said in abscesses of the head.
et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	and pull it out little by little, and be sure that you do not remove the nerve or the vein, and that it is not deeply embedded, which the hands cannot escape, and do not expose too soon, before you cover what you should not.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie;	And if you cut the vein or artery, and it does not let you stop, put vinegar or some powders that coagulate blood into the wound, and hold the wound.
et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	and let it stay until the abscess is calmed down, and the wound is softened, and then begin to treat it.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses;	And when the wound is cleansed, return to your work, until you complete it.
puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	Then ask yourself if there are any small pustules remaining, and cut them out and remove them.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement;	And if there is a large vein at the root of the pustule, it is not recommended that you cut out that pustule at its root, but tie it with a strong double thread, and let it drop through, without causing harm.
puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	then fill the wound with old cotton soaked in Egyptian oil, then apply the treatment.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	And if you remove the entire abscess, it is necessary to gather the two lips of the wound and hold them together, as there is no need for excess due to the size of the abscess.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	it is necessary to apply a covering to the root of it, and draw out the pus, and hold it as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure;	Those abscesses that hold excessive pus should be punctured where it is most likely to bleed out;
et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption;	and puncture it in such a way as the one previously mentioned, below, then apply bandages with oil and similar things, so that it does not corrupt what remains from the corruption;
et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and when the wound is well bandaged, apply the treatment with healing charcoal until it is healed.
de squinance	of dislocation
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge;	The ancients spoke and said of the throat cutter;
mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	but I have never seen such a thing in our land, and it is their written word.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee;	For those who have tonsillitis, the part of the neck called "epiglottis" must be avoided.
et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en II amandres.	and one cannot help with this, because all the veins and the source of the pain are in those who have abscesses deep in the mouth, or in the neck or in the armpits.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the disease is in the mouth, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to avoid the destruction that comes from strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige;	It is therefore necessary, when we want to cut the epiglottis, that we cut it outside of three or four small incisions across, between the two circles or by the amount of the incision of the throat, not in the cartilage.
et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	And those people are suitable for the section of the epiglottis because there is no cartilage, and the gag is long and thin.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil;	And if the master is afraid, then it is necessary to extend the skin of the neck all around, then cut the windpipe until it reaches the carotid artery.
et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit;	and avoid the veins of blood, if you see anything, then cover the wound as we have said.
et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix;	and it is demonstrated by the section of the jugular vein that flows out through the neck which is broken, and by the lack of voice.
et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	leave the wound open with a piece.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les II levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige;	And when the hour has passed for which we doubt strangulation, bring together the two lips of the wound carefully, and stitch all around the cartilage.
puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then administer medicines that cause vomiting until they are clean.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Albucasis says that we should not do this unless the throat is completely stiffened, and the limbs are judged to be dead, and the defect is lost.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort;	Therefore, cover the epiglottis because the hairs cannot be held, and he breathes through the wound, and thus is kept from death.
et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee;	Therefore, the ancients ordered to leave the wound open until the evil of the disease has passed, and it passes in three days or four. And then they commanded to stitch the wound and heal, as long as it is healed.
et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	And I will tell you what I saw.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon;	I saw a young lady take a knife, and stab herself in her throat, and cut part of the throat veins.
et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	I was called to cure her, and found her as if she were dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I discovered the wound, and found the arrow that had come out of it, and although she had not coughed blood or vomited, the blood flowed from the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee;	I hurried, and sewed the wound, and cured it until she was healed;
et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition;	and there was nothing left of the young lady but that she could speak, and she returned to her normal state.
por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	Therefore I know that in the region of the epiglottis there is no need to be afraid.
de la grosse gorge	of the large throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes;	This is called "hernia of the throat", and it is a large swelling in the color of a grape, and it is very common in women.
et est selonc II manieres:	And it occurs in two ways:
naturez, et accidens;	natural and accidental.
ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	or natural, which has no cause.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere;	And the accidental one occurs in two ways, one of which is similar to a gouty swelling, and the other way is similar to an abscess that comes from our blood vessel.
et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire:	And there is fear, and it does not require to be opened except in the small one that is in the neck, and it should be tested and searched in all the internal parts.
se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point;	If you have the knowledge to treat it as I do not, and cannot at all times, then the copper, as we copper the others, and take it out completely, if there is none.
et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And search well soon, and treat it as it should be, until it is healed perfectly.
des nous	For the fire cautery
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances;	Many ways of us are, which I will say all the similarities;
et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	And now it is necessary that I tell all the difference that is between us and others.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture;	I say that others are cold and feverish, until the blisters are passed, and is accompanied by the purging;
adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	Then rest the fever and the heat.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros;	Without the noise, there is no heat, fever, or pain, and it contains its own pus, which is according to the color of the blood, and begins like a small pimple, and becomes large;
et sont selonc II semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	and are according to two appearances, either dry or moist, and many colors as I have said in the section.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	When you come to treat an unknown case, it is necessary to first examine and test the instrument called "entromissoire", according to its form as described in the following chapter.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme;	And the manner of inquiring about abscesses from us is that you grasp or more moist skin than you pierce in the abscess, and turn your fingers slowly and slowly, until you know that the instrument has perforated the center, then it is according to the size of the abscess;
puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	Then, extract the mortise, and take care not to break it.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes;	If the moisture-filled wound is red, as it has been described in the other abscesses;
et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout;	and if the mortise does not come out moisture afterwards, then scrape it to make it greasy, then cut it in a cross shape, and take out the splinters with pincers, and lightly scrape off all parts and keep the shirt where you took it from so that you can remove it clean with the new one.
et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	and if you cannot remove it clean, then remove it in pieces so that nothing remains.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois;	If nothing stays in place, it returns to us many times;
et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	and if it stays for a short time and does not cause harm, then apply some corrosive powders to the wound, keep it clean, and use remedies to treat other injuries until it is healed.
et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	and if it is large, then cut out the two lips of the wound and treat what remains with charcoal.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet II jors ou III, tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc;	and if it is bleeding heavily and you cannot stop it, then apply the juice of broken glass to the wound and leave it for two or three hours until the bleeding stops, and rest the blood clot.
puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	then return to the copper vessel that is left there.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres:	See the shapes of the instruments used for opening veins, and they are in three ways:
grans et moien et petit;	large, medium, and small.
et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres:	and there are three parts that are called "lancet", and one that is called "bleeder", and there are three ways:
grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule;	large, medium, and small, to puncture the abscesses of the fistula;
et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule;	and they are also like the needles that are used to make the spoons, and are of yellow gold, or of iron, or of silver, and cost as much as those that are already yellow, and are more easily broken than black ones for puncturing the sinuses of the fistula;
et sont de III manieres:	and there are three ways:
grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	great, medium, and small, according to the amount of the width of the wounds.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci:	The shapes of needles are very similar, such as you see here:
grans, moiens, et petis;	great, medium, and small;
et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi;	and if there are needles that have two barbs in three ways also.
et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres;	and if there are needles that have three barbs, and are also in three ways.
et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres;	and if there are needles that have two barbs, and needles of one barb only, and are also in three ways.
et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	all of these are necessary in their use.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf;	The heads of these are sharp, and of such there are some that cut only from one side, from which we skin the flesh, because we do not cut the vein or the nerve.
et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes;	And of these intruders are the awls placed in palms, so that the pain does not persist at the opening of the abscesses.
et sont de III manieres:	There are three ways:
grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois;	Great, small, and medium, as you see;
et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus;	And we use only one from the limbs, such as legs, arms, breasts, and hips, and similar limbs.
et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	and never use any other small instrument, resembling the scraping of abscesses, in this form, to draw out blood.
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	and it is never put back in place that it should be aligned with veins, and arteries, and once again returns according to this great form:
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme;	Never inflate the breasts of some men when they begin to rot, as long as they seem like breasts of a woman.
et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	and prolong the inflated and swollen ones, and who want to heal them, if it is necessary according to this form of this line from b to g:
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	then scrape the fat, and fill the wound with healing ointment, then sew together the two lips of the wound, and heal it until it is healed.
et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures;	and if the jaw is dislocated downwards, and is stuck due to its size, like in women, then make an incision into two ribs above, by making similar cuts.
de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.;	because one holds the other at the end of one and the other, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form, from this line .b. to the line .g.
puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then scrape the skin that is between the two jaws, and remove the fat, and follow what we have said about sewing and powders, and whatever is necessary in the treatment, until it is healthy.
et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif;	If it is not healed, or the incision is not completely made, because the hairs do not want to rest, or due to the flow of blood, then you must fill the wound with cotton moistened in a corrosive ointment.
et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	Let it remain until the remaining part and the fat are healed, then treat it until it is healed.
des apostemes des asselles	of abscesses of the heels
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	These abscesses that come from the heels are ways of hard scabs or if they have cracks, and there are some that contain moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Therefore, those that contain moisture should be cut according to this form, from the line b to the line g:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the whole of the pus in the abscess is drained, apply old cotton to the wound and leave it on the other side, then remove all the cotton, and treat with a poultice suitable for this until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscesses are similar to scrofula, then treat them as we have said about incising scrofula, and if the wound remains open, then cauterize it as we have said before.
de la routure de l’artere	of the rupture of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme;	When the artery is cut, and the flesh above it is sound, then often there are abscesses, and just as often there is blood in the vein and abscess.
et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont;	And if one knows how to do it, then one should treat the abscess by making an incision along its length.
et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement;	and when you feel the pain, if you feel it tightly.
et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans;	and when it is for the vein, then remove the apparent parts.
et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	It is foolish to cover this abscess, and immediately when it is out of the ears and eyes and mouth and many other parts, and it is very large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc;	It is therefore necessary to apply the iron cure, and the one at the top should also be applied, and in the one that is of inflating the artery by cutting from above the skin long.
puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte;	then work the incision as small, and then separate the artery from the threads, until it is revealed.
puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples;	Then, remove the arrow from one side, and pierce it through to the other side, and stretch the artery with a double thread of flax, as I have shown you in the extraction of the two arteries that are in the temples.
puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme;	Then, do not prick the limb that is between the two loops of an introducer until the pus that is inside comes out, and remove the abscess.
puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient;	Then, apply the remedy as I have instructed, until the wound heals.
puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then, treat the inflammation that comes from this, until it is healed.
et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit;	If the abscess is in the belly of the vein, it is necessary that you dip your hand in what you can of the abscess from all the skin, then draw out the needle outside the limb that you hold in your hand, and make it pierce, and if there is a double filament, so that you pull it from the other side.
puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil;	Then tie the abscess as I have told you, or with one of two parts of the thread.
et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus;	And if you doubt that the thread will not hold, then put another needle all along the abscess at the incision of the first needle, and tighten the threads in four loops.
puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez;	then cut out the abscess until the excess is removed, then cut away the excess tissue and leave what is connected.
puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	then place a soft cloth moistened with wine and oil on top, then treat with bandages and ointments until healed.
des apostemes des ners	of abscesses of the nerves
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	Just as abscesses come in the artery and the vein, abscesses also come to the nerves when they are injured, or from too much work, and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor;	And there are often more remedies and instructions in all cases where there are joints, and this is the great abscess, and its color resembles the color of the flesh, and it is in many positions causing pain.
et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur;	and when it is pressed, the pain is great, and it is not in front of the flesh, but outside the wound.
et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer:	and moves well from all parts, and does not go forward or backward, nor out of place, and the one that is in joints does not need to be covered by iron:
par aventure i vanroit contraction;	by chance I may have contraction;
et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	and those who are at the neck or face, make the skin to the sputum.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine;	If the abscess is small, then with needles, and the copper in its root;
et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if it is large, then suspend it at the tip, and scrape, then remove the bone, and stitch the wound to the seam, and the cure until it is healed.
des grosses boces pendans	of large swollen abscesses
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros;	No times have occurred in the belly and no other place, and it is a disease that is called "funge" by the similarity of its appearance, and it is to the subtle roots, and the large joints;
et en i a de petis et de mout grans;	and there are small and very large ones;
et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	and I saw the man who had two in his belly that were more like "funges" than any other thing, and there was no difference, and they were white, and had small roots, and were broken, and it flowed with moisture.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine;	I took them and found in one eighteen ounces heavy, and in the other six ounces, and the workings in the incision are such that you look if the hairs are moist, and the color of the stone is white and moist and of subtle roots;
si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	if the copper is wide at the tip, and they are in your presence with the fire cauterization.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer;	For in cutting, there are often too large spurts of blood, and if you do not have it, then hurry to get the cauterizer.
et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors;	and if you see the pain spreading and fearful of the incision with the knife, then take a well-made thread, and tie the wound as we have said, and leave it for two days.
et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail;	and then tighten the bandage, and do not stop stretching the thread of cloth until it covers the wound, and cut through it with work.
et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne;	If the roots are large, then apply the cauterizing iron directly to the abdomen, but you should also cover half of it, then cauterize so it does not reappear.
puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	Then treat the wound, and guard that you do not cover the throul which is of a yellowish color and poor sensation and of milky appearance.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For these infected abscesses, I will come to treat them with leeches later.
quant li boude ist fuer	When the patient is feverish
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit;	If the appearance of the boude comes from cauterizing a wound or cutting into a syphilitic ulcer, and it is above the abdomen and in some of the bruises, as it has in other wounds, or of blood that cuts veins or arteries according to what is before, or of moisture;
et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	And if it is by the rupture of the pus and by the outflow of the bile, then the color of the abscess is similar to the color of the blood, and it is a light thing without pain, and open from various sources.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is for the issue of the intestine, then it is most diverse, and when one presses it to its two sides, it returns, and perhaps it is torn, and enlarges greatly at the entrance of the bath and by much work.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie;	And if it is by moisture, it is a light thing, and open well when you press it with your hand, do not force it much.
et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit;	And if it is by blood, it is open by these signs the abscesses are large and hard, and it is full of a quantity.
et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	And if it is by windiness, it is soft to the touch, and the work is that you look whether its appearance is from the blood of the artery, or of the vein, or windiness.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	If it is necessary to leave the care.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	For there is doubt and fear, as I have told you in the chapter on abscesses, for the artery and for the vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude;	And if its appearance is for the intestine or the mucous, then you must command the patient to dye his linen, and be fully extended, then sign around the belly;
puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine;	then command him to lie still between your hands, then go around the limb that you have signed all over, then extend half of the abscess above all the large joint;
puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz;	then tie it around with a strong thread or a firm silk cord, and let the joint be loose;
puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine;	then operate on half of the abscess extended over the joint, and let your knife indicate, and the intestine;
se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre;	If you have the truth of the joint, then dislocate it, and push the intestine to the side of the abdomen;
et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit;	and if you have the truth of the bone, then take it from the joint, and cut off the excess;
et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier;	and if the artery or vein opposes you, then go around it, then return to your work and take two needles, and insert two threads, and push the two needles around what you have done in order to pierce it.
puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi;	then puncture the abscess in four places above the needles, and if you see, remove the needles, and leave the wound open until it can close, and cut off the dead flesh by itself.
ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit;	when you cover it with a cloth when it is thin and raw, then treat it according to what is needed, and drain the abscess as we have said.
et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	and extract the arrow or the moisture that you have removed, then treat the limb according to what is needed, and soak the limb.
dou chancre	For the fire cauterization, instruct
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer;	We have said in the division the similarities of chancre, and how one must treat it with medicines, and how one must avoid the treatment of iron.
et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement;	and let us say the chancre is ingrown in the marsh, and great caution is needed in its treatment, and the ancient ones said that when chancres are in a place where it can be removed as chancre which is in the mammary glands, and in the chest, and similar places, and everything should be removed when it is at the beginning.
et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner;	and when it is large and old, it does not matter that you approach it, for I have never been able to heal one.
ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	I have never seen anyone healed of one before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire;	And the workings, when it is in place where one can remove it, as we have said, is that you purify once the evil of black bile;
puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide I boin leu por faire l’ovraige;	then make it heal if it has obvious accumulation, then remove the evil from the good limb to do the work;
puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier;	then pour out your bile or pus, and the hair from all parts, and the bone from all parts without leaving anything.
et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	and let the blood clot completely, and clean the wound well with your hand or something else, and if the blood clots against the incision of the artery or vein, if it is not stopped by cauterization, it will cause harm.
puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	then use other treatments until it is healed.
de ydropisie	de l’estomac
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer:	We have mentioned in the division, similar to hydrops, and how the assembly of the sharp is made, and the signs of each similarity, and the treatment given by medicines, and that which is cured by iron.
si est eclites soulement;	if it is only illuminated;
et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances:	And one should not touch iron in these two similarities:
c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose;	That is to say, tympanites and hypochondriac pain, for it is a deadly thing.
donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses;	Therefore, when you treat this resemblance of dropsy which is called "eclises" of medicine, and the cure does not work, look if the pains are weak, or if he has another disease than dropsy, as most cases and similar things.
si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance;	If not, do not touch iron, for there is doubt.
et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer:	And if you see the pain of great virtue, and he has no other disease than dropsy alone, and he is not too young or too old, then thus proceed:
lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	Hold the painful area straight above your hands, and the ministrants press the abdomen by bringing the sharp instrument to the lowest part of the belly, then take the spinous process according to this form:
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	And be slicing of two parts.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier;	at a point, and ensure that no part is too thin so that it can come close to the intestine when inserted, and it cannot be broken;
puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines:	then look if the hernia is pushed towards the intestines:
si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil;	if it is necessary that you cut them off at the base of the three fingers directly above the wrist;
et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois;	and if the hernia is due to the disease of the liver, then your incision should be on the left side of the base of the three fingers;
et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu;	If it is due to the muscle, then it should be set to the right, and it should not be moved only by the hairs growing over the wound where the excess does not run to the weak limb.
puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor;	Then pierce all the skin with the instrument, and beat it, and lift your hand to the entire space between the skin and the flesh as if you are scraping in the quantity of an egg or around.
puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	Then pierce the flesh until the space between the skin and the flesh reaches the desired length, and this is the width of the needle, then remove it, and beat this instrument with which this form is made:
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus;	And it is similar to a thin silver chain, and is made of light iron or copper, and has a small hole in its center.
et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus;	and on one side, three holes;
et II d’autre part, et I d’autre;	and two on the other side, and one on the other;
et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	and it is cut like a feather, and its shape is like the incision that the scribe makes when carving the pen:
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument;	at the top of it is the quill, so that when the instrument comes to the tip, then place the instrument above the quill;
vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort;	empty the half or third part, for if you empty it more than it should be at that hour, by chance it may cause the patient to die from the resolution of his spirit from the arm, or he loses consciousness, or he approaches death;
mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz;	but according to the quantity of its virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the virtue mean, and its hairs.
puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere;	then take the tool and hold the sharp edge, and it is held now for the one who is supposed to pierce the part that is above the eyelid, of which I have spoken, that you pierce in this manner;
puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit;	then restart the tool the other day, if you see the patient suffering from this, and take a small amount of the sharp edge;
fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	do this every day, and guard against following too much until it does not delay but only a little sharp edge.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre;	And if you doubt the pain, and you leave it too long without proper care, then the wound of burial or sand heals, and by much sweat or bathing and in the sun, and it becomes infected with drinking;
et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	and the treatment of desiccative medicines until it is healed, and cauterize above the stomach and above the liver and above the spleen after the extraction of the arrow, as I have said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	of the removal of the probe
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	No child is born without a wart in the penis, or the wart is small, or it is not in its place.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	If it is necessary to pierce at all times with a very thin needle according to this form:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet;	then put or puncture a thin needle through the bottom, and tie it and leave it for three days or four and when he wants to make urine, if it is removed, and make urine, and then put it back;
et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	And by chance, it does not cover well, because the urine that comes out does not keep it closed.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	If the one who is pricked is small, it is treated with a thin thread of the bottom, as we have said, and it will expand.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut;	Those who do not have the perineum in their joint are disabled, because no one is born with the perineum at the top of the thigh, so they cannot urinate before their thigh rises.
et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	And they cannot urinate because the matter cannot come out through the urethra, and it is a very bad disease.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient;	And the manner of the work is such that the hairs grow on top of their back, and the thigh bone and the hip are like the belly of a pen, so that the perineum is in the middle, as it should be.
et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	and guard against the evacuation of blood which often occurs, and if it does, if the cloth that stops the bleeding is used, and treat the wound until it is healed.
des pustules de la verge	of the pustules of the knife
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide;	often come these worms in the tail, and it is an ugly appearance of a maggot;
et en i a malignes et non malignes;	and there are both harmful and not harmful ones;
si covient que tu les preignes a I oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien;	if it is necessary that you remove them with fine tweezers, and pick up and clean all of them, then put on a piece of Egyptian gauze;
puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	then the treatment of the wound continues until it is healed.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	And if the wound is malignant, with a putrid color and foul smell, then you must cauterize it with fire.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier;	When you have coped with it, and if the dislocation is in the socket and part of it is inside the skin and part outside, then you must first break the dislocation that is inside.
et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	and when it is broken, if the part outside is healed.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion;	For when you heal it together, if the part of the bone is not secure, and there is blackness and corruption in its socket and where it was connected.
si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	then you must remove all that is black and corrupted, then apply the plaster of honey and flour made from the shells of large pumpkins and vetch, then heal with other treatments until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	And if blood flows, then treat the lunar cauterization according to this form:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble:	The cautery helps with two positions together:
c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption;	namely, at the extraction of arrows, and in decay;
et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi;	and if the patient is corrupt and retreats, it is necessary that you beat or conduct the stick a cane of mud, and urinate on the painful parts;
et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars;	and when the skin has erupted at the head of the stick which have been those who were not circumcised, or it has for wound or abscess, then it is necessary that you scorch it with the instrument of the beard, until the pus is removed, and deliver the patient from all parts of the stick;
et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil;	and if it is a bad thing to divide the vein, then you must burn it at the spot with no part of the spoon and the hair;
puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	then dry thoroughly between two, and put on a thin layer of linen cloth wet with cold water, that it does not blister.
de la circoncision	of circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies;	Circumcision is not different from other wounds in continuity;
toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	all the same when we do this work of our intent, and properly in children, it is a matter that we should do the best work, and the lightest to save.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancients did not practice circumcision on their children, because they did not use it in their law, and we have only what we have acquired by experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor I dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule;	For I have seen the greatest part of masters and wise men who did circumcision in the middle, and with force, and all at once;
si fuioit li keurs car il i a II toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	if there were two curtains, because there is two, and by chance if one covers the other above and delays the other below.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre;	or it recovers covered, and the pain is double, and to the wound that is from the tip of the member is not sure.
et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	and to the wound of the finger by chance the iron escapes and ruins the work, and many times they are born so that they do not have a need for wound treatment and I have seen it.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	Of the wound healing that is done with force to all the member of the thread, I found the best of the experiment, for the forces cut equally as well above as below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens;	For when you press your hand, if you cut evenly in all the soft parts;
mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir;	but that the thread is well stretched around the skin;
et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	And the way of the first work is that you make the child think that you are only tying the thread around the stick as much as possible, and then throw it in all ways that you can.
puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens;	Then place the child straight between your hands, and hide the forces between your hands or away from your feet so that the child does not see them, nor any of the instruments.
puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens;	Then blow your hand on the stick and gently, and pull it up as high as the child's stick is long.
puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien;	Then wipe it well of the dirt that is gathered, then tie the limb with a double thread, then tie it away from one side to the other.
et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge;	and the second line is to be done by the second hand with the pouch and the correct index, and between the two lines, then lift the head carefully and take the tip of the staff;
puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres;	then let the blood flow slowly and slowly, for that is the most dangerous;
et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and put powder on and on the powder a glue made from the unsalted fat of a well-cooked hare, tempered with rose vinegar, boiled in rose oil and fresh, and let it stay overnight, and the other cure until it is healed.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste:	The form of forces for the mummification is this:
li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The two shoulders are tense and thin, and the shoulders are also as great as the hand equally:
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision;	The error of the mundification is that the knife is not cutting into the incision;
donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme;	Therefore, you must extend it to your angle, as well as when the legs make an abscess;
et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	and the coping equally, and if you cannot hold it at your angle, then hold it with nails, and then the coping.
Et s’il trespassent III jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement;	And if they pass three hours, and what is outside the rod is swollen, then let it remain until the abscess is completely healed, and scrape lightly;
si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	If you move the cup as you can, and avoid the part of the staff, it will not harm you.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point;	Therefore, cure the limb of things that cause pain from powder, as we have said or treated for powders, and if you use too much care, it will not harm.
cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore, cure the limb as we have said, until it is healthy.
dou retenement de l’urine	The retention of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division;	The retention of urine is due to the obstruction of a stone, or frozen blood, or a bowel, or a charred, or similar things, as we have said in the division.
et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz;	and if the urine is not released, and you see that retention is due to a stone that is lodged in the urethra, then it is necessary that the painful parts be lifted over the knees.
et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet;	and the feet should be placed on the back, and extend the belly from the upper part of the back, and restrain the painful parts as much as possible.
et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e;	and then the belly is pressed against the expression of the stone from above, so that the urine is released and;
et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme:	and if it does not come, as we have said, and the painful parts are greatly painful, then you must administer extraction with all the instrument called "syringe", of which this is the form:
et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil;	and let it be of fine silver wire, as like a quill of an eagle.
et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	and let the needle be of a long and half-palm, and fine at the head.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue;	And the manner of the issue of the urine is that you take a double thread, and tie the head to the tip of the cotton or wool, and pull the head of the thread through the tube.
et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede;	and fold the excess of the wool and pull it to the head of the tube, then oil the tube with oil or butter and egg white, and place the patient on a chair, and the arose the bladder and the oil-soaked cloth and oil of olive and vinegar.
puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude;	Then lightly insert the syringe into the bone, until it reaches the root of the bone, then double the bone over against the wound.
puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors;	Then push the syringe forward towards the bladder, and feel the hairs coming out of the empty space, and this is only done in this order if the guide or it goes is twisted.
puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine;	Then stretch the thread along the entire thread slowly and slowly, and the urine follows the thread, then remove it forcefully, and correct the urine.
et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	And restart the syringe until the bladder is empty and the hairs are aligned.
des maladies de la vessie	of diseases of the bladder
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When blisters or blood come into the bladder, and putrefaction is assembled, and you see distillation of water and medicines, then use all the tool called «clepsedre», and it is the form:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus:	It is closed, and if it has three holes:
II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois;	On one side, and on the other, as you see;
et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est;	And the joint is cut by the doctor's knife in such a way that it does not damage the bone too much, so that the moisture can be drawn out and put back as necessary.
et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens;	And when you see your medicines going into the bladder, put the head of the catheter in the moisture, and draw it out through the opening that is there.
si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens;	If you draw out the moisture with the catheter, then push the catheter strongly back in.
si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira;	If the moisture enters again, and comes to the bladder now, so that the patient feels it.
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie:	And this is the form of the subtle catheter with which one catheterizes the bladder:
si est ci:	If it is like this:
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut;	And it is of silver or of copper, and it is the highest of the catheters;
et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet;	And it is thinner at the top where the catheter enters;
puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu;	Then take a sheep's bladder and put the moisture that you saw catheterize the bladder, then tie it between the two breasts with a double thread of wool, and heat the moisture above the fire;
puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie;	Then put the tip of the catheter in the hole, then hold your hand over the bladder all around the moisture, until the pain feels that the moisture has reached the bladder;
et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor;	and if you do not have a catheter, take a piece of parchment, and make a circle with it, and pierce it roundly around;
puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument;	then stuff the thread strongly into these holes, then assemble the circle as one would assemble a shield, and put inside what you see of oil and moisture and vinegar, and tie it with the instrument;
et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	and do as you have done with the catheter, of pressing with your hand until the moisture comes to the catheter.
de la piere	of the stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines;	We have said in the previous section the ways of arrows and extraction together with medicines;
et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille;	and I have said the difference between the arrow embedded in the flesh and all the signs, and in what arrow one should make an incision;
et en la vessie, et en la verge;	and in the bladder, and in the penis;
et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	and I will tell you plainly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit;	I say that the stone which is embedded in the bladder often occurs more frequently in children, and this is a sign that the sharp urine spray from the bladder is like a sharp blow to its subtlety.
et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist;	and there is a sharp pain in the penis, and it often hurts, and then it becomes inflamed.
et a mout de ces saut li fondemens;	and with many of these sprays, the base.
et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont IIII ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece;	and is light in the healing of children up to the age of four, and is very painful in old men, and is constantly present, among those who are between young and old.
et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	And the treatment of those with large stones is lighter than that of those with small ones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	And when we come to the cure, it is first necessary to cleanse the wound with cloth, to draw out all the matter that is in the intestines.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	For it never clogs when seeking the stone.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut;	Then take the dislocation by the feet, and stand and move it towards the outside, so that the stone descends to the edge of the bladder, and never once rise up from the hip.
puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval;	Then let it sit between your hands and prepare it, with its hands away from its thighs, so that the bladder is completely descending down.
puis la quier et la touche dedens;	Then grasp and touch inside.
se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	If you feel the stone in the space, then hurry now to cut above the stone.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis;	And if she does not break at the touch of the soft touch, then gently press your index finger of your right hand, if the pain is sharp, or your middle finger, if the pain is dull;
et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie;	and press at its base, and cut into the stone, and when you feel it at your finger, if the pain is in the groin, then apply the anointing oil to the affected area;
puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	then press above your finger, and cut at the place where you saw it cut.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille;	And command the minister to press the anus with his hand, and command him to stretch the testicles to his right hand, and with his left hand remove the skin that is outside the testicles in the part where the incision is made;
puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	Then apply the splint, covering it with a cloth:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre;	And make an incision between the thighs and the groin, not in the middle but on the right side of the naval:
et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans;	And the incision should be straight above the stone, and the two ends should be at the thigh or groin, and the width of the cut should be wide on the outside and narrow in the middle, according to the size of the stone, not too wide:
par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail;	If the pressure is too great where it is at the groin, it may jump out of place:
et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges:	And check if there are any stones or edges and margins:
si est griés a issir;	if it is grasped to pull out;
et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	and if there is a smooth, rounded part, like a bone, and its exit is light.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant;	In such cases where it has angles and edges, make the cut larger;
et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe;	and if it does not jump out, then you must force it with pincers that are like a lime at the head to pull the stone so it does not escape;
ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief;	or you can push it out with a subtle hooked instrument from the head.
et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole;	and if you cannot engage it thus, then enlarge the small hole, and if there is no skin, then strain it with vinegar.
et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	If there are more than one arrow, first remove the largest one from the neck of the bladder, then cut above it, then pull it out, and the smaller ones afterward if there are many.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	If it is very large, then it should be cut, and a larger wound made.
Car II choses avienent au malaide:	For two things happen to the dislocated joint:
ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder;	or it dies, or the urine comes out through the wound because the joint cannot hold together.
mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces;	but all effort must be made to pull it out or remove it with pliers, until you pull it out in pieces.
et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut;	And when you have completed your work, apply incense and aloe and dragon's blood to the wound, bind it, and place a moist cloth soaked in oil and wine, or oil and vinegar and cold rosewater, to alleviate the inflammation.
puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	Then resolve the misalignment over its shoulder, and do not dislocate the joint further by pulling it too hard.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you reset it, the limb should rise well with oil and vinegar, then apply a healing ointment and basilicon ointment until it is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine:	And if pus comes into the wound and corrosions, and clots of blood in the bladder, and it is retained by the urine, which is known to be withheld without causing a sensation when urinating.
boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit;	Therefore, remove the pus from the wound, and extract that blood clot, for if it remains, it will corrode the bladder and cause damage.
puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then lift the wound of the sharp and the silk and the silk thread, and assist in all ways that you can, until it is healed.
et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	And it is necessary that all the wounds that you treat, that you tie the two thighs together, and gather the remedies above the limb.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir;	And if the stone is small, and it is guided by a catheter, and tied up, and the urine cannot come out;
si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	if the cure that I have said before, that you cut many times, is excused from this treatment.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	I have experienced this before.
Pren I foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a III angles fichiees en I tison:	Take a piece of iron according to this form and be at three angles tied with a thread:
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie;	Then take a thread and tie it around the catheter outside the stone, so that it cannot come back into the bladder;
puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere;	then gently push the thread into the catheter until it reaches the stone;
et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part;	and then turn the chisel to your hand on the stone little by little, until you can pierce the stone from the other side.
si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	if soon comes the urine, then press your hand above the part that remains of the stone that is inside the shaft.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides;	If it is already broken, and it springs forth with the urine, and is sharp against the hairs;
et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie;	and if you cannot do this for any reason that prevents it, then tie the thread below the stone and the other above, then make the shaft in the place between the two threads, then pull it out, and remove the thread, and clean the clotted blood that is in the wound;
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and the care as long as they are healthy.
de la piere des femmes	of the stone of women
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por III choses:	Few have seen a needle inserted into women, and if it ever happens, then the care is difficult, and it is prohibited for three reasons:
l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge;	the first is that perhaps the woman is a virgin;
et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	and the second is that one cannot find a woman well-trained who would willingly expose herself to such shame, especially when she is chaste.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains;	And the third reason is that perhaps one cannot find a woman well-trained in this art of hands;
et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil;	and the fourth reason is that if the woman's needle is larger than the man's, because it should be made with a deeper cut, and there is great fear. And if necessary, one must send for a skilled midwife, and apply the truthful herb, and if you do not know how to do this, then it is not advisable to try to perform the procedure yourself;
et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere;	and if a woman presents with a sharp pain in her life, or a woman who knows a part of the art, and she commands that she do what you command of the examination of the stone;
et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge:	and look very closely if the woman is virgin:
adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere;	then it is necessary to put her hand or base and search for the stone;
et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	and if she finds it, then hold her hand away from her base, and recommend that she put her hand or with the pain, and press her right hand firmly on the anus.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse;	if she finds it, then it is necessary to move it from great to great from the entrance of the anus until it reaches the root of the thigh;
puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie;	Then cut across the stone in the root of the thigh, against the middle of the knee, where it is muscle-filled and feels like a stone in that part.
et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite;	And do not move the joint above or below the stone, and let the wound heal at first small.
puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont:	Then push the stone out of the wound, if you feel the stone so sharp that the stone can be removed, and note that many methods of stones are:
c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	It is to know, small and large, sharp and smooth, long and round, and those that have edges.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	if you recognize the similarities to know the outcome.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	And if it does not come out, then put the broken glass in the wound, and let it stay there an hour until the stone is softened.
puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre;	then return to your work, until the stone is fully removed, and have the instruments I mentioned in the extraction of the stone for you to help in your work.
et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide;	and if it bleeds again, and it is from the artery that has been cut, then put powder on the wound and bandage it with tents and binders, and do not restart, and leave the stone and do not pull it out, unless by chance it might kill the patient.
puis cure la plaie.	then treat the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	When the heat of the blood is calmed, and the wound healed, then return to your work, until the stone is formed.
de hernie carnouse	of hernia carcinoma
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef;	Ramming with water is nothing other than an assembly of moisture or white clay, which is not the same as the juice of herbs that contain the urine.
et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit I autre oef;	and is called "syfac", and never properly in the web of the eyelid, if one cares that it is not the other eyelid.
et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit;	and it is the thin skin between the white "syfac" that we have said.
et ceu n’avient se poc non.	and it does not have a specific name.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the generation of this branch is due to weakness that comes from within, and it is spread out that matter.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors:	And never if it comes from percussion on the eyelids, and this moisture has many colors:
ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus;	or it is a changing color from yellow to jaundice, or it is without red, or black, or watery white, and there are more.
et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	and these are the signs to know this assembly, because if it is the white "syfac" that we have said, then the abscesses are there, and they are long like the shape of an eyelid, and do not open the eyelids, because it has moisture all around.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef;	If he has moisture in his own cloth, then the abscesses are treated with a part of the egg, and for this reason, it is thought to be another egg.
et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien;	and if his moisture is between the skin of the fingers and the white nail, he feels it well.
donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	therefore, when you want to know the color of the moisture, try all the introducing parts, because it was previously formed.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to what comes afterwards, judge what is inside.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors;	And when we cure them with iron, it is necessary that the hairs be cleaned according to some power and the replenishment of his body.
puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz;	then the swine on his back, on something a little high, and put much cloth over him.
puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions;	then lift up his right arm, and command the assistant to lift it on the left side, and extend the rod to one of the two ribs near the armpit.
puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir;	then take the spatula and cover the skin of the ribs with the long part up to the knuckle, and make your cut straight across the skin of the ribs towards the white face, and gently scrape the skin according to the power.
puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont;	then pierce the white face flat with a wide needle, and extract all the sharp points, then put your needles, and press the white face upwards.
et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement;	and do not touch the face of the bones, but only the skin.
cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue;	remove all or even the very ribs of him, if you do not remove them properly, then it will return to sharp.
et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac;	and if the bone jumps up at your work, then reset it in its place when you have completed the work of the skin.
puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then sew the two books of the face of the bones to a seam, then treat it as the other wounds until it is healed.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc;	and if you break the bone and it becomes infected with another disease, then it is necessary to tie the veins that are suspended, in doubt of blood clotting.
puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	Then copper the coin to all the suspensory, and extract the eye, and treat it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices;	And if it is sharp and gathered in two parts together, they are two branches;
si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset;	If you copper the other part evenly as you did the first, then wipe the blood, and put some soft cloth soaked in rose oil into the wound;
et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	and put some other soft cloth soaked in wine and oil under the two copper pieces, and put on top doubled cloths, and tie it to all the limb that is according to this form:
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil;	Then take two cloths, and place them like this charpie according to this appearance, and they are sewn together at the girdle of the breeches, and one of the strings above the buttocks, and the other at the part of the elbow;
et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier;	and the other two heads above the two angles, and let all the assembly be restrained in the loop of the brace.
et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers;	and never use this branch of the cautery in the shape of an iron needle, and you must grip the cauterizing needle subtly, and coat the skin with it, and heat it as we have said, so that the white sap that contains the acid is discovered;
si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	if you take the cauterizing needle in this form, and pierce that white sap with one prick, and burn the skin with this subtle cauterizing;
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout;	and coat it in all ways that you can, until you extract everything;
et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef;	and beware that the fire does not touch the eyeball.
et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve;	and cleanse this work is safer.
et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille;	and avoid the corruption of blood, and keep quiet the works of tailoring.
et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	and if nothing goes against you, or abscess in the groin or corruption of blood or other thing, then cure what goes against you according to what is said before.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit;	And if the pain is not severe, and does not want to wait for this work because of its horror, then alleviate perforation, as I told you, and it is that when you are well certain by the signs that we have said that the aqueous humor is low, then place the pain on the raised seat;
pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors;	For the abscess, pierce it in the outermost part, and place the incision along the length of the body;
et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer;	and make the incisions wide enough that all the sharp pain is relieved;
puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee;	then place cotton on the limb, and tie it, and let the remaining sharp pain subside, then treat the wound until it is healed;
et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant;	and if the white cloth does not prevent the sharp pain from escaping through the wound mouth, then you must use a pen or the instrument used to treat hydrophobia, of which the form is as previously mentioned;
et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	and enlarge the wound slightly, and remove that which is sharp so that it returns to its agility after six months or more, and when it is assembled as before, and thus passes through its pains.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the testicles
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse;	There are many fearful conditions in the cutting of this branch, which seems to me that it is better to leave;
et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	and I will tell you the work and similar things of the abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions;	I say therefore that many abscesses come from wounds, and immediately after cutting;
et c’est par mout de cas.	and it is often the case.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion;	It is to know by excessive sharp and wet, which is spread after cutting, or from impact;
et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors;	and the color of the abscess corresponds to the color of the blood flow;
et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief;	and it does not cause pain, and it is a serious abscess;
et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	and sometimes it is a gray, pussy, and purulent abscess, of yellowish color, and never comes from an artery or a vein swelling;
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois;	When it is from an artery, it is known by the appearance of the abscess, which changes when you press on it with your fingers;
et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	and it does not require that you touch it.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars;	Those that come from vein swelling are known by their appearance at the touch of your fingers, and can often be cut across this resemblance, and on the others as well;
et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	and you must cut the cords that are causing the swelling, then set the bone in place, and the wound is cleaned with a white cloth, and deliver the suspended parts from all parts of the bone.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope;	If the bone is already set with these charms, then you must cut the bone and the cords.
et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	and if it is outside the skin or inside the veins, then you must deliver all of that which is held, and clean it thoroughly.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the horn of the char is located behind the shoulder, it is necessary that you cut it all, and extract the eye, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your surgeries are completed, apply the wound with a linen cloth soaked in rose oil and wine, then use other treatments until it is healed.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the testicles
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait;	This is an abscess wrapped in a wrapping similar to a boil, with the softening of the cords, and the pain increases when it moves.
et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	And the treatment of this disease is as difficult and painful as the one before, and we will tell you the work of it, according to what the ancients did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment;	It is necessary that you make the patient sit upright on an elevated seat, then lift the suspensor of the testicles to your fingers, and all the veins that are close to the cord, and clean them with a master's hair, and stretch them properly.
puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples;	Then cut across the sharp spatula through the middle of the veins, until they are exposed, and then scrape each part, as we have said in the extraction of the arteries that are in the temples.
puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief;	then fish out an needle or he has a double thread, and tie it to the first shoulder where the blood came from, and to the other shoulder.
puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues;	then cut across the middle straight, according to the length of the wound, and remove the corrupted blood.
puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions;	then treat the wound as with others, using bandages or ointments, so that no one knows what the wound was.
car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz;	for because of this there is no harm, and if all the people see it, then you must remove the bandages from everyone.
si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	if he does not lose his appearance because of the incision of the bandages, and they dry and cannot be helped.
de la routure dou syfac	of the toothache
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions;	The symptoms of this branch are due to the section that comes out or sphincter, or extension over the abdomen in the part of the angles, because the intestines descend from that break to one of the bones;
et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes:	and this break is due to too much sphincter, or from extension of it, and these two ways come from many causes:
ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses;	or from impact, or from jumping, or from shouting, or from lifting heavy weights, and similar things;
et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement;	and the signs when it is due to too much sphincter, are that it happens slowly and gradually, over a long time, and does not come suddenly;
et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	and the abscesses are equal up to the backbone, because the face is close to the intestines.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs are when it comes to the section of the tooth, which brings sudden pain at the beginning, and has various appearances of abscesses outside the skin, and it is for the end of the intestine and the heart behind the tooth.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And sometimes the worms are found with the intestines, and they are retained inside, and cause great pain to suffer from the illness, especially when pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these cures of iron with fear, because it should be avoided.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir;	And the method of the work is that you command or let the patient bend the intestines with their hand into the wound, if it can be pushed in.
puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes;	then it should be even above his neck, between your hands, and loosen the bowels.
puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc;	then the wound should be above, and cover all the skin of the bones.
puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir;	then push in between the belly's lips an incision according to what you have skill for opening the wound, and let them be such that the intestines can issue.
puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars;	then shave the beard that is under the skin of the flesh, until the white beard is exposed from all parts.
puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac;	then insert your index finger in the roof of the mouth that leads to the flesh, between the white beard that is under the skin of the cheek, and between the second beard, and behind the cheek, and between the second beard.
et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille;	and then move the cheek outwards from the skin of the flesh, and place the white beard on top of your right hand, and lift the cheek towards the back, and pull all the beard downwards towards the waist.
et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement;	and commands the minister to stretch the arm upward, and release the air that is behind the ligament;
et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz;	and asks if he has any intestines wrapped or white and hard, and if you find anything, then let it go out of the stomach;
puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions;	then take a needle or he has thick thread made of many threads, and insert it into the back part of the white and hard thing, which is after the skin of the intestines;
aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz;	then after the belly, then cover the threads that appear from the threads, until there are four threads;
puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars;	then assemble them one above the other in the shape of a cross, and tie the white and hard thing, which we have said is out of the skin of the intestines, with a strong thread of two parts;
puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne;	Then envelop the dislocated shoulder in two parts, so that no part of the clothing that they wear can enter into the wound, as an abscess does not come.
et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi;	And immediately apply the bandage according to the first bandage, with two fingers of that, and after these two bandages leave the sucking wound which is outside the curvature of the bones, the great one of a finger.
et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte;	And then the other according to the round shape that the evil carries;
puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant;	Then cover in the part that is outside the skin of the bones, as much as possible without correction, and the bone, as we have said before.
puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	then apply a poultice of soft cloth in oil to wounds, and it applies the remedy that we have said.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And never cauterize the white swelling that we have said, after incision, due to fear of bleeding.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui;	For this has often happened, and let the remedy remain until it heals through it;
et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece;	and if it takes too long to settle, then apply hot vinegar, and place on what we have said, until it heals.
puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	then treat the wound with other remedies, until it is completely healed.
de hernie carnouse	of hernia carcinoma
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this branch, I have never seen anyone dare to perform the cure by iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz;	And the ancients said that it is made in such a way as the branch that is together with the face, in some manner that you bind the veins, after the cut above the belly lightly at the opening;
puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient;	then copulate with me, and heal the abscess of this which works, until the vessels are clean.
et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and the cure as we have said, until they are healthy.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus;	No time comes when there is a break or tear, as we have said, and open the veins;
et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres;	and do not cut any of the intestines as we have said, and if there are any, it is little, and repair them every hour;
et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent;	and whenever if he remains too long in this point, the wound or the abscess, until the intestines are cut;
et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert;	and the blood has by the extension of the abscess which is at the tears, as we have said, because they are extended, then softened and inflated the veins and open;
et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit;	and if it is by cauterization, as we have previously mentioned.
et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere:	and never cured in this manner:
et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois;	and the hairs are often tied together above their backs between your hands, then the limb of the tear is filled with a large amount of three fingers worth.
et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac;	then the sinew that is outside the skin that surrounds it, then take the needle and put it on the limb appearing from the sinew;
et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre;	and press it against the front of the belly, then cut the two limbs appearing from the sinew above the head of the needle, and cut both.
puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines;	Then extract the head of the arm, and do not cover the mouth or extend the elbow or anything else, as I have told you in the treatment of the break in the ribs.
puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	Then treat it with the treatment of wounds.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when you remove the arrows, if you do not defile and heal the wound until it is healed.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The saphenous vein is constrained, and does not appear in the incision, and the cauteries are silent in this place, and closer to salvation.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	of the softening of the leather of the boots
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir;	Many times have the tendons of the joints been softened in some men, because the charms that are inside are softened, and it is to be seen.
et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil;	And it is a matter, when one wants to cure it, that one makes the pain lie on its back, and the copper which is softened over the natural skin;
puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a III costures ou IIII fermement;	Then gather the two lips to one seam, and if you see, cut first the excess of the softened skin at three or four seams firmly.
puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Then, apply between the stitches, and treat it like other wounds, until it is healed, and cut off the thread.
dou chastrement	forcibly
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre;	It is customary in our law to use cauterization, and because I would like not to speak of it in this book;
et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres:	and it is not necessary for any other way:
dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure;	one of which is that the patient responds to the cauterization when asked about it, and in this way treat it.
et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	and the other, because we often have to cauterize animals to help us, such as goats and sheep and chickens and others.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres:	I therefore say that this chapter is done in two ways:
ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	or by traction, or by cutting.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant;	In the one that we make by traction, we should sit the patient best in high heat, until the ligaments are softened and during.
puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	then hold them with your hand, until they are put back and you do not feel them anymore.
Du chastrement de taille:	Of the sacrament of the belly:
covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez;	You should clean the patient, and press the skin of the ligaments with your right hand, then tie the suspenders, and cover each burn separately, when you have them well scorched.
et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz;	et leave no poison or subtle poison that is on the vessels;
et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure;	and this method of castration is more dangerous than that which is done by attraction, because at attraction something from the testicles remains, by which the animal desires sexual intercourse;
puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	then cure the wound until it is healed.
des hermofrodites	hermaphrodites
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes:	Hermofrodite is according to two ways:
l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	the first is that between the two testicles open as much as the figure of a woman's nature, or he has hair, and sometimes cutting it allows urination.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	And the other way is in women, and has above the clitoris as a penis and two testicles.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies;	And the treatment of males and females is that you cut off all the hairs stuck together, and treat them as other wounds;
en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	In the second manner, for men whose urine springs from their clothing, there is no cure.
de la tentigene	of the tenting
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir;	Tentingene is a charm placed on the natural part, as long as it is too ugly to see.
et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	And no women have it as big as a hand, and that is the cure.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement;	It is necessary for you to stain the excess of the tentingene on your hand or nails, and wipe it off lightly.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	And do not go too far back, for there is no blood coming, then the cure of other cures until it is clean.
et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	and in another chariot that is born from the mouth of the marsh, and it uses, and perhaps it jumps up, and it is according to the appearance of a cow, and because of this they call it the ancient "cowdisease".
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If it is necessary for you to grasp it, as we have said about the protrusion, and care for it until it is healed.
de erratique	If it is necessary for you to grasp it
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis;	It is indeed difficult to determine the nature of a woman's pregnancy, or when it is small.
et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est;	It is either natural by birth, or accidental by disease that has come upon her.
ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit;	Or it is by charm, or a subtle or spelled spell, and it is made to happen in the marsh, or in the cost, or outside, or wherever it may be.
et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir;	and they conceive, and childbirth, and perhaps the flowers to have.
et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	and the knowledge of this is by the gaze of the bait.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	If the swelling appears close to the surface, you can apply your fingers or a probe.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi:	If it is very sharp and subtle, and it is close to the two lips, then hurry, and do as follows:
met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes;	put your two index fingers together, and let the woman be on her back, spreading her legs;
puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens;	then form the two lips, until the sharp and subtle sphacelus is removed, and it is over the stoppers;
puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	then take linen, and soak it in oil, and put it on the limb, and feed the woman at home every day, so that it does not stick.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	And if the thread is hard and sharp, it is necessary that you soak it in the same way as vinegar leaf.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope;	If the limb is made of wood, then it should be suspended by its end and the copper.
et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef;	And have the staining blood medicines, such as dragon's blood, incense, and an abundance of wine.
puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder;	Then apply a wide piece of cloth, so that the wound cannot seal.
et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec;	And then let it be long, and the application be a tent of dry linen.
puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat with other remedies until they are healed.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	And when in the marsh there is a broken bone, cover it according to this method, unless it is an abscess.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	For an abscess that has formed in the marsh, one should not touch it with fire.
des emorroides	of hemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul;	Emorroides are openings of veins without a cut as usual, and when the emorroides are old they become thrombi.
et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	And we have said in the previous section the similarities of those, and the signs, and I will say here those that require treatment.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	I say that hemorrhoids and thrombosed veins, when they are formed in the marsh, and do not appear until sensed, are only cured by iron.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	Those that can be felt at the edge of the marsh, are those that can be cured.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses;	Therefore, you should put the woman in a cold house, then straighten the shoulder with tongs, and the copper at its root, then powder with restraining medicines of blood, such as aloes and sulfur and incense, and similar things;
puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide;	then close its feet at the door for an hour, then put it in a high cold place;
et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	and if blood comes out, then make it sit in a decoction of sumac and bark of green apples and pears and similar things, and then take flour of wheat, and mix with honey and egg, and make the poultice on its back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	And if he faints, it's good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir;	If not, make him lean back with suction cups on his back and breasts to avoid hitting.
puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	Then take the other one, and soak it in juice of plantain or juice of aloe vera with old wine, and apply to the limb.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	And when the abscess is ready, cure the limb with poultice until it is healed.
et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul;	And the one called "albathir" is red, and resembles the sharp edge of a knife, so it should be covered as I said about the thelul.
et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then cure until it is healed.
des apostemes de la marris	of abscesses from marshlands
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	Many types of abscesses come from marshlands, such as chancre and pustular abscess and herpes and esthenia and fistulas and hemorrhoids and chronic abscess, and many other diseases that I have mentioned in the division.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe;	It is therefore necessary that I mention in this treatment the abscess that comes in the marsh, which is not one of the abscesses that collect below.
et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	And if you know the work of iron, look at the abscess if it is aggravated and at the beginning of its coming, and if it is accompanied by heat and fever, and if it becomes red, then see if you can see it.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie;	Therefore do not rush to pierce it, but let it wait until the pain is eased.
et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe;	Then let the pain sit on the seat, and have two small seats where he leans, and support it on his back and gather his feet to the sides of the leg.
et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien;	and let his knees be spread apart, and place his arms outside of his hips, and tie them together with a strong rope.
puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme;	then push the ball towards the right side of the chest, and introduce the instrument used to operate on the throat of the marsh, from which afterwards comes the form.
et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide;	and it is necessary that when you see this instrument being introduced, that you first look at the depth of the throat, so that nothing enters further than it should, and that it does not cause pain.
et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve;	and if the instrument is too large, it is necessary to cover the depth of the throat with cloths, so that the instrument does not hurt him.
et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	and it is necessary that he puts the trumpet of the instrument above, and stains the instrument.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit;	And when the abscesses are open, and they make it by hand wide, then it is necessary to cover the head, at the spatula level.
et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec;	And when the wound is drained, it is necessary to put in the wound soft cloths soaked in rose oil or dry green oil.
et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites;	and put the wound dressing at the back of the marsh, and put above the marsh and above the unclean soft cloth soaked in vinegar or mustard.
puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then the healer after two hours of resting, until it is healthy.
et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites;	and never lift the wound and let it heal with a poultice of honey and mead, and then with honey or roots of lily and aristolochia longa being cooked.
puis reveigne a l’oignement.	then apply heat.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	And if the wound is closed with stitches, it is necessary to be careful not to use iron, but to treat it as we have said in the section on division.
de l’enfantement	of childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar:	The first step is to know the natural shape of the child and the signs when you see the woman approaching and wanting to smell the armpit:
adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir;	then quickly remove the baby from its place.
adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui;	then check that this child matches the natural shape, and is not stuck to its head, and the second one with him;
et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost;	and when you see these signs, it is necessary to gently press on his abdomen, so that he passes it quickly.
car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification;	for when he goes to his chest, and the second one is with him, and his marriage is from his excess by good cleaning;
et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	and this that comes otherwise does not come naturally.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises;	for it never comes up to his feet, and comes very quickly through the chest or the shoulders, and the hands, or it comes up through his abdomen, or sometimes, and is converted accidentally on his neck, and by other bad shapes;
si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	if it is necessary to help her in these things, then she must be skilled and subtle, and if she becomes confused and deceived, and I will show you all the shapes how one should help him.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent;	If the infant comes up to its head by natural issue, and the mother cries loudly, and the child's strength is weak, then let the woman sit on a seat, or the women hold it.
et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	And take its natural oil of olive or fenugreek cooked, and then give the child's stomach between its fingers the small spoonful that is its form:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers;	and break the second one, and cover its angle as much as the moisture that is correctly out:
et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament;	and take the woman's stomach as much as the child descends, and if it does not descend, then you must clutter the woman with fenugreek musk with linseed oil:
puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre:	then I prepare and sneeze with conditions, and hold my mouth and nose for an hour.
si istra maintenant l’enfes.	if you now strain the child.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc;	And if both hands are dislocated, it is necessary to gently and slowly reset them.
et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut;	and if they cannot enter, place the woman on a chair, and lift her legs up.
puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement;	then lower the chair to the ground, and wipe the woman, so she does not urinate during the lowering.
et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	and if the hands cannot enter, and the child is dead, then place the hands on the cushion that was previously placed, and gently reset the child.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	from the issue of the child on its feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut;	When the child comes up to its feet, if it is necessary to put it on its back;
et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz;	and then slowly and gently, until it is even;
puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	then take both feet and gently extend them.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi;	If it jumps up suddenly, command it to hold still, and force its mouth open with a condition.
si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	If it jumps again, God willing.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it does not jump as we have said, turn it slowly and slowly until it is in the natural position.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	Then it is completely straight.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier;	And if it does not come again as we have, then take muscat leaves of high quality, and oil of wormwood, and melted lead, and grind everything in a mortar;
et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz;	And place the natural form of the woman within and without this ointment, then make it sit in high tea until above the ribs;
et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre;	and when it is softened outside, make her wear a garland of myrrh, and put it on her, and leave it for an hour;
puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	then make her sit on the seat, then make her vomit and hold her mouth and nose, and lightly press her belly, for she is now sick.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	of the child's feet above its knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc;	When the sickness comes in this form, if you put your hands gently and gently;
puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit;	then let her lie on her back, and hang her feet down, and let her lie on the bed;
et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval;	and gently folds his hands back and forth, then places his hands on top of the belly, and removes the cuirass until it is fully exposed.
et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains;	and if he does not feel anything, then he takes his feet and gently moves them, then moves the belly upwards, then pushes with his hands.
et ewe l’enfant poc et poc;	and gently moves the child.
et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	and instructs the woman to hold on until the child is born.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	of the child's hand that comes out widely with a hand
I covient engignier a ramener la main:	It is necessary to engineer a way to bring back the hand:
s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler;	if it cannot be brought back, then lift the woman and go.
s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment;	If she cannot walk, then make her lie on a bed, and form her legs together.
puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit;	Then apply the treatment I have mentioned;
et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main;	And if she does not give birth, then make her sit on a chair, then study to bring back the hand.
et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	And deliver the child according to its natural shape, and make her vomit, and command her to remain quiet until the child is born.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	of the child's head on its neck, and has spread its hands, and its face turned towards the back of its mother
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement;	It is necessary that the midwife stain her hand, then turn it slowly and gently;
et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc;	And when it is even, put the natural muscle treatment of oil and honey on it, as we have said, then command her to move slowly and slowly.
et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne;	And when you have done this, if the bone is sitting on top of the seat, and you command it to take its place.
et la fai esternuer.	and make it sneeze.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	In the same way, for all the others
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie;	When it comes to doing this in the same way for the other shoulder, the other shoulder should be coped with your hand, until the moisture is drained.
et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes;	and if it can be felt above its face and above its neck, then the coping should be done from the back, so that it is not retained, and the bone moves.
puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois:	Then push the child inside, until you have put it in the right place, and command the woman to take its place once.
adonques si istra legierement.	Then, apply gentle pressure.
de l’issue des gemelz	of the outlet of the testicles
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent III ou IIII;	Often they do not grow until the third or fourth time.
et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	And this is not a strange thing, and it often happens.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom;	These are strange things, and they do not live, unless named.
je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude;	I know that they are multiplied and are destroyed by the siphon that gives them life, which is attached to the belly.
et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	And sometimes they come out naturally like some worms, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait;	And if they come out painfully, as the cure has said, and if the bail is subtle, and it does what it does quickly and gently.
et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	And do as follows for their benefit.
de plusors enfans	of many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient;	No one is formed in the first, second, third, fourth, fifth, sixth, seventh, or more than fifteen times, and they are all formed in the shape of a child by the measurement of the wise man, and it is suitable that the bailiff should see everything, for by chance similar things happen to them.
si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	If done according to what is necessary.
de l’enfant mort	of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains;	When you care for the woman of the child who is dead or pregnant, as I said in the section, and it does not come out, and you are forced to do the work by hand;
si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort;	if it is necessary to cut into her, ensure that she is of sound mind and has no injury or fear of death.
si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees;	if it is necessary for the woman to be leaning on her back, and her legs raised;
et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant;	and the midwife applies the herb of II parts, where she is tied to the bed so that she does not undergo childbirth.
puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges;	then rub the mouth of the woman with warm oils mixed with mustard and fenugreek seeds and sesame oil, then pinch her hands with these oils and mustard.
puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief;	then press them lightly into the marsh, then let the shoulder reset where it is comfortable, and if the pins are convenient for this, then take care that it does not descend above its head.
si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes;	if the pins are in its eyes or on its neck or in its mouth or in some palate or behind the beard or in the forehead or near the ribs, and if it descends above its feet, then pin or prick and on even sides.
et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide;	and it is necessary to dye the pin in its right hand, and place the hook between the fingers of its left hand, and press with its whole hand lightly, and pin in any of these ways that we have said, until it comes to the empty thing.
et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	And this is the shape of the bone:
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz;	Then find another bone, or if you have skill, so that the extraction is equal;
et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	And then stretch it equally by moving from one side to the other, to make it come out, and let the teeth of the bone hold, as in this form:
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie;	And if a part remains, use one of his two fingers oil, and push it into that part, and pull the other part;
et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	And if it does not come out, put this bone or higher up the limb, and do this until it comes out completely.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote;	If one hand comes before the other and it cannot be brought back by constriction, then you must wrap it around a pole, until it is completely healed.
puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	Then the copper wire should be placed in the joint of the foot or at the heel, and thus you must do in the other hand, and to the two feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue;	And if the child's head is large and it is difficult to deliver, or if it has an acute angle assembled, then you must push the spatula with sharp edges between your fingers, and make the head and extract the acute angle.
ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui;	or you must break it with the instrument called "almidach", of which the form comes with the instruments or chapter that is after this one.
et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment;	And thus, even if he himself is of great natural stature.
et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer;	Then pull the bones apart with pincers, and if he jumps and is held by the forceps, then they are cut as much as possible until the moisture that is out comes out.
et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues;	And if it cannot come out, then cut it into pieces with a knife that you can.
et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	And if it is inflated in the belly or out of the ribs, then you must pierce it until the moisture runs out.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	If the infant is held above its feet, then the traction is light, and the pressure on the marsh is light.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main;	And if it is swollen in the belly or in the groin, then you must extract it by pulling it out through the wrapped cloth with your hand.
et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre;	And making the belly or the ankle, until the moisture that is in it is corrected.
et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris;	And if the other member is broken and the patient cannot move it, then bring a cup of water to his mouth and let him drink.
puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer;	Then drink one or two, and remove it.
et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses;	And if the patient's mouth is retracted due to an abscess that has come, then it is not necessary to force, but it is necessary to administer moist and fat things.
et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	And the medicines are applied, and the plaster is placed in high molten and moistened.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif;	And if it is above its shoulder, and you can place it even, then alleviate as we have said in the living child.
et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	And if you cannot do it, then tear it by pieces, and leave nothing of the second one.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris;	And when you have done this, alleviate as we have said in abscesses which come into the marsh.
et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	And if blood comes out, then place it in acute restriction, and alleviate other cures.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut I autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	I saw a woman in whose belly an infant had died, then consulted the other about that one, and he also died.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time, some abscesses appeared in the groin, and they swelled up so much that they burst, and then began to cause great pain.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called to the patient, and I thought for a long time, and could not stop the bleeding.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I applied strong adhesive bandages, and then some bones were exposed, and after some time others appeared.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I was very surprised because the belly does not have any bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	I thought that it must be the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point;	I looked at the wound, and in the meantime, I treated the bones, until the woman was much better.
et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu;	and it is tied with a long piece of cloth around the shoulder, and it is placed in place with a little bandage of the body.
et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	and I have not remembered this chapter except for the reason that, when the masters find an unusual thing, they know how to provide help.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	bring the marsh to its place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres;	Then comes the form of the pressor, which is used to apply pressure;
et a II tornans as II chiés des II liiens.	and it is applied to the two joints of the elbow.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux;	However, the horn should be more subtle than the restraint, and it should be made of metal or wood.
et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi;	and its mouth should be two inches wide, and the edge of the trees should be long, and one and a half palms.
et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus;	and between the two limbs, there are two joints of this same kind, which are firm in one and the other, half a palm length or a little more.
et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	and these two joints are closed in the mouth of the jaw when turning the two horns.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles;	Another form, of a more subtle and lighter appearance, is made of flat or boxwood, according to the appearance of nails.
et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large;	and it has two joints like these, as you see, half a palm length, and they should be wide.
et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes;	and when you see the jaw opening with all the instrument, then place the woman on the bed, the feet still and the legs open, then close the two joints together in the jaw, and hold the head of the instrument outside between her teeth.
puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	Then use your hand on all the instruments, as you have evenly made the pliers, according to the quantity that you saw open the mouth of the marsh, until the bail does what it wants.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances;	These instruments are all above, and are multiplied in their likenesses;
et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	And when the mirrors have them arranged, so much the faster they work, and so much higher they are to men for their quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	If you do not despise the instrument that you have not prepared, because their necessity is not excusable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis;	When the second one is held by the childbirth, it is necessary that you command the pain to hold her hair, and then make her spit out the condition, and your hands at the mouth and the nose;
et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	And if she jumps for heaven, well then.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire;	If heaven does not, then take the pot, and make a syrup or coverlet, and put herbs that can open the mouth of the throat, such as calamint, rue, anise, chamomile, cassia lignea, and centaury.
toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu;	All these herbs, or any of them, should be cooked or boiled over the fire;
puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris;	then put a cloth or syrup from the pot in the mouth of the throat, and the steam comes out into the throat;
puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	Then make her spit it out, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If the second joint is broken harshly.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine;	And if she remains after this treatment, and is not better, then command the midwife to moisten her right hand with semolina or musk oil, and then blow into it, and give the second dose.
et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction;	And when she has found it, grasp and extend it gently and straight, so that the husband does not cut during extraction.
mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie;	But move it slightly to the right and left, and then pull it out.
si venra et se desaerdra.	If it comes and dislodges.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes;	And if the husband's mouth is too narrow, we have mentioned the treatment of vomiting and fumigation of herbs.
et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire;	And if it is not all of what we have said, then remember to not pull.
mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon;	But it is recommended that what is at the mouth of the marsh, you tie to the belly of the woman, then smear with a healing ointment made from four ingredients.
si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer;	If it will not rot and return, and will come soon.
mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	But if it rots when a bad smell comes to the stomach and head, and causes pain.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu:	Then you should apply smoking treatments to this:
aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	None of the ancients have experienced fumigation with watercress and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The form of the instrument used to smoke the woman during retention of flowers and the secondine is as follows:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu;	And it appears like glass, and they place the head under the natural heat, and the others widely over the fire;
et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	and either the fumigations over the coals, and the wart until it is burned, and start another.
de percier lou fondement	to pierce the foundation
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac:	Many children are born who have not yet reached the foundation pierced, but it has been stupefied by some subtle syrup:
si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche;	therefore the midwife should pierce that syrup at its proper time, and not pierce it too early with sharp instruments, and cleanse the wound so it does not touch it;
puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	then place on the wound a soft cloth in wine and oil, then the healing ointment until it is healed.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it will not reset, put or plug a splint, and let it lie for some time, and be supported as the child wants to go into the rooms.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme;	And never comes this stoppage of pus from a wound or abscess;
si covient coper celui soudement:	if it is necessary to drain that pus:
si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	if it is treated, as we have said of the swine's dung.
de la fistule dou fondement	of the fistula from the foundation
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors;	Fistulas that come from below the foundation are nodular and thicker than those that come above the foundation, or in the space between two parts, if there is one fistula or more.
et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans;	And when that nodular one is old, it works and thickens with moisture to become white or subtle blue, and those fistulas are never persistent.
et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	and are known by the fact that there is outflow or vomiting when the pain makes an outflow, and sometimes some verses.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge;	And if there are fistulas that protrude into the bladder, and protrude into half of the penis;
et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	and reach into the sacrum, and into the knee.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant:	And thus one knows the fistula passing through the basement, and not passing through:
et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	and it is that you pierce your own index or base, and pierce a thin needle of silver or iron into the fistula when there is no twisting.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit;	And if he has tortuosity, if you put a thin layer of pitch, or horsehair, until you feel the pitch or hair at your fingertips;
et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit:	and if you do not feel it, and it does not come out with puncture or sweatiness or vinegar, as we have said:
saiches qu’elle ne perce mie;	so that it does not pierce through;
si te haste dou curer.	if you hurry to cure it.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula is persistent near the bladder or near a urinary tract, if it allows urine to pass, and cannot be cured by medicines.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu;	If it has pierced up to the joint of the elbow, then the pitch comes out to the skin;
s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement;	if there is no tortuosity and the pain is internal, then it is that it is inside, and there is no medicine or treatment by fomentation;
et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	And in these fistulas, there is no cure but labor, and the vanity of those who try to treat them.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos;	In that one which is not very deep and not very ancient, with hope of healing by fire, as I have experienced, and it is that the pains are hidden between your hands on its back;
et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre;	and the patient's legs up to their knees, and its knees bent towards its belly;
puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	Then pour water or mud, if there is twisting, until you clean it out.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet;	If the pain is felt around the foundation, then you must insert your finger, as if it has pierced the tent.
et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans;	and it is discovered or you feel between your teeth whether it is the tongue or the throat, then spit out that it has passed.
si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	if not, there is no way to heal it.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc;	It is said that one can heal almost anything, but this rarely happens.
et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit;	and the aid that is done, if it is to heat the subtle cauterizer according to the width of the fistula, as it is said before.
et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement;	and the whole bottle is placed in the fistula, until it reaches the bottom.
et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil;	and do this two or three times, until you know that these charred pieces are burned, which resemble a barb of an arrow.
et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	and then the treatment of broken bones in butter, until that bone is set, then the treatment of burns with heat and sealing.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If he is thus healthy, it is well.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez;	If not, nothing else can be healed.
et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur;	And if it is not healed between, and does not perforate just at the base, and between the tent and the wound, a thick layer of charcoal or ash, and you see the fistula that leads to the cure underneath the covering.
si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente;	If the cover of the beginning of the fistula, and it is stuck before the tent, and then the cauterization after, until it reaches the top of the tent.
et sera delivré li tente, et cherra;	and he will be delivered from the tent, and fall.
puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	then one must believe those charms that seem like a quill of a goose, and not remain without them.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if you cannot straighten it, and cut between you and the work, then cauterize with fire or medicine.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses:	For the fire cautery brings together two good things:
c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor;	that is to say, the burning of these charms applied, and the stopping of blood and the drying of moisture;
puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe;	then the treatment of tents torn or broken in pieces, until the eyes are filled with blood, and then the charms burned in the eye.
puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	then the treatment of wounds infected with boils, soaked in hard charcoal, and the dry medicines.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it is restored, it is healed and does not return.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if the fistula comes from just above the foundation, and is distant from the body, then press on the top or base, and look for it.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres:	If you feel the tent, and between II is the cloth or the sweat or the charcoal, where it is close to being pierced, there should be no other means than the administration of one of the three methods:
ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier;	or you cauterize it as we have said, or you cut it from the bottom up, or if you can, put bandages and treat it as first aid;
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit;	and do not remove too quickly from the front, so that you do not cover the foundation which holds the foundation, and it comes out through the way of excretion;
puis le cure, si com nos avons dit;	then treat it as we have said;
par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé;	If by chance it is healed, or you remove that covering and the wound then it is cut above the foundation, or by tent or by other instrument appointed;
puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues;	then monitor that char which is in the wound, as much as you can;
puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement:	then study to restore the wound, and to delay the fistula in the part before the foundation:
si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	if it is a lighter thing at the misalignment.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere:	And sometimes fistulas are in this manner:
et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	and when you put the tent in the fistula, and it is out of the foundation below the skin above, then take a tent perforated at the top in this form:
Et i boute I fil tort en II, et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And push the thread into the fistula, and push the probe through the entire thread in the fistula until it reaches the top.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement;	If it is lost on the edge of the foundation beneath, then hold the thread of that which is plugged, so that you can pull your own or the foundation.
et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II;	and trace the head of the thread, and gather the two ends together, and hold them against each other, and let it lie for one or two days.
et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent;	and hold it not once, until the thread covers those charges that are between two, and stick.
puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	then treat the wound until it is healed and clean.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not open, try to puncture it in all the ways you can, unless it is too far back.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it does not matter to make the placement cover if it is too far back, and then treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans;	The shape of the spinous bone that is made into a fistula is very sharp and one-sided;
et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	And on the other hand, not, because we do not know how to handle what we should not handle, as you see here.
des emorroydes	Des emorroides
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres:	There are two main methods:
ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement;	Or they are within the foundation, like grains of resin, and there are small and large ones, and in this case, blood clots, and there are one or more, and they are under the foundation and at the base of the foundation.
mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors;	But those that are underneath have little moisture, and they are cut or a little sharp or a little blood, and they have the color of the blood.
et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz;	And the treatment of those who have them within the foundation is that you command the patient to urinate in other rooms until the foundation is full and it appears.
si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines;	If you are in a hurry, you can hold it with pliers, or hold it with your finger, then cut it at its roots.
et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot;	And if they cannot hold it with their fingers due to its moisture, take it with a cloth, or cotton, or a piece of linen.
et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere;	And hold it with your two hands, then cut it, and powder the wound with any hot powders that are in the cauterization.
ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	Or you can cauterize it as it is written in the book of cauterization, then treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement;	And if the base cannot be lifted, then cleanse the wound with a sharp and biting clyster to remove what is stuck at the base, so that it can come out openly.
cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere;	When the hairs are pricked at their base, and if they are thick and strong from the root, then the treatment is light.
et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	And you should hold them with your fingers or pliers, and cut them off, then treat them as we have said, until they are healed, and do not fear the incision with iron.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere:	If it is necessary to stitch the wound in this manner:
pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large;	Take a thick thread, and wind it around a needle, and then pull the thread from above and make the needle pierce from the other side, and turn the two ends of the thread away from the needle, and if it is wide.
et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc;	and hold the thread firmly, then pull the thread, and extract the needle, and do so with all the others, and leave it for the excess of the blood.
puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose;	then place above the foundation a cotton bandage soaked in rose oil or wax, and place above the foundation, and instruct the patient to rest.
et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then let it remain until they heal, and when they are healed, apply ointment and other treatments until they are healed.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	dried and withered from the base
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	often found dried and withered in the intestines, and due to constriction of nature, and when the disease is old and medicine does not help.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir;	If it is necessary that you apply the scraping of a spatula or your finger above, which does not allow it to become moist.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient;	Then the healer, as much as it should be, as it should be.
et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez;	And if he cannot cure, then start the scraping stronger than before, until it is clean, and be scorched.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then the healer, as much as it should be clean.
dou fremit	high fever
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont;	Mice is a small appearance cut in front of the chest, and goes up much into the front.
et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	And never the trace of the frost, and the feeling is like death from shivering, and comes throughout the body, and more in the hands than any other part.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor;	And the healer so that you take a quill of a goose pen, or a pen of vulture very strong, and put that quill on the shivering, until the circle prevents the shivering all around.
puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	Then turn your hand all around the wound until you remove everything inside the swelling, and put it in a pot, and extract the swelling from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see, do this according to the form of a rain or iron dog, and it is subtlely pushed out and pulled up:
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser.	Do not pierce, to keep the two together, and to press.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	And if you see, if you cauterize the swelling, as it is before or in the chapter of cauterization.
de la forme dou clistere	of the form of the splint
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet;	Never use a silver paste, or an alloy of lead, or melted tin, or tin filings.
et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	And never use these small and large instruments, according to those which you will bring.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Therefore, those who are to be treated in the care of children and those who are weak and painful, are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The shape of this plaster is small and large if it is above wide, or the belly is tied according to this manner:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez;	And if there is a discharge or the belly is tied, as you see, and the wound is inside, pierce.
et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I;	And say to one of the two sides, "II", and on the other side, "I".
et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre;	And let the belly or the one who applies the medicines use a bladder of beast or parchment, and pierce all around with small holes, and have between each hole "I" amount of space, then fill these holes with one thread of thread twisted in X or around, and gather the belly as if it were a goat;
et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize;	And when the medicine is inside, if the thread has the instrument in front of a strong thread, then suture;
et c’est li forme dou cercle:	And it is the form of a circle.
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement;	And let the medicine not be too hot or too cold, and grease the head of the suture with oil or a similar substance, then fill it lightly;
puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet;	then the ministers pour water into both of his hands together, until it is completely clear, then remove the cyst, and relieve the pain in his legs by applying a poultice to the affected area, and if the wound allows, let it heal as much as possible.
et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	and if he sleeps a whole night through, it is a greater help.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you give the clyster in the disease of diarrhea, and the medicine wants to come out quickly, then restart it as long as it is healthy.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant;	And if his hemorrhoids are at the base or in an abscess, then the cyst should be removed as delicately as possible for a child.
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	and this is the shape of the delicate cyst when the skin is stretched:
des plaies	of wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies;	We have said in the section on wound care;
or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	we will tell you about the treatment of hands and medicine, according to completion.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are different according to what they are made of, and according to the limbs or wounds that are made, and from what they are made of.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses;	The things that are done to make wounds are by piercing with a needle, and cutting with a sword or dagger, or lance or staff or siette, or similar things;
ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres;	or they are done according to the laws of the body, such as a wound that pierces through the neck, or head, or foot, or belly, or liver, and similar members;
et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	and I will tell you the treatment of each wound, and I will begin with simple head wounds, because its memory will come in its chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut:	I say that when a simple wound comes or the bone is not broken, be careful if it is of penetration of an arrow or similar things, and the skin is completely torn and is large, and you slightly doubt of abscess:
si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree;	if the wound is recently clean of blood, and the cleaning is on the injured side instead:
et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	and avoid the pain of overeating wine and large meats.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char;	And if he does not want to clean, let him eat soft meat, and not drink wine, and do not change his diet:
et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice;	And apply to the wound, if pus arises and comes out, cotton moistened in rose oil alone or in vinegar stiptic.
et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés;	And if there is no pus, apply above the wound, if it is fresh and full of blood, and it does not move due to air, powder, which I will say a little later.
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound has moved, apply some ointments until it is healed.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large like a sword cut and similar, and the lips cannot be brought together by stitches, then bring them together by sewing, as I will say in wounds of the belly, from sewing.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope;	If the wound is exposed to the bone, and can be moved, and does not hold but only at one point, then cover it.
puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	Then heal the wound with medicine, and restore hardness in the flesh instead of skin, and command the patient to eat large foods, such as tests and cooked grain, like chicken, and similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure;	And if you suspect bone fracture, and it is not to the bone, then cover the entire wound, and pour boiling water, then heal.
et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil;	And if there is an artery in the wound or vein, without cutting, and it cannot be stanched by medicines, then suture the artery, and if you suspect a fracture, dislocate it with a thread.
et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	And if it does not improve, then cauterize.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere:	And if these wounds are small and simple, then the treatment is light.
et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	and you put this powder that smells like what the wound has lost.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est:	And the manner of the powder is as follows:
pren encens une partie;	take a part of incense;
sanc de dragon II parties;	blood of dragon two parts;
chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc;	chalk alive three parts, and the powder finely, and fill the wound, and let it settle and join to all its blood;
et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle;	and then bind it well, and let it remain without swelling;
car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	for one does not use medicine until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And one should never use chalk alone when one does not have frankincense or dragon's blood, but that the wound has moved.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre;	And if the wound has moved, immediately in its place, do not put any other of this powder;
mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe;	but put on some digestive ointments, or flour of barley made of honey and water, until it is healed;
puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	then perform other treatments until they are healed.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz;	And if the broken bone comes with the wound, and it is small, then strain it with fine needles.
et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	and I will tell you what to do after the fractures of the main ones.
de la plaie dou col	of the wound of the neck
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If the wound comes from the neck and it is simple, there is no difference between this and the main wound, but if the neck nerves or the artery is cut.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire;	If it is the nerves, there is no other method than to let the care, and not put anything restricting, for it harms nerves and makes them recede.
et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres;	and do not put anything sharp on the wound, for the substance of nerves is cold, and the continuation of it is with the brain, which is one of the highest members.
mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	but if the medicine is not suitable, such as chalk washed in sharp vinegar, and mixed with rose oil, and the wound cleaned similarly in sharp vinegar, and other stones according to this manner, and moistened with warm water.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, then bandage it well and treat it until it is healed.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu;	And if the wounds are deep and have been cut and filled with blood, then pierce or lower the limb.
et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est;	And if the artery is cut and blood flows out, then open it, clean it, and cauterize as necessary.
et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel;	And if the arrow from the throat is cut, or the wound is deep, and the vein is kept, by which the meat goes, then cut the arrow above the back of the throat, but do not touch the throat, but put it back according to its natural shape.
et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then gradually stretch it, and leave it for some time, then treat the wounds until they are healed;
et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier;	and if the wound has made an impression in the bone, if desired;
et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue;	and if there are pieces of bone, remove them all if possible, and those you cannot remove, leave until the wound heals, then disinfect and align the bone;
et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	and if the wound is fresh, apply the powder that I have mentioned.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if he has bone in the wound and there is a fistula, then treat it as I have described in his chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	of the wound from an arrow or a sword
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne:	If it is a spear or dagger, and the wound is deep, look to see if there is any sign of wind blowing through the wound:
saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz;	There are times when the wound is mortal;
et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide;	and if it is not deep and fresh with all its blood, then in the first hour do not put powder on it or tie it up for the blood that does not coagulate and returns to the heart, and causes pain;
mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor;	but I apply an attractive ointment and tie it twice a day;
et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors;	and if you do not have ointment, put old cotton in the wound to absorb the moisture, and let the pain sleep on the wound for three days, or four, or more;
si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne;	if no spasm comes, nor trembling of the heart prevents it.
et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	and when you see good positions, cut out the wound.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Treat the wounds and other treatments, until they are healed.
et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule;	And if it cannot heal and work, then cut out the fistula.
si la cure si com on doit.	if the treatment is as it should be.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant;	And if the wound is from a sword or dagger cut, and it is simple, or worse, at the back, then treat what is in front.
s’elle est grans, de cousture;	if it is large, of stitching.
et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez;	and if it is small, of powder, and if it is pressed into the bone, and in it has chipped pieces, if it wounds, and the fragments if they are not removed.
et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions;	and if they are not removed, then let the wound fester, and it will align the extractions.
et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	and for other wounds in other members, it is up to judgment as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	belly rupture
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis;	The dislocations of the abdomen are large and medium and small.
de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus;	of the great wound never leaps out the intestine, or the nerves of the intestines, by which the intrusion of others.
et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut;	And the seam is more painful, and it is never worse than the small wound because one must not reset the intestines unless they are put back in their proper place.
por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II.	Because the intestines swell quickly when they feel the cold, and they must not be reset unless they are put back in their proper place, and because it is better to have the small wound, for one must not twist the intestines back to their proper place as with others.
Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres:	And there are four ways to treat a hernia of the belly:
les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies;	The two common seams are in the belly seam, and the seam of other wounds of the body and two other private seams are common to other wounds.
et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	And all ways they are more proper with the seam of the belly, and I will say one by one and explain each.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres:	I say that when the wound is small, and nothing of the intestine is protruding, and there is no other thing to remove, it is best to return it by one of the two methods:
ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	or by the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestine is inflated by the heat.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere:	And when it is hot, warm it in this manner:
moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	moisten a sponge or some dry cloth only in cold water, or cook in cold, sour and salty water and vinegar, and boil the intestine until it is softened;
et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	And never once has this wine been restricted, and it is believed that it can cause swelling.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose;	And when you see the swelling disappear, if the intestines are dry or high and painful, because by this means the entry is soon achieved.
et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes;	And if it cannot enter, then make a small incision in the wound with the instrument used to remove the splinters.
et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait;	And the first care is believed that the wound, that we should not cut without great necessity.
et c’est li estrumens por le fendre:	And this is the instrument for cutting:
si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	If it is cut within the crown and not without, and see its shape.
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestine jumps out, if you can put it back according to its natural form in its own place, because this is good.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief;	When the wound is wide, and it is in the lower part of the abdomen, then you should place the patient on their back, and raise their legs higher than their head.
et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre;	And if it is in the lower part of the abdomen, then place the head and the foot higher than the other parts, and also if the rupture of the belly is in one of the two parts, then place the injured part higher than the other.
et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	And thus you should manage as I said in large and medium-sized wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres;	For small wounds, apply what you have prepared, then place your hands between them and administer ointments that cover the entire wound and close the lips.
et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort;	And this is the common method of stitching, and it is that you grip an needle or more, according to the quantity of the width of the wound, then leave some space at the edge of the wound, and sew with a needle or if it has good thread.
et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble;	And pierce the two needles through the two pieces of leather, which is outside the leather inside, until you make it pierce from that part, and gather the two needles together four times.
puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille;	Then, wrap the string of a double-threaded needle around the needle of II parts, then evenly assemble the two pieces of the wound, and then leave one finger's space, and make another stitch.
puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte;	Then, tie the wound with a thread as you did with the first needle, and do not stop doing this according to what you know about needles until the entire wound is closed.
et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer:	And let the needles be medium-sized, between thin and thick, for thin needles cover the entire wound, and too thick ones cannot enter well.
por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes;	Therefore, it is necessary that they be medium-sized.
et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure;	and it is not advisable to place the needles too far from the back of the horn and the skin, so they do not pierce and open the wound before sewing.
et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee;	and then cover the wounds of the needles, so they do not pierce the pain at night, and place bandages or cloths on the wounds of the needles to hold them until the wound is sewn.
et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II.	and this method of sewing with needles is more convenient for small wounds, because it requires only one or two needles.
Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien;	The second method of sewing is common, and it is that you gather the two pieces of skin and the two pieces of sinew together with one needle and a strong thread in the middle.
et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras;	And when you have perceived these four together, then reset the needle at the part where you began, in the manner that one counts the threads.
et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi;	and put space between each stitch the thickness of a thread.
ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	This stitch heals the man, and I sewed a wound that one had in the abdomen, which was cut by a knife, and was the wound more than one palm of great, and it pierced the intestines well two palms of great, and was the wound in the belly.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	I brought back the intestine after it had been there for 24 hours, and the wound was dressed after 15 hours, and I treated it, and it healed.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle;	And the master had judged that he would die, and it was a miracle;
et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines;	and did not heal it with ointment, for I was in a place where none were found, nor any medicine.
et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	and I placed moss on the wound twice a day, and washed it with honey water until it healed.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture:	Or I will tell you the two proper methods of sewing:
pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens;	take the needle, and the thread from the part behind, inside.
quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer;	when it has pierced the center correctly, then insert the needle at the head or where you put the thread, and make it pierce from the other side of the part inside.
et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	And the understanding of this sewing is that you should sew as the tailor does with furs, and leave one side of the seam once, and then bring it back from the other side, until the sewing is completely finished.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere:	The second method of sewing, which Galen describes properly, is such that anyone does, who assemble the two parts naturally together and apply one of the main sides of the seam to the other main side, in a similar manner:
fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac;	Take a needle or the main point of the awl close by, and pierce only that side, and leave the two sides of the seam;
puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac;	then turn the needle, and pierce it through the part in front of this from below, as the two heads of the shoulder.
puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit;	then pierce the other two through the part in front of this from below, in the two other heads of the shoulder that are on the other side.
et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	and this is the most common method of sewing and it is the deadliest.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune;	If anyone says this word, and no one bears witness, then you should sew the belly with two needles, where there is thread in each.
et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies;	and you should put one needle from one side, and the other from the other, in the manner of those who sew corroies.
et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	and when the fracture is in the belly, it is more painful than other abdominal injuries.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies:	The judgments of the wound are such as the judgments of other wounds:
et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout;	and when you clean the fresh wound of all its pus, and as soon as the doctor has moved it, if you remove the intestine and the cloth:
puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe;	then put on powdered charcoal, and if the doctor has moved it, then put on any ointment that is present until the wound heals.
et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach;	and bind the cloth, and make sure the sutures are sound, and the muscle:
puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then treat the wound as you would with others, until they are healed.
et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	And if you do not have medicines, then place this immediately, as soon as it begins to bleed, a soft cloth, and shake it twice a day until it is healed.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples;	For you have no other use of medicine in many positions where the wounds are simple;
et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles;	And if you doubt that the wound does not communicate with the main members, then it is necessary to rub another light oil of mild heat, or in red oil, and place it inside the angles, and remove from the bones;
et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine;	And if he feels pain or putrefaction in the abdomen, and often occurs, then apply black wine grape clasters, and immediately if the putrefaction comes to the intestines.
et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	And puncture it, and scrape what when it is the large intestines, it is lighter to heal than the small ones.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	The intestine called "jeun" cannot be healed when it is empty, because of the plants that are in it, and the subtlety of all the body, and its approach to the nature of the nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres;	And if the pus jumps from the wound, then put it back as the intestines, while it is fresh.
et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres;	And if it is old and becomes green or black, then you must tie the limb that is black, because there are veins and arteries.
puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	Then, cut the tissue that is between the joints, and place the two fingers hanging from the part away from the wound to the side of the injury to align the extraction when the bone shatters, and the wound opens.
de la routure dou boueil	of the breaking of a boil
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance;	When the intestines are torn, and the wound is small, if it can be restored to some people, because I have seen that some men were gutted from their belly by a lance.
et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez;	And the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and it became a fistula, and in it there was excrement and feces.
je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	I placed medicine according to what I could, and did not stop treating it until it was healed, and the wound closed.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre;	And when I saw him suture, I doubted that the hairs had not harmed his stomach;
et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans;	but there was no harm, but he remained in better conditions, and fed and watered;
et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere:	and they said no experts that when he had a small wound in the intestine, that he should be tied in such a way:
pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus;	take thick threads, then gather the lips of the wound, and when the thread has opened the mouth, if it puts it above the two lips, so that it holds his mouth open;
et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise;	and then cover the head, and it holds so that he cannot move, then put the other thread in the same way as before, until the wound is completely closed;
et cout la plaie.	and bandage the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere:	If the sharp object enters the intestine and causes no harm to the patient, and it can be sutured with a thin thread that is taken from the intestine of an animal, in such a manner:
pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure;	take the tip of this intestinal thread that is very sharp, and then tie it to the tip of this thread with a thin linen thread, then pull the thread through the needle, and sew the intestine, and bandage the wound;
et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance;	and this method of suturing is no other than according to the way of faith and hope.
et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	If the wound is large and wide, even when it is in one of the internal organs, there is no remedy or health, only subtlety.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	of fistula or that it is
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	All wounds or abscesses, when they become covered, are universally called "fistula", and specifically when they are cut open and reopened.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil;	And the fistula is along the spine, a hard and white tube, where there is no pain, and it is as sharp as the quill of an owl.
et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse;	And never in clear bowels, and sometimes thick;
aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez;	And never too thin, and sometimes enough.
et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes:	And I have spoken about this in the division of wounds, that every wound that is not healed, and there is no char, it is only due to one of the EIGHT causes:
c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors;	It is to know, by the smallness of blood or flesh;
ou por sa malice;	or for its wickedness;
ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char;	or because there is hard carrion inside, and on the lips, that does not let blood rise;
ou il i a trop de bowe;	or because there is too much pus.
ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit;	or because the bones are broken, and the matter is of bad quality.
ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure;	or because the medicine is not good in the cure.
ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence;	or because the corruption is like a plague.
ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature;	or because the property in the region is late for digestion, and late for health, and expelled by nature.
ou il i a voinnes ou os:	where there are veins or bones
et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	and I have already shown all these causes, and the signs, and the treatments of remedies in that section.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	It is necessary for me to inform you of the treatment of fistulas that are made by the work of hands.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors;	It is said that fistulas can occur in all parts of the body.
car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez;	for there are fistulas that come to large veins, and arteries, and nerves, or to the face, or to the intestines, or to the bladder, or to any of the ribs, or to the spine of the back, or to any joint of the hands or feet.
et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	and if it comes to the proper property of the main member, and similar ones.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance;	And all such wounds are of great suffering, and there is only labor and ignorance.
et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier;	And if there is no such wound that does not come just below the joint that I have said, and you have faith in the cure, and you know how to do it, take a tent of tin or iron, if the wound is straight, if it is curved.
et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit;	And if the wound is twisted, then circle it with a thin tent of linen, for the linen will stick to the twists.
et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie;	And if the wound is perforated and you cannot well encircle it with tents, then cauterize one of the perforations, for the moisture will pass from one perforation to another, and cleanse it.
puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent;	then carefully apply your skill, to know if there is bone or tendon, and if it is sharp at the edge, and ask the patient well about the pain he feels when you press with your hand, and where he feels it.
et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens;	and when you know truly where the bone or bone is, and if it is far from the joint, or tendon, or artery, or vein, or any of the limbs that I have told you, then cut according to what I have told you, and remove the fractured pieces and the charred parts that are inside;
et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons;	and then the cure until it is healed, and if the fistula is well positioned at the right place, then you must cut across, as much as you can, then put soft bandages in medicine water, and squeeze them at the top of the fistula, until the medicine corrodes the excess that remains at the bottom.
et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then I apply clean ointment to the wound, until it is healed.
et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	and if it is not healed by that, then cauterize it as we have said, and if the bone is corrupted by a fistula, then extract it.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit;	If the vein or nerves do not harm the principal members, as we have said;
et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez;	and if the bone is exposed, and there is corruption and blackness, then remove as much of the corruption as possible, then apply clean ointment to the wound until it is healed.
et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font:	and if it is not healed, and remains as before, then you must do the same thing again.
si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu;	if you are able to reach it and remove all the corruption, then restore the limb.
et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	And if it is thus healthy, that is good.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir;	If not, it means that the corruption is too far gone, that you cannot proceed;
si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature;	if there is no other method than to wait for nature.
et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un;	And if there is a small bone corrupted, and you can remove it with pincers, if it is not removed by the proper instrument, and if there are many bones, then remove them all, do not leave any behind.
et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	And if the moisture makes it contrary, and there is no mistake or fear, then boil and burn the bones, and deliver them.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os;	And if you cannot remove them within an hour, place on the wound something poisonous, and leave it until the flesh is rotten around the bones, and then they will more easily break.
et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie;	And if it is large bones, such as a leg or thigh, then separate them as much as possible from the corruption until the entire bone is rotten, then reopen the wound.
et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os;	And if there is a large part of the corruption, and it comes out in a mass with the bone;
si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez;	then it should be covered all around with the corruption, and then treated until it is sound.
et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	And I will tell you about a fistula that happened to a man in his leg, so that you may take example and help in your work.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir;	He was a young man around 30 years old, who had pain in his leg due to a cause that came from within the body, so that the matter came to the leg, and was filled with a large abscess, and there was no reason to open it.
mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors;	But the doctors over-opened it so much that the abscess was opened, and they drained a lot of matter, and became a fistula, and there was much pain that everyone was groaning from the body's moisture.
et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors;	and many sought cure within two years, and there was no knowledge in the art of hands, until I was called, and saw her leg and the remedies used to treat it, and what flowed through the pustules with great force.
et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	and became red the veins of youth, and had the color yellow.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	I pitched a tent in one of these holes, and then I searched all the holes, and found that one was coming into contact with the other from all parts of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens;	I therefore hastened, and cut into one of the pustules until I discovered a part of the bone, and found it rotten and pierced, and the corruption was coming from within the bone.
je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai;	I thought what appeared to me from the rotten bone, and I thought there was no other corruption, except that which I had seen.
et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder;	and began to heal the wound with medicinal powders by long stitches, and could not hold.
et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu;	then began again, and discovered the bone as before, and found continuous corruption in the bone, and the marrow, and then removed it, and I could not heal the limb.
mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines;	but I could only place around one palm of the bone, and treat it to all its length, then heal it with medicines.
et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	and it became healed and healed quickly, but did not want to begin the work again except for the weakness of the pain, which could not bear, and for the fear of death that I had for him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	For the evacuation of blood often caused harm, but he was completely healed, and in the place of the bone grew a hard callus, and it was of good disposition and had no harm or contradiction throughout, neither to the other nor to the coming.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere:	If the bone is broken in any part of the body, it should be treated in this way:
pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut;	Take the bone, and strain it at the top of the bone that opens, and command it to extend upwards;
et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char;	and put another thinner thread of linen below the first thread, and tie it above the wound that is on the bone, and extend the head, so that you can remove the rotten flesh from outside, and uncover the wound above the limb where you want it to be, so that it does not become infected.
et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue;	and put a bandage or a cloth outside the bone to cover the rotten flesh;
et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	and it should be as visible and feelable as possible to see and feel the corruption, and should be another time.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute;	And if the tooth is corrupted and does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part, then remove the whole crown;
puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit;	then put the thin gold, and then fill from one part to the other the corruption, and let the gold be as long as possible near the corruption as we have said;
et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part;	and if the corruption is in the joint, then copper the corrupted joint, and fill the tooth from the other side;
et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper;	and if the corruption is in the continuation of the two joints, then there is no other way than to copper;
et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert;	and if the corruption is in the fingers of the hand, or the finger of the foot, it is very strong that thing, but nevertheless it is necessary to inquire about that corrosion, how it opens.
et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire;	and cleanse it in all the ways that you can, but let the vein or the nerve not cause you harm.
et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce;	and scrape away what the incisor and the threads for covering these bones are many, according to the position of the bones and the appearance of teeth, and their thickness and thinness, and their size and smallness, and their hardness.
et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument;	and therefore it is necessary to arrange each similar work tool.
et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies;	and show you the tool that you will have to use, according to the knowledge of this art, and by the testimony of the ways of diseases;
si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	if you understand the tool that you have according to what it should be used.
dou feu	with great fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer;	The head of the shoulder may become dislocated due to an internal cause, or due to a lack of.
et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre;	And when you have treated that corrosion with medicines and it does not improve, then you must cut off that limb up to the joint where the corrosion comes from, so that the pain may escape by death, or by the malice, which is greater, due to the lack of the limb;
et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors;	and the signs are such that the limb becomes black, so that it seems as if it were burned by fire, and then it turns darker, as in the corrosion of one member by another, and it takes hold of the whole body.
si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	if you have a copper vessel, and if it is by the impact of some poisonous animals, such as scorpions and vipers and similar, if the corrosion is at the head of the penis, and the copper, and do not give him any space for the venom to come to his hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras;	And if it comes to his hand, if the copper is at the joint, so that the corrosion does not reach his arm.
et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute;	If it comes to the arm, then cut at the elbow.
et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut;	And if it passes the elbow, that is death, and there is no benefit in other than the quantity of its virtue.
et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet:	And as soon as the corrosion comes or pain:
s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe;	If it comes to the first joint, then cut after the other joint.
et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet;	And if it comes to pain, then cut all the pain.
et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil;	And if it goes up to the leg, then cut at the knee joint.
et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort;	And if it comes above the knee, there is no other remedy than to let the pain go to death.
et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers;	And the manner of binding or covering the limb is such that you tie it above and below, and extend some bandages along one side, and other bandages along the other side, and you wet the skin between the two sides to the width of a span, until the bone is exposed;
puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	then cover or bind with cloth, and put a piece of linen on each part, so that the cloth does not touch the healthy limb, and avoids other injury and abscess;
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans;	And if there is bleeding when you work, cauterize the limb promptly, or apply some astringent powders;
puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	then return to your medical practice until it is completed, then tie the injured limb with a bandage, and treat it until it is healed.
et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet:	and I will tell you what happened to the man in that case:
il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet;	a dark spot appeared that seemed like a burn from fire, and that corrosion first appeared on his toe, which spread to the entire foot;
et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez;	and when the man saw the corrosion, he immediately covered the foot, and it was healed.
et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions;	and some time later the corrosion appeared on his other hand, and it came to me, and I put him on things that were reactive after washing the body, but could not stop the corrosion.
et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere;	and he wants me to examine his hand, and I do not want, unless I have hope of reflecting the matter.
et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible;	and I also doubted that if I cut his hand, he would not die, for the virtue of the ointment was weak.
et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez;	and he completely lost hope, and returned to his land, and stopped covering his hand, and was healed.
et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	and I have not counted it other than for what is done in such cases, when one has to deal with it.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe;	No time comes abscess in the shoulder, and it lasts so long that it causes great swelling.
et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz;	and then pierce and perforate, and in its mouth the arrow, and let the shoulder remain as it was, like a vessel.
et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»;	and the skin that is above is also as delicate as the cloth you tear, and does not corrode the bone, nor the nerve, and such diseases are called "sinus", and are not called "fistula".
mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»;	but if it is so long that it reaches the bone from the front, it is called "fistula".
et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz;	and the skin if it is that you cut that skin all around, and immediately when it is delicate, like a cloth;
et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	and does not return to its place for its corruption.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi:	And if you have confirmed that the skin has returned, and the corruption is not yet in the flesh, and the skin is charred, then the treatment of the plaster should be as follows:
regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite:	Look to see if the breasts are large, and the nipple is of foul smell, then plaster with Egyptian medicine made as follows:
prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel;	Take garlic, oil, and lead, equally, and put to cook in a pot over the fire until the medicine is red and as thick as honey.
et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus;	and then take according to your need, and make it in sharp and sweet, and in clysterize the belly, and hold the protrusion.
et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant;	and let the medicine stay in for two hours, then expel it by pressing.
fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor;	do this many times, until the wound is clean and healed.
et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez;	and never clysterize with ashes of sulfur, when this medicine is not present, and you should squeeze sulfur powder from a vine trunk, and pour sharp water above, then let it flow, and in clysterize, until you see that the wound is clean.
et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet;	and if they cannot bear the pain, neither the Egyptian medicine nor the sharp of ashes can relieve it, then apply a poultice of honey and flour or if it has a little bit of lead powder.
ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain;	or you poultice with honey and melted wine, where the honey has the property of healing and cleansing, and the wine makes the wound ferment.
et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin;	and when you have done this, and you have confirmed that the wound is healed, then apply a poultice of what makes charcoal in it, and it is that you grip an emplaustrum definite, and they make with rose oil and in wine.
ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens;	and you apply the bandage with some medicines and ointments, of which I have spoken about their properties or treatment of wounds.
et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez;	and if the hole in the bandage is small, and the pain of the bandage cannot enter, then slightly enlarge it with a needle, and put in an Egyptian tent of ointment or basilicon ointment until it is expanded.
et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	and if the wound is too large, then cut and leave only as much skin or bandage as can enter, and if the pain is above the elbow, then cover or higher up where it is.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char;	When the bow is in the string, do not let the arrow slip.
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere:	And if you cannot cover the string as you see fit, then adjust it in such a way that the bow corresponds to the lowest point where it is, for when the bow is strung, do not let the arrow slip and if you cannot cover the string as you see fit, then adjust it in this manner:
que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe;	that the bow corresponds lightly downwards, and do not leave anything of the bow.
et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain;	and take remedies to strengthen it, and place them on the wound, and cover it with a piece of linen that covers all the wound.
puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois;	Then apply pressure to the wound in that place, not too wide at first, since it is carefully sewn together with another cloth according to the quantity of the wound, and put it on the wound of the clean cloth to align the wound, and do not remove the large dressing until after many days, once.
et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste;	And the one who is on the wound of the body, often removes to remove the wound, and treats what comes from the wound, whether it is poison or little or enough, or digested or undigested.
et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez;	And take care if the patient feels pain or not, and whether there is an abscess or not, and when your medicine has been spread in some way and you see the nature that jumps over the wound of the clean cloth, if the breasts are already healed, and approach the healthy ones.
et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	And then dislocate it in the morning, or at noon, and when you have dislocated the wound, change the bandage and renew the ointment.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the breasts are not well digested after many hours, force them to be straight so that they do not become misshapen.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	And if the subtle poisons are cut after long time, do not despair of health, for health approaches.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire;	For there are people who delay in applying char to their wounds, and those who do the opposite;
et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie;	and they suddenly jump up after many hours, so that the breasts do not remain still;
et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine;	and if the breasts are delayed in rising, and are distant, then apply moist and drying medicines, such as ointment, because there is a large part of vitrified glass, and this is the last medicine.
pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance;	Take a definitive grip, and apply with rose oil, and mix it with equal parts of old wine in substance.
puis le confit et en use;	Then cook and use it.
et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu;	And this very thing is cooked and thickened, when a definitive grip is not present, or you take myrrh and aloe, and incense, and grind it, and the powder on the honey when it is over the fire.
et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire;	And then glue it to the cloth, and place it on the chest, and once in a while administer aristolochia longifolia, and roots of star anise, which is also like flour and hundredweight.
et en use de simples ou de compostes:	And in the case of simple or composite remedies:
broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use;	Grind them, and make powder from them, and put on honey that I have said, and use it.
et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens;	And if the cure is long, and it is not cured by this cure, then cut away the corruption that is in front of it, and make impression on the bone, or on hard members, or on limbs.
si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	If the cure of the fistula, as we have said before.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	of the abscess of the nail
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois;	Panarice is an abscess that arises outside the joint of the little finger of the hand, or of the foot, or by chance arises in other places.
et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute;	And when it is removed, and no attention is paid, if it comes back with an abscess, and corrode and pour boiling water as much as it reaches the root of the nail, and perhaps it corrodes all of it;
et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	and it comes to the bones, as much as there is painful putrefaction, and the limb is very swollen, and it is a dark red color.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	If you treat it as we have said in the division, and the cure does not help much, then you must cut away all the excess that remains of the nail, then cauterize the wound afterwards.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne;	The cautery is very helpful if the bones are healthy, and the nail is healthy;
et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout;	and if the nail is close to the bone and begins to pierce, and the wound, then it is necessary that you put the cautery out of the nail so it does not pierce the bone, and bring the bottom up, and carefully and gently cover this wound with medicines burning and corrosive to remove everything;
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	then the treatment of wounds until they are healed.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner;	And if the corrosion is in the bone, then cut and remove it, for as long as the bone is corrupted, it cannot heal.
et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	And if you see the other decaying, then cut and remove it as was said before, then treat it until it is healed.
et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier;	And if it is fierce, and bleeding, and the patient feels great pain, then you must first treat it.
puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor;	Then cut the space between the bones by sawing across, and guard that the cut does not come too close to the bone, for the pain would be too great.
et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	And if it happens, put something on it to soothe.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	the pain of a sore hand
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	The pain that arises in the hands of some men by chance is all charred, and by chance it has a tail or where it has bones, and once it has an angle, and none of them are born at the root of the joint, or where the birth is in any of the fingers.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet;	Those born without any bone do not move, and those born at the joint of the bone may move.
la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere:	The size of one who is chubby is lighter, in a way:
taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	size it at its root of a wide span.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer:	Those born at the root of the joint are difficult to cure.
si te tien dou coper.	if you hold it with a cover.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	In those who are born or should be at the back, it is necessary that you first cut the rounded part of the bone to the bone, then cut the bone to a suitable silk for this, then care for it until it is healed.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The same things that come together in two ways, either by birth or by wounding, or by burning of fire, or by similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz;	If it is necessary to cover that which is sore, so that it can return according to its natural forms.
puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent;	Then put between two bandages or cloths, moistened with rose oil, so that they do not stick.
ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	between two thin pieces of cloth, as much as the joint should be heard, as it should be.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	If one of them comes with their palm, then apply it as it should be.
des vils	of the poor
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors;	Vis are veins large and swollen filled with superfluous melancholic fluids, which come from many members of the body.
et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	and more often in the legs of those who walk and work and carry, than in others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	Then you must administer them purgative of clyster, and then the healthy one from the basilica.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres:	The treatment of iron is according to two methods:
l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir;	one is that it is removed and the black blood is drawn out.
et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	and the other method is that the vein is opened and all the blood is drawn out.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere:	The abdomen is thus according to this manner:
arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil;	The first leg is raised high and hot, so that the big toe is not thinned, then strain the leg with the bad side down towards the lower part of the belly;
puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir;	then open the vein in the belly, in I, II or III, of a wide-bore needle, then release and pull out the black blood to your hand, from one to the other, until as much blood as the bad side can bear is drawn;
et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire;	then bind it and command that he be fed with foods seasoned with black pepper;
et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	And begin the evacuation and cleaning when the veins are flat, and exposed to the air.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere:	The following is the method for this:
reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes;	Rub the affected leg with oil, if there is much hair, then place it in a bath, and apply hot water to the leg until it becomes red, and swell the veins;
et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville;	and if you do not have a bath, heat the water at the fire, and then apply it to the vein where it is long, at the base of the knee, or in the part below the ankle;
puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent;	then scrape the skin at the base of the vein, and remove all parts of it until it appears when touched;
et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche;	and it appears red and black, and when it enters or skin seems to resemble a white cord.
puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois;	then press the raw flesh out of the skin, until it is raised from the skin, and then it can be removed with a light touch, then the copper in the other joint for about three days.
puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers;	then scrape the skin over the vein until it appears, then lift it to the wound, as you have done, and remove it with a light touch, as you did before.
puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille;	then remove another size, or if you have skill, then lift it and remove it to the other side of the wound, then cut and remove it from the second size.
puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope;	then extract it from the abdomen, as much as it can be removed, then cover it.
et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse;	and if you cannot pull and lift it, then insert a large needle into the intestine strongly doubled, and tie it and pull it out, and turn your hand from one side to the other, as much as there is.
et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide;	and be careful that it does not cover, because if it covers, then it cannot be pulled or lifted, and it causes harm to the patient.
et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset;	and when you have treated it all, then place on the wound of the sore linen soaked in wine and in red oil;
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and the cure as long as he is healthy.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie;	And if his sight is contracted and twisted and clouded together, and it is not straight, as we have said, then you must forcefully untwist it, but do not cover it.
et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	and treat it as we have previously said.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne;	The form of iron that covers the eye if is curved, and does not cut through, so it does not cover the vein;
et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	and is of large curvature, because if it were thin, it would cover the vein, but if it is large as we have said, and this is the form:
de la voinne civile	of the vein of the eye
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor;	This vein is incised in the legs, in hot parts where there are no herbs or trees, and in land where there is no moisture;
et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	and by chance it arises in another part than the legs, and this has the pus that comes out of the skin, as it comes from inside the flesh and muscles, incise between the skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	And if the signs of the beginning of this wound are such that it comes in the leg a very great inflammation, then the limb changes, and the wound begins to protrude, like the root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe;	When the wound is open, it is necessary that you wrap around a piece of plaster of one and a half to two fingers thick, and the plaster, and leave the plaster on the leg, and every time it is not there, if you wrap it around the plaster, and the plaster.
et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue;	And if it is too long, cut off a part, wrap it around, and not cover the remaining part at its root until it is completely out.
car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie;	For if you cut it off, it will enter into the wound and cause abscess and putrefaction or sickness in the limb, and it will be very bad.
por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors;	For this reason, it is necessary to treat it little by little just at the head, and nothing should remain or rot.
et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse;	And there is never this vein when it is treated from the palm of length, or of X, and some have come to me, from which it issues of X lengths, and when you cut it off, it will burst or puncture, and it will perforate just at the bottom, so that everything will be out.
et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	and clear out the matter that is inside, and administer to the patient medicines in the form of poultices every day, then treat the wounds as with abscesses.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains;	And never rain on this vein, and especially when it opens at the joint of the finger, or the finger, and much pressure comes out, and it suddenly rains;
cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	treat the wound as we have said before.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	between the skin and flesh
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer;	This disease is called in our land "bull disease", because it often affects bulls, and it is a small worm that grows between skin and flesh, and goes throughout the body up and down, and is felt well at the alert of member to member, as long as it does not leave the skin where it was;
et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre;	and is caused by the corruption of some humors, such as worms coming from and wriggling in the intestines and lumbrics and ascarides or worms in the belly.
et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil;	and its harm is doubted, for when it goes through the body, and climbs to the head, and comes to the oil, by chance it enters, and destroys the oil.
et ceu avient maintes fois.	This happens often.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait:	When you see it cure and draw, one cannot help but notice when it goes:
si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire;	Therefore, it is necessary to tie the limb above and below a very tight bandage, then cut it off and draw it out, and if it turns black in the char, you should not touch it, but cauterize it with fire until it dies.
et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit;	and the greatest harm it does is that it corrupts the oil, as we have said.
et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer;	and if you see it coming or close to the oil, hold it firmly away from it, then cover it and remove it.
et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	and it is advisable to use the remedy of applying a solution of medicinal herbs for the bad humors that cause disease, and if it fails to work, try using meat broths for purgation.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	of pain coming from the windiness
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre;	This disease is called in our land "wakirir", and it is a pain that comes to certain members, and then moves from member to member;
et je vis ceu que je vos di.	and I have seen what I will tell you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais;	I was called to a sick woman, and I discovered that one of her arms was swollen, and there was a small boil in the vein of the arm.
et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre;	And soon after, it grew as big as a worm in the shoulder, much faster than anything, just like quick silver when it is cut from lead.
li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais;	The pain separated from the arm and moved to the shoulder, and then a little later it rotted throughout the body, until it reached the other arm.
puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	Then she told me that she turned around inside the body, as I saw.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I marveled greatly at how she moved from one limb to another, for I had never seen this disease in this way before.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme;	Nevertheless, I wanted to move the pain from one arm to the other, but I could not do so, as I saw in the woman.
et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte;	And I thought it was because the woman had dry skin, and her veins were exposed, and because that whiteness appeared constrained.
et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	And they do not reveal themselves to those who are delicate, and who have moist skin and veins covered.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer;	And when you see how to cure this disease, and the pain feels as we have said, if it opens up as we have described, then tie above and below quickly, and then cover it with a bandage until that whiteness is released from the limb.
et cauterize le leu;	and cauterize the limb.
et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	and if you do not see it in your eyes, then treat the cause of that whiteness, as with foul-smelling pills, and serapin pills, and similar others.
des saiettes	of arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	Arrows are various, according to their resemblances and according to the materials they are made of.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees;	The variety of their shapes is such that there are those with large points, small points, curved points, and smoothed points.
et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces;	And of those who have II angles, and of those who have tongues, and of those which have pieces.
et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres:	And that which pierces into any member however it pierces in the manner:
ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	or in the principal member which is hairy, such as the head, neck, liver, lungs, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and similar members.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent:	When it pierces therefore into any part of these members, and the sign of death, which I will tell you afterwards, is apparent:
si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions;	if it is necessary to extract this arrow, for many die afterwards in various positions.
et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	and when this bad sign does not appear to you, and the arrow is not completely embedded, then remove it, and treat the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole;	And the sign of the skull when the arrow pierces and penetrates the bone, and the syphilitic pus that is above the skull, is when there is scotomy and soda and swelling and confusion, and inflammation and swelling of the tongue, and spasms and mental confusion, and vomiting of bile;
et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles;	and perhaps there is no force in the nostrils, or in the ears.
et par aventure pert la parole et la voix;	And perhaps the tongue and voice are affected;
et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char;	and white pus-like matter issues from the wound, and also like bruised meat;
et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	if this sign appears to you, then take care of the patient, and remove the arrow if it is not already out.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide;	The sign of the arrow when it pierces or breaks, is that it is near the right breast, and also feels as if it were stuck in something hard, not empty;
et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope:	and perhaps the arrow moves as if it were stuck in something, and also cuts through black blood, and causes coldness and cold sweat, and syncope:
saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	Therefore, with doubt, they send them away.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign that the arrow has not been pulled out is that without any pain, bubbles come out of the wound, and the throat swells, and the limb changes color, and the patient breathes high and seeks for the cold air.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes;	And if the arrowhead pierces through the covering of the worst, it is under the small ribs;
et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire;	and causes great pain and breathlessness.
et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	and they move all the members of the shoulders.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the arrowhead pierces the stomach, by chance if something undigested from the meat does not come out of the wound.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if the arrowhead pierces the abdomen, and nothing comes out through the intestines, there is no hope in the cure, nor in the extraction of the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor:	And if the arrowhead pierces through the bladder, and the urine spurts out and comes forth, and the patient feels great pain:
saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	Therefore, that the wound is mortal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other member, such as the hand and neck and throat and shoulder and elbow and back and spine and hip and knee and leg, and similar members, are safe according to many positions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in the nerve or the artery, and it is not venomous, as I will tell you what happened to me, because of what you were doing differently.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis:	It happened to a man who was shot in the calf at the root of the knee:
je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	I tried to remove it, and pulled it out from the other side of the fat of the ear, and was healed without harm.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles;	And if a splinter enters the skin and gets stuck in the oil paper outside the paper, and the splinter is replaced, and it cannot be reached except with the tip towards the top, and it was a large splinter like a Turkish arrow, through all the iron without ears;
li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	the wound was cleansed, and no bad accidents came to him.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles:	And if a splinter enters the throat of a Christian, and the splinter is Arabic-shaped with ears:
je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	I removed the barbs, and carefully extracted it until I got it out, and the Christian was healed.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit;	And I drew a spear from a man, which was stuck in his neck or stomach, and thought he was dying.
et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition;	Then after thirty days, he did not change his condition;
je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	I cut into the spear above, and pulled it out, and removed it, and there was no bad outcome.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus;	And if you want to a man who has a spear sticking out of his back, and the wound was sewn up above;
et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	and the spear remained inside him, and did not change his natural condition, nor did he find any harm in any of his natural works.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie;	And you see another man, who has a spear sticking out of his face, and the wound was sewn up;
et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor;	and prolongs thus without suffering great pain;
et mout d’autres semblans.	and many similar cases.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie;	And a arrow was removed from the man of the king, who had it sticking out of his throat, and was slightly tilted to the right side;
et estoit li saiette toute reponue.	and the arrow was completely embedded.
Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	I was called for after it had been three days.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	If the wound is very narrow.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie;	I found it all under a thin tent, and did not feel anything;
et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	and he felt sharp pain and pain on his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast;	I thought it was from the tip of the arrow. I put some warm and soothing ointment on his forehead because the veins were not inflamed;
et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	and I saw the bones of the arrow.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis;	I put the plaster on immediately, and poured it directly onto the wound, and it remained there for a long time, until he felt the arrow inside his nostril.
et il le me dist.	and he told me.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu;	I put the corrosive medicine on the wound immediately, and I tried it, and I felt the tip of the arrow that was lodged in the bone.
puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement;	then I pushed it into the opening of the wound with that medicine, until the arrow appeared clearly.
et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir;	and it passed through the ends in about four months, and then I removed the stitches that I had put on the wound, and from one side and the other, and he could not get out.
adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	then he did not cease to subtly and ingeniously devise ways of using tools, until I took them well made, according to the form that it will come at the end of this chapter, so that I can treat and heal the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer:	And the miracle worker judged that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored:
je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	I healed it anyway, and the wound was closed, and the pain was completely healed.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre;	Or I told you the quality of the extraction of some arrows, so that you put your skill on what I do not say, because the books cannot contain everything;
mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	but the wise masters compare it to a small thing, and because of what is present and lacking, they find new work, and new instrument, in the understanding of strange things that happen in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres:	I say that arrows do not issue from limbs unless by two methods:
ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part;	or by the limb where they enter, or by another part.
et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	and that which exits by the same way it entered is an arrow that has entered through the bowel, and it has never exited.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue;	And if it does not exit, let it remain until the bowel is poisoned and rotten inside, and let it be left to its own issue.
et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor;	And if it is stuck in the bone, and cannot be removed, let it remain for several days, and move it every day.
et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	And then it jumps out, and if it does not jump out, pierce all around with a thin needle, until the flesh around it is expanded, and then pull it out.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide:	And if the arrow is stuck in the head bone, and goes towards one of the bellies of the brain, and any of the accidents that I have described to the patient:
si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	if it is not pulled out, but left until it becomes even after several days, because if the arrow comes towards the face, that is death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	And if the arrow is not embedded in the bone only, and does not come to the surface, and remains there for several days without any bad event, then the engine of drawing should be used.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit;	And if she is very crooked like this and cannot get out, then administer tar, as I have told you.
puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then heal the limb until it is healthy.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente;	And if the arrow is returned to the body but cannot be seen, then search for it throughout the tent.
et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble;	And if you feel it, then remove it with any suitable instrument.
et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans;	And if you cannot remove it due to the narrowness of the wound, and the deep penetration of the arrow, and there is no bone or sinew or vein, then leave it until the wound becomes large.
et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire;	and if you find an arrow, and if it has ears attached to it that it holds, then break the shaft where you can, and then break or pull off the ears from the shaft, as much as you can.
et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	and carefully do not break the arrow, so that you can pull it out more firmly.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	If you cannot do it once, if the leg is completely inside the thigh, then cut it off, for the extraction has failed.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre;	And if bleeding occurs due to this, then follow what we have said about the treatment in its chapter.
et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement;	and guard against the incision of the nerve and the vein, and put in place as you can pull out the arrow without danger, or quickly or slowly, or firmly or loosely.
et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	Put the patient according to the shape it was in when the arrow came out, for this is the greatest help that there is, and if you cannot do so, put it according to what the signs show.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment:	The arrow that comes from another direction, which opens nothing and where the skin is swollen in one place so that it can be seen or felt abnormally:
taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai:	Then cut above, as long as the barbs can be taken hold of, and then extract it:
si saut fuer maintenant.	If it has now sunk in.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is retained in the bone, then round your hand and push it into the bone, until it enters the bone, and expands the bone, then pull it out.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer;	And if it cannot come out, leave it still and then begin extraction again until it comes out.
et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust;	and if it is of an arrow and it is, if it is shot through;
et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument;	and if it is poisoned, and you see administer gently, if you administer the instrument chewed, so that the tip of the arrow between the hair of the instrument;
et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	and then bite further, and if the arrow is chewed, if it bites the instrument entering at the point, to alleviate the extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	And if the arrow is lodged, it is necessary that you cut out all the flesh around where the poison is, if you can, then treat the wound as it should be.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope;	And if the arrow is poisoned or painful or in the belly or bladder or ribs, and it is close, and you can cover over it, if it covers.
et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est;	and guard yourself from covering the vein and nerve, and then extract it, and then cut the wound, if necessary.
et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and the treatment until it is healed.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The shape of the hooks used to extract arrows resembles an owl's beak, and here is its form:
Et en sont mout de manieres:	And there are many ways to do this:
grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	large, medium, and small, according to the amount of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	The shape of the needle is also like the beak of a bird, to pierce at the tip of the blood, like this:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	The shape of the needles for pricking and for drawing is like this:
des voinnes dou cors communes	Veins common to the body
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir:	There are 31 veins from which one can bleed, including the main ones, which are 16, namely:
II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»;	2 branches that are after the ears, which are called the "two herbs";
et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans;	and the 2 arteries that are in the two temples appearing;
et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»;	and the 2 veins that are in the two armpits of the two eyes, which are called "aspirates";
et li voine que est emmi le front;	and the vein that is placed in the forehead;
et li voinne que est au chief dou neis;	and the vein that is at the back of the head;
et les II guindeges qui sont ou col;	and the two jugular veins that are on the neck;
et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»;	and the two veins that are in the lips above the mouth, and these are the veins called "auguste";
et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	and the two veins that are outside the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras:	The veins that one cuts commonly are V in each arm:
l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»;	the other is the cervical, and is on the right side, and they call it the "head vein";
et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»;	and the remedy is called "fasting", and it is composed of the cephalic and basilic veins, and they call it the laymen "vein of the heart".
et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	and the basilic vein is located on the right side, and they call it the laymen "vein of the belly", and it is above the femoral artery, and it is the one that is used to heal, which opens clearly above the groin.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains;	and the subclavian vein is the one that is between the auricular and annular artery, and it has two branches.
et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes:	and in the leg there are three veins:
l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit;	The first one is dislocated at the left shoulder, and the second one is at the elbow of the right shoulder.
et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei;	And the vein that is called "nesse", which is in the elbow of the other shoulder.
et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	And in the other leg, there are three veins dislocated from those.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine;	The sinus of the veins that are after the ears helps with ancient catarrh and headache.
et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre;	And the qualities of the sinus, as I said to you, and it is that you reset the head of the pain, and rub the skin where the veins are with a rough cloth.
puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief:	Then compress the hairs on their neck with a bandage until the two veins appear behind the ears in both sides of the head.
quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche;	And if you feel pain on your neck, and if you see the hairs standing up, then stop.
puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues;	Then take the lancet, and place it outside the vein near the bone, then lift your hand above the vein, and cut through the skin and the vein, and it should go straight through the vein until you see.
puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee;	Then stop and tie it until it is healed.
et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	I have already mentioned the incision and the cauterization in the first book.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz;	The cure for the second artery that is in two temples, it is to drain the ancient, and soothe, and harden accustomed, and at the courts of the tears ages to those.
et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis:	And the qualities of the skilled healer are as I say:
et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement;	And it is that the painful one strains his neck, so that both veins appear openly.
et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche;	And he feels the hairs on the other side, and then lifts up the eyelid;
puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit;	Then lift the finger above the vein on the other side, and prick the lancet outside, and lift the vein up, and cover it, as you have done in the two other veins, and do according to your need.
puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton;	then release the pain, and put your finger on the wound for an hour, then put on a cloth.
et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee;	and then tie it firmly, and leave it until it is healed.
et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	and we have spoken of them and their treatment and removal, at the beginning of this book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor;	The healing of the wound on the forehead is just as valuable as the healing of headache diseases and facial old wounds, and migraine, and a rupture.
et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere;	and the quality is such that the pain twists his neck, until the wound appears.
puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	then take the tool called "fosser", which has this shape:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues;	and place the point of it on the vein, and hold it with your hand or something else, and let the blood issue according to the amount you see;
puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	then cut away the vein, and tie it until it is secure and no more blood flows out like a wide flame.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus;	However, it should not be too tight;
et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	and the knot on the side, because the bone is close, and by chance the string may break when it is thin.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice;	The second vein that is in the two arms helps to those, and at the elbow, and at the wrist, and at the shoulder, and at the diseases of the face;
et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant;	and the quality of their health is such that the hairs twist their neck in turning from any direction, as before.
puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	then the healthy one, and let the health be through the cross, a little long of the flame a little wide, for there is no harm.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise;	And if their flames are thin, perhaps they break;
puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	then make bleeding of the blood, as much as you have skill, and then tie with cotton, and tie it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene;	The health of the vein of the neck is good for ague, and for sweating, and for diseases of the face, such as migraines and redness that comes in the face, and continuously when it is old.
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre;	and the qualities of the pain are such that the hairs tense their neck, then they strain their nostril to your right hand, and take the subtle flame long, and the wick into the space between the two nostrils, because the vein does not open well inquire, and the sinus will now begin to heal.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree;	and do not move too much from there, and treat the blood according to your need, then leave it overnight, because it is quickly restored.
et c’est li forme dou flaime:	and this is the shape of the flame:
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes;	The pain of the two jawbones helps to narrow the alveolar arch, and at the beginning of mastication, and for many diseases, and pustules, and corrosions, and herpes, and eczema;
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit;	and the quality of the skin is such that the hairs stray from one side to the other, as we have said.
et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est;	and whether the masters are above the top of the wound, and the wound is on the seat, then clean the vein with a long incision, slightly wide, then draw out the blood frequently, as much as the matter requires.
puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle;	then make another incision on the other vein, then release the ligature, and hold the wounds steadily, so that the hairs do not strangle.
et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	and let it bleed until morning, so that the wound is healed.
de la sainie des leivres	of the health of the liver
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The health of the liver above helps to cool in the mouth, and prevents tooth decay, and cracks in the lips, and dry throat and inside.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit;	And the quality of the saint is to make the pain sit in front of you, and hold its neck as I have said;
puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires:	then turn the eyelid, and look at the two veins, one on the right eyelid and the other on the left, and they are known by the fact that they are black, and by the fact that there are small black veins around them:
cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	then tie both of them, and if you do not know them, and you are in doubt, then tie the largest one from each part, and do the same with the two veins that are above and below, for it is the same method:
de la sainie desoz la lengue	of the health of the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche;	The cleaning of the veins that are outside the tongue helps after the cleaning of the cephalic, and it is at the narrowing of the throat, and for diseases of the eye, and for diseases of the mouth.
et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire:	And the qualities of a good cleaner are that diseases cease between your hands before the sun, and you stretch out your tongue, and look outside at each side a black vein.
saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	Therefore clean both and do not go too far in front, for outside are the arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres:	The veins of the neck that are cleaned commonly are cleaned in two ways:
ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»;	when holding onto all the fire with a wide, sharp blade, or like a surgical scalpel, and it is called "anesthesia";
et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	and they are wide and thin according to the width and narrowness of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The form of the flame is very famous, and is as wide as you see.
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble;	And there is skill for opening closed veins that are plainly visible from the outside, and which contain large amounts of blood and are disturbed;
et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	and this is the shape of the sharp blade:
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	And it is more subtlely pointed, and is for cleaning fine veins, where there is fine blood clots.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre;	The basilica vein, which is one of these veins, helps with diseases that are outside the neck, and where the collarbone, and where the chest, and where the stomach;
et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	and it is necessary for the surgeon to act wisely, and to separate from the artery which is out of place.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit;	And if he cuts the artery, and blood gushes out, then it is necessary to apply pressure, as I have said.
et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	and he should not pinch the flame, but cut as an anvil.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre;	And if the bishop does not open clearly, then it is necessary to hold and change another one.
ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras:	or you want any part of him, or you act in place of the vein in the arm.
elle apert manifestement;	it opens clearly.
et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	and the cup to the flame, as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz;	And if you know the joint of the shoulder, then it is also necessary that you strain the arm, so that you touch the joint until you know the pulse.
puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil;	Then sign the shoulder joint, and then bind the arm, and cup the vein with the flame as before.
et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere:	And watch that you do not puncture the artery when you see the joint swelling, for it is of the artery.
eschui la donques.	Then move away from it.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere:	And if you see it emerge as high as the urine of a child, and the blood is red and thin, know that it is from the artery.
haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient;	Hasten then, and place your hand on the length, then press your hand without pause, as many times as it has happened.
se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides;	Tie the arm, and leave it thus, and do not move the hairs.
et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	And let it be under fear, and do not move it until it is healed.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient;	And if it is not healed without pain, and you are not present with the medicine, then prick the artery if it opens, for the head of the vein retreats.
et estainche li sans.	Heal the wound.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor;	Take a piece of cloth, and tear it, and take one half and tie it well to the other side.
se li sans estainche, c’est bien;	if they are not stained, it is good;
se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc;	if not, then the cure, as we have said, with powders that stain blood.
et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	and the stains are not too dark in many positions of the small limb of the wound, and the position of the joint of the arm.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit;	The cleansing of the wound in the middle helps that it treats blood from the head above, and from the body below, because it is composed of the basilica and the cephalic, as we have said.
et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner;	And it is necessary for the cleaner to go through the tendon that is outside, and if not too much in front, and he finds the tendon, and he inflates and the stain is dark, and perhaps it cannot be cleaned.
et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil;	and this nerve is often exposed, and if it does not expose itself in any men due to its subtlety, then you must use the instrument of needles.
et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	and protect the nerve for your power.
Et se il a voinne entre les II ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if he has a vein between the two nerves, make it long.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz;	The needle of the cerebral type helps, as it draws out blood from the head, and helps with those.
et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	and it is best to use a needle in the olive oil or mineral oil lamp, as it is the safest of all veins, because it does not contain any nerves or arteries.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence;	However, it is best to ask for the lightest limb, and do not cause any harm if you cannot find it the first time, and then restart.
et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	And sometimes the shoulder swells in some people, but it is necessary the first time, but it does not cause any harm.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of health depends on your thought.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir;	The first thing you should know about healing is that healing is only intended for keeping health and preventing diseases from coming.
et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute:	And the healing is done in one of the three veins that are either cut:
c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique;	That is to say, cephalic, median, and basilar.
et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent;	And one should heal at the beginning of the first ten days, and in autumn and winter after fasting, when the signs of repletion appear.
et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	And one should first cleanse the affected joint or limb after two hours or three days.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens;	The cleansing administered for diseases does not have a determined time, but it is best to do so every hour or at night, in all hours and at all times.
et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	And it is not necessary to cleanse children under the age of fourteen, nor a pregnant woman except for those in their fourth month up to seven months of pregnancy.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez LX ans.	One should also not sain the elderly who have passed sixty years.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz;	And when anyone wants to cleanse in any way, it is necessary for them to wipe the intestines with a light clyster, if they have too much feces retained, so that the veins do not attract the excess and harmful intestinal contents to the principal limbs.
ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques;	Neither does one who is too fond of meats, nor one who is indulgent, become healthy, as much as they may be, nor hydropathic.
et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors;	And if one becomes sick after a bout of colic, vomiting, diarrhea, and frequent pregnancy, childbirth, travel, watching, and fasting, and all the virtue, or by some cause of the arm or body;
puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir;	Then subtly the humors, if they are not too thick, by meats and drinks and medicines, if you have the power.
puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit;	Then enter or bathe, if nothing prevents, to thin the blood, and to save you from bleeding too much at the third hour, as we have said.
et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses;	and guard yourself from that day of work, and pain, and luxury, and similar things;
et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans;	and be tied and joined, and let the healers be higher than those who heal, and let the rub the arm II times or III, then strain the joint above movement, for if it is too loose or tight, it cannot be corrected;
et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on;	then rub the limb with hands, until the veins swell, and feel for them;
puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	then drip the healer’s flame from a small amount of old oil, then put their finger on the vein where they want to heal, so that the vein does not burst and fail to bleed.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus;	Because there are veins that flee as quickly as strings to the scribe, and if there are some that are plain of thinness, so that when one puts above the flame, it withdraws from the flame, and cannot open the vein, and thus is one of those;
et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	and if it opens the vein, then the wound is too narrow, because it is necessary that the scribe be aware of these things.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin;	And if it opens the vein the first time, it is good;
se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	but if not, then it should try again a little below that joint or above firmly, if the vein is not swollen.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras:	If the joint is swollen, and the hairs sprout, let it rest for one or two days, and do not bind the arm tightly.
par aventure i venra apostemes chaus;	perchance I will come to abscesses in the future;
ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait;	do not enter or take a bath, then restart the healing if it pleases.
et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement;	and if the wound is small, or if you doubt that it will not bleed as much as you saw, then trust in that wound itself directly to the fire.
et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez;	and work gently, provided that the joint is swollen;
car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	for this often happens, when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile;	If you see the limb swelling, do not begin again with the same bandage, and put on a small amount of oil, for it soothes the pain of the wound, and is quiet in this limb like the oil.
et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc;	And thus administer the bandage of oil in each wound that you bandage, to stop the flow of the blood.
et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu;	And this same thing is made into a triangle and a bow, when it is put on the limb.
si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	If subtly the wound and separate it when it is too thick.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre;	And if there comes some large abscesses, which often happen, immediately when it is not bandaged except at this time or the opening of the vein is small, then hurry, and put on the limb a soft sponge in boiling water and a little cloth, and hold it an hour.
et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie;	and it is necessary that you do this after the removal of blood from the vein, and if it remains in place for several days without any discoloration or greenish tint, then it is not necessary to remove it.
et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	and if you see, place something of aloe or mire in a juice of calamint, monkshood, or similar.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique:	And often there is an abscess and appearance of the sores of the basilica:
met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	and then place your hand on it, and if you press the limb gently with your hand, if it is that appearance badly.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere;	Therefore do not place anything of what we have said, because inadvertently it may cut into the artery.
mais li fai I emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	but apply a dry plaster to strengthen the limb, then use other treatments until it is healed.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And treat each wound according to the quantity of its virtue and the color of the wound.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges;	For if it is not black, let it remain out until it becomes red;
et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez;	and if you see it swollen, let it remain out until it becomes thinned.
et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges;	And it is suitable for those who are weak and have skill in extracting arrows, to make a larger wound, and let the flames be wide;
et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant;	and for those who are weak, do the opposite, and let it heal quickly and often, and it should be treated by cutting across, not by pricking.
et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	This method of healing is safe from the corrosion of blood and the strangulation of nerves, and it is as good as the healing done over a long period of time or a wide area.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates;	And to those who need it for the healing, it is appropriate to give bread made from ground grains mixed with apple juice.
s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	If it is hot-blooded, then pour out the blood three or four times and if it is of cold complexion, change the bread to bread made from honey syrup or aromatic honey syrup with spices, such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cloves, and a strong-smelling syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	And if he faints during the sweat, after much blood loss, it is appropriate to give him a broth of charcoal, and a subtle-smelling syrup, and use the other things that we have said in the chapter or section on syncope, for the evacuation of blood.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he wants to exercise his arm, and strengthen it again, if necessary, when it is weakened by great injury, that he should strengthen it gradually, according to the quantity of its continuous virtue.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine VII houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And if he wants to exercise his arm after the first strengthening, and he has strong pain, then he should strengthen it again seven hours after the first strengthening, or after the ninth hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And if he wants to strengthen on the other side, then he should strengthen it again on the second day or the third day.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre;	Because he has much blood inside his body which is already heated, and causes fever;
si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson;	if it is necessary to draw a large quantity, and widen the vein as much as possible;
puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens;	then you must meet all the conditions of health, and put your hand on the pulse when it is healthy, so that the patient does not come into the vein in place of the pulse, and this has often happened when the healers are neglectful;
et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus;	and you must not draw blood when you see the arm shaking, and make blood come out the second time, and the vein is closed, that you press firmly on.
ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz;	If it is curved, he should extend his arm quickly, for that would be harmful.
mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois;	but let it rest until it heals the second time.
ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	or you do not put the tip of the flame on it until the ice that has been frozen from the vein is softened, and put a drop of oil back in its place, and press it lightly.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the swelling is present, let it be and do not hold it tightly until the abscess is calmed down.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if necessary to draw out blood from the second vein, if the healthy one in the same limb or another arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The veins are healthy in place of the main vein because it is composed.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges;	And the way of healing is that the hairs put their hand in hot water until the flesh is red;
puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc;	then gently tie it, so that the vein appears well, then heal it now from the side, not too narrow or too long;
et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez;	and let the wounds be wide, and clean well near the joint of the hand, and if it cannot come out, put the hand in hot water, and let the blood flow in the hot water, until you have enough;
et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit;	and if it is still stuck, do not put the hand back in hot water, because it puts more in than out;
et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	and the cleaning of this wound is safer than all other wounds, as there are no arteries or nerves.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere:	The cleaning of the wound of the right hand is worth all diseases of the liver, and this is the way:
estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie;	strain the hand, and apply hot water, until the vein is blown, if one can see it.
et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien;	and if the wound is crooked, and if you cover it with all kinds of things, it will not hurt anything.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	and do not move too much in the beginning, because the nerves are all exposed to the flesh, and then put the hand in hot water again, if it is not frozen in the wound, and cannot come out.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have treated the arrow as much as is necessary for you, put oil on the wound and tie it with a thread quickly, and thus do to each one.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The healthy sign of the left hand is valuable for the disease of the mouse, and do everything as I have told you on the right side.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	The healthy sign of the shoulder is valuable for all diseases that are outside the body, such as marrow diseases, and retention of urine, and disease of the knees, and old legs, and similar diseases.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet;	And the quality of its wound is such that the hairs boil in hot water, and rub on the vein until it dies, and tie over the joint of the hair.
et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains;	and if the vein is at the elbow, and from above the wrist they go much with rain.
saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	then the larger or more open rain, or at the elbow, which is better.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant;	And if you heal it above the wrist, then guard against the nerves that are displaced, and heal it as in sewing.
et soit li flaimes anesil.	and let the flames be close.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if it cannot issue from the bone, put the flesh in the hot water, and let the wound well drain.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz;	And if you have to heal it the first time, then start the second above a little, because the bones are salty.
ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	and do not doubt the nerve, as we have said, and so make the other sewing of the wrist equally.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The vein of the ankle is at the knee of the foot, and its healing is equal to the pain of the back, when it is for an abscess.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne;	And the quality of his health is such that the hairs between or in the bath, and strange above the knee four times in twisting, because otherwise it does not open the vein.
et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant;	and if it opens, then the healthy one in all ways that you can, and crosswise.
et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	It is worthwhile to hold it, for the veins are dry, and it is very replete with hands of men.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners;	And if you do not hold it, then the healthy one none of those who open or do two small ones, and towards the small one, and keep away from the nerves.
et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint;	And make so much correction of the blood that you see, and then release the ligament, and put on cotton and hold it.
ele est maintenant sanee.	It is now healed.
des sainies de ventouse	of suction wounds
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre;	Vacuums are made of horn, or of brass, or of glass.
et ventosation si est faite selonc II manieres:	And vacuum is done in two ways:
ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Either by striking and drawing blood, or without striking.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres:	And this vacuum that is without striking is done in two ways:
ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu;	Either it is at all heat, or without heat.
et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief;	And the vacuum that is done by striking and drawing blood is made in twelve places on the body, of which one is at the top of the head.
et li autres est emmi le col;	And the others are at the neck.
et II autres en II costeis dou col;	and two others in two ribs on the shoulder;
et li ventouse desoz lou menton;	and the suction of the face;
et li ventouse des II espaules;	and the suction of the two shoulders;
et li ventouse sus les crupies;	and the suction on the buttocks;
et les ventouses emmi les II bras;	and the suctions in the two arms;
et les ventouses des II jambes;	and the suctions in the two legs;
et les ventouses des II chevilles;	and the suctions in the two knees;
et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne;	and the suction does not treat blood, but only the small veins that are scattered in the body, and therefore it does not weaken the person, as one does with the treatment of bloodletting.
et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	and it should only be administered when there is no fire or fever, in any disease that comes from repletion, until the whole body is emptied.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens;	And if necessary for illnesses, it is advisable to ventilate, or by custom, to reset every hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and in every season.
car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief;	for there are some who, when they have business to ventilate, have heavy heads.
et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz;	and if some have fullness and redness in their face, and head, and neck, and darkness before their eyes.
et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc;	and some who have a drop of blood in their mouth, and have swollen tongue, and spit out blood.
et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	and if there are some who dream, and see through red and black and death and similar things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés III houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, and especially when it is in the month of May, we command them to fast for three hours after midday.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors;	The remedy for the pain of the muscles helps with the grieving of the head ... that comes to the eyes, and it is only suitable after the evacuation of all the blood from the body.
et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement;	And this ventilation is in the place of the remedy for the headache, and it is only suitable for those who are of cold constitution or who have diarrhea, because that causes great harm.
et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	And therefore it is not suitable for those who are awake or who have cold diseases of the head.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who often feel ill, become forgetful, and therefore it is necessary to place the suction cup a little lower due to the doubt of forgetfulness.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion;	The ventilation of the neck is in place of the remedy for the headache and the basilica, and therefore it is suitable for the narrowing of the vein of the pomum, and for all, and for repletion.
et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	And it should not be placed too tightly, for if it is held too firmly, it may cause injury to the intestines or stomach and the abdomen.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique;	The ventilation of the second rib of the spine can cause pain in the neck, and numbness and tingling, and choking, and pain at the roots of the teeth, and is in the place of the health of the basilica.
et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	And it is necessary to command the healer to express his hand when placing it, so that he does not press the artery, and does not cause blood to flow.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche;	The ventilation of the lower jaw can cause illness in the mouth, and corruption of the teeth, and similar diseases that are in the mouth.
et est en leu des sainies des II levres.	and it is in the joint of the lower lip.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	The winds of the shoulders cause disease that comes from heat and fullness.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes;	The wounds of the ears are as valuable as three veins of the arm, for they draw blood from these large veins.
et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	And the patient is instructed not to be too eager in front, for the veins are bare of flesh and can be easily damaged by needles and arteries.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire;	The wound on the back above the hips is as valuable as many diseases, and it should be large and made of iron, so that it can draw well.
et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit;	And if it were too thin, it would break.
et i fai grans plaies.	And I make great wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors;	The bandages of the legs heal openly, for they draw blood from all over the body, and cause ancient pains of rain, and of the marsh, and of the bladder, and remove the flows;
et sont en leu des II sophenes, et des II chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	And they are in the place of the second metatarsal bones, and of the second metacarpals, and at all times they weaken the body after long use, and bring on numbness in many positions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc;	The way to apply the bandage is that you first put it empty and quickly fill it with heat, and place it firmly, and move it evenly, and do not stop doing this until you see the red and swollen flesh, and open the pores of the blood.
puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez:	Then, firmly, and reset the suction cups, and take care in the positioning of the vessels, for there are such that have tarry bile, and clear porous ones.
si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes;	If it is necessary to prick once only, and it is necessary to make large wounds, and one deep one.
et suce legierement.	And clean lightly.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir II fois:	And if it is not too large, then it is necessary to prick twice.
la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	The first time to thin the path of the thick blood.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois;	And if it is not very sharp, then it is necessary to prick the third time.
et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And when we want to draw out a little blood at a time, then we should only suck once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent;	And if we wish to draw much blood, we recommend frequently.
et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif:	And if the blood is thick, we recommend using a sharp, pointed knife, and it is suitable for those who have thick skin and are tough, that you use the tips of oil-appetizing and dissolving:
se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite;	if it is in this state, of blue oil, or of almond sweet oil, or of cucumber seed oil;
et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	and if it is in a feverish state, of celery oil, or of lily, or of chamomile, or another similar one.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the excess is large and cold, take oil of marjoram, or balm, or aniseed oil, and the likes.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	And if the one who is to be bled has wide and open pores, then one should not put any oil, but rather wash after the venesection of high rosewater, or high cold water, or myrtle water, or cucumber water, or porcelain water, or other similar thing.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And those who have much moisture, if they rise from ash, or high myrtle water, and sumac, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans;	And those who have excessive swelling rise from old wine, or vinegar of sucking, or decoction of anise or chamomile, or other similar things;
et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II;	and do not wait too long to apply a suction device before the bath or in the bath, but after the bath for an hour or two;
et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	and do not sleep immediately after suction, and it is good that they wait until they are ready to be sucked and when they are being sucked.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez;	And watch out for those who are suctioned if they are feverish, and if they are not too weak and inflamed;
si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses;	if it is good that they take cold things, such as green apples and endives and lettuces at the outlet, and similar things;
et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	and muddy puddles, and hot water from a cauldron, and moist meats.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons;	And those who have a cold complexion, take honey syrup, and aromatic wine between old and new, and a little broth, and muddy puddles, small birds, and pigeons.
et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier;	and the day that he will travel, he must drink more than eat.
et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz;	And it is necessary to give some men triangular or muscat wine before traveling, or after, for the benefit of the main members.
et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	And it should be subtly given to the sick, but only those who are strong drink it.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne;	Vacuum cups applied to cause pain are those placed over the liver, and over the mouse, and podagra, and over the belly and the buttocks and the thighs and the back, for these members do not suffer pain from other methods, and no one does this except to draw blood from member to member, as we place them over the breasts when the child is born;
por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre;	to remove the viscosity that is in the member, as we place vacuum cups over the belly and the buttocks to soften the member;
et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu;	and remove the pain when there is an abscess or stone, as by its attractive virtue it may chance to remove the abscess, or dislodge the stone from its place;
et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement;	And thus, when placed over the liver and the mouse, where there is a suction retained, these suctions are administered empty for sweat alone.
et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	And never are administered together with fire, and sometimes plain of hot vinegar, as in diseases of pleurisy, and in such a way that the suction is filled with hot steam or hot water where he has cooked poisonous herbs to it.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The shape of the vacuum administered by fire is as follows:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre;	And it has two large and half-palm of length, and it is or costed around the middle I small perforation, as to put a needle, and it is of brass, sulfur before so that it does not bleach the painful part when placing it on the limb.
et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent;	And in the middle of it, use a crooked rod of iron or iron, to put a splint in place, and they should be large and small according to the diseases and age of those who take them.
car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	For infants' suction cups are different from old ones, and thin ones are different from fat ones.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre:	And one should put this suction cup on the limb:
empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide;	with a wax splint or linen, and put it in the suction cup at the end of the iron rod that is in the suction cup, so that it clarifies whether the suction cup is at the bottom of the suction cup that it does not burn the hairs.
et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse;	Then place it above the member, and you should hold it above the perforation that we have said, so that when one wants to, then the suction can go in and one removes the vacuum.
et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	And take hold of the lineament as before, and repeat it often, if you have skill.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement;	In the suction that is administered in the disease of pleurisy, there is no needle or perforation, and it is not administered until it is full of sharpness, and it is placed above the member alone.
et c’est li forme:	And this is the form:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus;	Nostrils are not administered until in members where one cannot place suctions for their smallness, such as lips and gums, and similar ones.
et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans;	and when removing from a horse, such as a donkey or mule, and other similar cases;
et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren;	and the quality of the user is such that when you thrust through those that are in fresh waters without a net, then take them;
et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres;	and put them into fresh water until they are familiar and have nothing in their bellies;
et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues;	then wash them with blood and suction, then rub the limb until it is red, and put on the gut;
et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	and when they are smooth and cooked, if it is a place where a suction can be put, then put it, for this is very good.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint;	If not, then lift the limb gently, first from above, very well, and then wipe it.
et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés;	and if it is too sore after the course of the wounds, then moisten the linen cloth in cold water, and place it on, until the wound is cleansed.
et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez;	and if the wounds multiply, then place on broken glass, or salt, and similar things, until it is cleansed.
ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant;	or you place on the limb half of crushed beans, and leave them until they dry on the limb, it will stop now.
et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	and if you have more troublesome ones, take other remedies.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent;	And if the remedies do not want to take effect, rub the wound with fresh blood, or you make a needle until it enters the wound, and then place them on top, and as soon as they feel the blood, they will stick.
et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	And when you see that they are stuck, powder on a little aloe and brimstone or ash, and they will now fall off.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	This begins the book of fractures
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and it restores fractures and dislocations.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent;	Know, foolish boy, that the false miracles of this chapter were never seen in any of the old books, neither were they letters.
et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin;	and for this reason, knowledge is lacking in our land, for I found none good.
et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie;	and I know nothing, except for the knowledge gained from ancient books, which I have studied so much that I have treated it, and by experience, and by the habit of my life.
et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	and I have described to you in this chapter what is contained, and I have abbreviated it at the end, and I have clearly shown the forms of the instruments that will be brought, as I have done in these two chapters before.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	It is therefore necessary that we say or preface of this book the sums of the language and the chapters where the wise put their understanding, and dwell on the truth, so that those who are experienced find and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars;	I say that when a fracture or dislocation or twist or wound comes to any one, it is necessary for you to hasten to clean the injury on both sides, if nothing stops you, such as weakness of body, or children, or old people;
ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois;	When the joint is not very warm or too cold;
et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre;	and if the joint is not very warm or too cold; and if you drink cold water, such as cold juices, and char of quail and partridge, and do not drink any thick soups, and do not eat too much meat that fills the veins with blood, until you have no doubt of an abscess or spreading of matter to the limb;
si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	if the hairs regrow as they used to before.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken bones begin to heal, it is necessary to grind the meat that causes large swelling, or has viscosity, such as cooked wheat, and rice, and tests, and pie, and pancakes of milk, and eggs, and fish, and large wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For the grinding, it is better to do it sooner rather than later.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans;	And know that the bones of old people and the infirm cannot be well healed or joined according to their nature due to the scarcity of flesh, nor those that are too soft, such as the bones of small children;
mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant;	but do not care, reset it over the broken bone and large thick tendons that stretch and join the limb together, as much as it can bear, until it is as strong as before.
et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	and do not leave it entirely to its own devices, and because it needs to be nourished with large amounts of food, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And the fractures are diverse in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the fracture of the head is different from the fracture of the foot, and I will tell you all the ways of fracture in this chapter.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there are fractures that go around, and others in soaking, like the shape of a quill for writing.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if there is a fracture with a wound, and a fracture all in a small cut.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu;	And in every way, it should have its own intention and proper tool in the restoration, according to what memory brings to its mind.
et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main;	and it is known that the bone is broken because the joint is twisted, and open wide by default, and it is pressed by the hand.
et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure;	and when there is no twisting in his arm, and the hairs do not cause great pain, if there is no fracture;
mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	but he may still have twisting, or a wound, or a small fracture.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	It is not necessary that you move it with your hand, but place the remedies that come after this, and then gently hold it now.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne;	And if the fracture that goes in the arm is in two parts, and the two parts are dislocated, now you must put them back evenly, as well as abscesses that come.
et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez;	and if abscesses come, if he leaves no pus, until the abscesses are calmed.
puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces;	then put it back in the muscle that you can lightly and safely, and if the restoration of this is lighter than the restoration of those where he has pieces.
puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	then the strain, as it should be afterward.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main;	And if the bone is broken into pieces, then strain it with two parts, whether by hand or foot, or at your hand if it is small members, or at two strings, or with one string and at your hand.
et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor;	and put the member according to its natural shape, so that when the parts of the broken member are separated, then reset all the additions in their places at once with your hands, and guard that by your work no harmful injury or pain comes.
et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	and firmly set the two bones according to the best shapes.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien:	And if it feels good to the hand, if it seems not quite right.
si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	if it is stretched well, and not strained too much, and does not press as those who do so often cause abscesses and contractions in the limb, as we have seen many times.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere;	And when the limb is set, well restrain the bad movement that it does not move, neither while awake nor while sleeping, nor turning, nor in any other way;
et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	and watch well that the limb is so assured that it feels no pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor;	For when it feels no pain, it is not quite set, and it should be put in the best position so that it feels no pain;
et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez;	and make sure it is placed correctly, as twisting can occur when it is restored.
et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	and the quality of the broken member depends on what I tell you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	The members broken are different in smallness and in greatness and in form.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans:	For there are small members, such as fingers and toes and similar ones:
si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz;	so it is necessary to wrap them with soft, thin linen cloths.
et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe:	and those that are large, such as the thigh and leg:
si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche;	so it is necessary to wrap them with a wide, sturdy cloth, because the large limbs encompass the whole member and evenly strain all parts, so that there is no gap.
puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure;	Then lightly press the joint, three or four times according to the limb, and hold your hand a little on the entire limb, then go above the fracture and hold it less than the fracture;
et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet;	and gradually soften the limb a little and little, until you grip a large part of the sound limb, then take another limb and turn around directly above the broken limb;
puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus;	then return to the part beyond the fracture and hold it gently, neither too strongly nor too firmly, as we have said in the first part above;
puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	Then place between the lips of linen or cloths, as long as they are even, then tie all together with a bandage, and then put your well-made stitches above, if there is no abscess or swelling.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors;	And if there is swelling or an abscess, put something soothing on the abscess and that which opens the swelling, and leave it like that for some time.
puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	Then strain above your stitches, and they should be half of a wide strip, or of bark that is properly cut, or of palm fronds, and they should be according to this shape:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres;	but the stake that one puts across the fracture should be slightly larger and wider than the others.
et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor;	and it should also be as long as needed for the limb, whether small or large.
puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure;	then pull across the stakes as you did in the first chapter, then tie it evenly with a thread, just like in the first chapter over the fracture.
plus estroit est ensus, adés moins;	the tighter it is pulled, the less there is.
et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol;	and it should be that the thread is of medium thickness, neither too thick nor too thin, and made of flax.
car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	for if the thread is thick, as I have seen in some works of fools who make cords from linen that are too thickly twisted, and this is great error, because the band cannot be even if it is too thin, and it should only be that there is less than a finger's breadth between each stake.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the hairs are pricked by the thorns after straightening them in their natural position, then soak them in linen or some other clean cloth, so they do not become inflamed.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is with the bone fractured, and the bones are broken, I will tell you the treatment afterwards.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And do not strain all the broken limbs at once on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant;	For when the members are large, one should not put bandages immediately, but after five days or seven, or more according to your safety from abscess, constantly watching.
et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion:	and now the manner of ancient plasters to restore fractures, dislocations, and twists:
et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	and you take flour that is kept in the walls of the mill, and knead it with abundant water, and put this mixture, not too clear or too thick, and use it, and this is the common method of the plaster restoring fractures to many positions, and especially to women and small children, because it is neither too hard nor too soft.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion:	Another way of applying plasters to heal fractures, dislocations, and twists:
pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana X З.;	Take equal parts of aloe, dandelion, and nail polish, and add 10 grams of Arabic gum and myrrh.
mirre et aloes, ana V З.;	myrrh and aloes, 5 grams each;
alechil VIIII З.;	aloe, 8 grams;
et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef;	and grind them into powder, and mix with enough honey;
se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	if the patient's complexion is hot, then use this plaster, as it is of good composition, and quickly heals broken bones, and is beneficial to many people.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion:	Another method of splinting that is useful for sprains:
pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.;	Take a piece of cloth and soak it in warm water, then apply it to the affected area.
mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.;	Mix equal parts of honey and aloe, then apply it to the affected area.
acaice VI З.;	Apply a cold compress to the affected area.
bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Boil equal parts of armagnac and honey, then grind them well and mix with either vinegar or a lot of egg yolk, and administer it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure:	Another method of splinting for joints and bones that have been dislocated from their sockets, to relieve pain and promote healing, and to prevent further injury.
pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	Take a new piece of cloth, soak it in warm oil, and place it on the affected area.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	This plaster does not heal immediately, but it is good for alleviating abscess pain, and properly relieves the pain.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez:	Another method to treat broken bones:
pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Take dried fig leaves and earth partridge leaves, grind them together, and make a poultice.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	Another method of healing a broken bone and to ease the remaining pus of an abscess.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie;	Take valerian root, chamomile, flowers of violets, and flour of each one in equal parts.
et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Grind and mix with wine, and if the limb is hot, apply the mixture with wet or dry coriander seed.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	Another method of healing more than the first, when an abscess is difficult to restore the member.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie;	Take valerian root, linseed, balm, mallow, and willow bark, and flowers of violets and chamomile, each in equal parts.
et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	And bruise, and cook with sharp salt, or sweet salt, or with wine, according to the heat of the limb, and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Hippocrates said in his book that one should not put on a broken limb to restore it, except for a mixture of wax and oil, and nothing else, and he said that it should be between two things, neither too soft nor too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems that Galen said that one should put on a broken limb to restore it, things dry and slightly warm, such as myrrh and aloes and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor:	Another way to treat injury and pain:
pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Take the hooves and feathers of birds, or pen-feathers, and sage, and silk equally, and bruise them, and make a poultice and apply it to the wound.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu;	And then remove it after a while, and be careful that the pain is not gone, nor has the bone of its limb become soft.
si ne lou deslie par mains jors.	If not, remove it by hand later.
Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant;	And if pain comes to the limb, or itching, feeling of restlessness or swelling, then you hurry, and remove it, and take off the bandage now.
et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor;	and take light bandage, and wet sponge from the sea, and soak in vinegar, and raise the limb, until the itching stops, and let the pain be relieved.
puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut;	then let the limb rest for an hour, then put on dry linen, moisten with vinegar or rose oil, and tie with a bandage, until you are sure of no abscess.
et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant;	and reduce the inflammation of the limb, and let the pain be removed, then start again with the thin bandage, and a little plaster, and do not strain it too much as before.
et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	and carefully as they are clean.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that the abscess is filled with pus and redness and pain and swelling, and you have the skill of plasters and liniments, then restart it as you did before.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII;	And if it does not come to the limb of what we have said within three days or four or five or seven;
et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus;	and never leave it for twenty days, as we see, until the fractured part becomes straight, and approaches the proper position of the bone above;
adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant;	then the splint is applied more than before, and the flesh increases in size, as I have said before;
et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir;	and if you see the limb becoming too dry, there can be no healing;
arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure;	then apply a hot, wet cloth every time you remove the splint, and this should be done each day, and release the bandage a little;
par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement:	For this work, therefore, cuts the broken bones in the limb, and quickly heals what the foolish people do, which twist the limb painfully:
c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	It is evil, and this work is not worthy of praise, and I see no other thing than pain and doing it correctly.
des diverses manieres de brisure	of various methods of breaking
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees;	Many kinds of fractures are, and various shapes, and the causes are distinguished;
car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust;	because it has fractures that are made by the percussion of a sword, and the collarbone is broken completely through the bone, which is outside the bone, as it is cut or broken;
et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	and for this reason, it is called by this name of fracture "haiture".
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»;	Where the spear pierces the bone from above, and is called by this name of fracture "absolute".
et est li plaie de ces II brisures grans ou petite.	and is the wound of these two fractures great or small.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is percussion from above, or cutting or from the neck of the spear, or to fall on the stone, or other similar things.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if he has a broken bone that approaches the skin, which is outside the bone, or above the bone, and this wound is large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»;	And if there is a wound that is set in the bone as thin as a hair, and is the fracture small, and for this reason, it is called by this name of fracture "capillary".
et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres;	And if the wound that is made by being pierced by an arrow, or by falling, or by a similar thing, and makes the piece of the bone enter below, and is the threads like when they hammer nails into the kitchen ceiling when they hammer above.
si entre li piere dedens.	if between the stones inside.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant;	And they have more in those who have or wet bones, as in children.
et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles;	And they have all these ways of fracture that small pieces are removed as these.
et je em parlerai en son leu.	And I will speak about it in its place.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And we know all ways of breaking by pulling on them, and by the inspection of tented parts, and by the rotten flesh that is above.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The appearance of the hairy part is known because when the bone is exposed and rubbed with it, if there is an open black break.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of the break, be careful of accidents of evil, and if you see no bad accident, such as vomiting of bile, and loss of understanding, and extension, and paleness, and fever ague, and the eyes to issue forth and redden, and other similar things in more dispositions, then it cannot be healed without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see any obvious injury, and you hope for recovery, then begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the fracture comes first to you, and it is in the bone, then you must remove the bone before the fourteenth day or you will not be able to.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is in the soft tissue, then you must remove the bone before the seventh day, provided that the skin over the bone is not rotten, and the injuries that we have mentioned occur.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi:	And if the fracture of the bone comes just to the skin that covers the brain, then you must remove the broken part in this way:
et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset;	and it is that you hold the head of the painful wound, and reveal under the bone in all ways that you can, and above the shape of the wound as soft as you can, and if blood comes to discover the bone, or abscess, help with what is necessary, and it is that you fill the place with moist linen cloths in rose oil.
et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc;	and let the wound rest until the abscesses are calm, and be sure of the cessation of bleeding;
puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige:	then begin around the bone to cut, and it is done according to the two methods of surgery:
l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	one method is that you cut at a narrow incision in front, and it is this form:
Et puis i boute I autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	Then make another cut larger than the first one.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde;	and the second method is that you have many different incisions, some narrow and others wide, and they are pointed and made of iron outward;
et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	and in working lightly, that you do not wound the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou I cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os;	And if the tooth is very hard and firm, it is necessary that you first drill around it, as long as you have tools with tapers, not before it passes through the bone, and it should have above the point a margin or a circle, which does not allow the point to pass beyond the bone;
et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test;	and you should have several, so that each one fits in its place of the bone's spine, so that you have tools for all teeth;
et c’est li forme des III manieres de tareres:	and this is the form of the three kinds of drills:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes I tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez;	The quality for drilling around the bone is that you place the drill on the bone, and turn it to your right until you feel that the bone is drilled through;
puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures;	then apply the sharp object on the other side a little later, and so do everything around, then carefully cut the space between the bones that is between the joints, and do it more subtly than you can, and lightly, as we have said, until you remove the bone to your hand, or to any of the tools you have such as forceps, pincers.
et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	and be careful not to touch the brain or the spinal cord.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire;	And when you have pierced and removed the bone, it is advisable to open the space that remains of the bone to all other tools similar to a scalpel, but it is necessary that it be more tenacious and more subtle than the other scalpel.
et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens;	And if he does not remove any of the small bones or scales, gently remove them with the instruments.
puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	Then treat the wound with bandages and ointments that we have mentioned.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus;	And the other method of work is as follows, which the Gauls mention, which is safer;
et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	and the loan is very strong, and that is its word.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is first necessary that you remove a part of the bone where the break is open, so that when you have exposed that part, you can place the lens shape of this eyelid, which is why it is shaped like this:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os;	And do not cut a small piece, and it is the party age in two parts, so that the cutters are towards the bone;
puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz;	then hold a small hammer above, so that you gently cut the bone all around, and be careful of the thread that is outside;
s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	If it is against the bone, then gently, because one can harm it by force, and without fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the break in the bone does not pierce through the skin, and the bone is broken only from above, and there are small pieces, then it is necessary to remove those sharpness, and to scrape off the scales with the fine razor that you should have various quantities of, to manage each limb in the most convenient way, according to the work and the shape of the break.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If before large razors, and then more subtle ones, and do not stop doing this until it is well.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement;	In each of the other haircuts and delicate cuts, it is necessary to adjust according to its position.
et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	And this is something that cannot be answered by him who has put his study in this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie;	And if the wound is exposed, then it is necessary to apply a piece of linen cloth according to the size of the wound, and rub it with rose oil, and place it on the wound.
puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil;	Then take another piece of cloth doubled in two or three, and rub it with wine and rose oil, and place it on the first cloth.
et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement;	and do it more gently than you can, so as not to wound the sciatic nerve, then administer by above and another limb, and do not strain it until it stains the wound only.
et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses;	and let it stay there for one or two days until the abscess is soothed, then remove it, and administer medicines such as lily roots, flour of mastich, frankincense powder, aristolochia, and similar things;
et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication;	and of these things make a powder, and put on the wound, and administer common medicines without bitterness.
et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice;	And ensure that the wound is clean, so do not leave any dirt on it, nor allow any pus to gather, for when pus gathers on the brain's surface, it causes great harm.
car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	for when one places a sharp object on the wound, do not pull it out from above.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	If no accidents occur, as we have said, then it is doubtful without doubt.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac;	And if there is no other remedy available except the one placed on the wound, then it is necessary to apply a piece of cloth soaked in honey, three parts of rose oil, and one part of gauze, and place it on the wound.
puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then the care of various cures that are suitable, until they are healed.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les II parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont II os;	That sometimes both parts of the jawbone above are broken, or one by itself, because they are two bones.
et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	And that one is cartilaginous and does not break easily, if it does not twist or dislocate, and then it heals.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil;	And if one of the two parts is broken, then you must bend your little finger or thumb into the jawbone, and put the break inside your index finger, and at the pouch by default, until the jaw regains its natural shape.
et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	and do this carefully, and ensure that the hairs do not feel pain from your work.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the broken part is in the part above the nail, and cannot reach the finger, then it is necessary that you place it at the top of a small bone.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues;	And if the fracture is of two parts, then make another, and hurry to restore the first one, if you can.
se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	If not, after the seventh or eighth day, when the abscesses have subsided, then apply a head bandage of linen cloths to the affected area, if the fracture is in one part.
Ou tu boutes I autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est;	Or you apply another on the other side, where the fracture is.
et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	and they should be thick enough to fill the gaps in the skull.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	And no one said how to boil the tents in water, and to kill each day.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin;	It does not seem to me that this is good, but it is necessary that they be pounded in the making of an ointment from egg yolk and powdered linseed.
puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	Then leave the tent, until the bones are iron and the cartilages hardened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a I souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi;	And never use feathers or goose down in place of tents, and if the patient has a headache, wrap it around, and hold the breaker, and blow the pains through.
or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	Or do what you have seen.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en I poc de dyaquilon.	And if an abscess comes to the nose while you are working, put a piece of cotton or a cotton swab in rose oil or a drop of iodine.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis;	And if there are no boils, put on plaster made of senna flour, and powdered frankincense, mixed with an ointment from egg yolk, then put on light bandages, and do not bind too tightly.
et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu;	And if the bone of the nose is broken into small pieces, and it is broken into smaller pieces, then extract them with appropriate tools, then cut off the fracture, and the cure of things in jarring char, and suture, as emplastres and ointments suitable for it.
et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if there is no wound in the nose, then the cure of tents, and put on bandages until it is healed.
de la routure de la mandibule	of the fracture of the jaw
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jaw is fractured without an open wound, and the break is not complete but only partially, and it is not broken in two pieces, but rather bent inside, if one knows this clearly.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide;	It is necessary, if the fracture is in the right part, that you bite your index finger into the wound;
et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	and if the fracture is in the left jaw, then bite your index finger of the right hand, and bite the fracture lightly inside, and press it with the other hand by default, and put even.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en II, si covient que tu aministres extension de II pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the break in the jaw is displaced in two pieces, it is necessary that you administer traction of two parts until it is even.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus I drapel double;	And if movements of the teeth occur, or fracture, then strain them with a gold or silver or silk thread, then place on the broken jawbone, and place over it a double cloth.
et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And place over it a great well-made pad or a piece of evenly cut leather, long and wide according to the jawbone, and tie it to the muzzle so you can, and instruct the patient to rest, and give him light food.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet;	And if you see that the shape changes, then release the animal from the trap, and then put it back in place what is changing.
et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote;	And apply plaster on it, with enough flour or semolina of wheat after you have removed the broken jawbone.
et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez;	and place the lighter plaster on top of it, and if the plasters stick together, do not change the position of the injury, let it remain until it is healed.
maintes fois est sanez en III semainnes.	often heals in three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if abscesses come, as we have said many times, apply what we have advised.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee;	And if there is a fracture and wound together, stitch no part of the bone that is broken;
si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	so subtly from the bone as to avoid instruments of evil.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, enlarge it as needed by fire.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus I des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have removed all these pieces, and there is none left, clean the wound if it is wide, and apply uncovenable plasters to that end, to stop bleeding until they are healed.
de la forcele	of the elbow
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc III manieres:	The shoulder is broken more than once in front and behind, and the fracture is in three ways:
ou elle est brisie et desevree en II, et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer;	or it is broken and disjointed in two, and there are pieces, and it is the least difficult to restore;
ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	where there has been a break with wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies II ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie;	And the work if it is regarding the break with wound, that you have two assistants, one of whom feels the force of the broken bone;
et li autres estende lou col vers la partie;	and the other extends the neck towards the affected part;
puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	then set the break to your two, so that it is as it should be, and there is no appearance or movement.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit;	And if you have to extend further, put a round, padded shoulder cushion of cloth or other material, and it should be large according to your need;
et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	and hold the shoulder steady, and hold the bone in your hand, so that you can set the fracture properly, as it should be.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule I oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot pull the head of the shoulder downwards, because it comes out in front, then it is necessary that the painful parts be gently moved up and down over their place, and place something under the shoulder, a moderately sized earthenware jar, and push up the shoulder until the bone of the shoulder is raised.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus;	And then apply your fingers to the fracture, and if you feel any movement, it is necessary that you cut through it.
et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as;	and carefully trim the pieces, and if the bone cannot be joined for any reason, then use one of the instruments you have.
mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	but do not use this instrument on the shoulder to guard against infection:
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre;	and it resembles a spoon, and is not very sharp, and should be as wide as necessary, according to the size of the bone and the skill of the workman.
et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os;	And say "Two shoulder blades, one broad and the other narrow, as you see, and like the edge of the wound that you made when you treated the bones;
et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	And when you are sure of the abscess, if the wound is large, and if the edge is small, or if you doubt the abscess, use the wound with cloths and tents according to its size.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille I drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if an abscess comes, if it is heated, soak the cloth in rose oil and vinegar and wine, and put it on.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier;	The straining of the bone, when it is painful and when it is cut, is that you place above the bone the plaster of the mill powder and some salt, and put light dressings on it, and put a needle outside the wound, if you have the skill;
puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre;	Then take a very large bandage from the palm of your hand in width, then put it double over the wound and the plaster;
puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant;	then take a thin strip of three fingers in width and length, and wrap it around that bandage, so that the head of the bandage is hanging down;
et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide;	and put the strip across the broken bone, and wrap the bandage over the neck, and unbind the healthy side, and unbind the injured side;
et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint;	and reset each part, and when you see that the bandage is holding the broken bone evenly, and you see clearly that the strip does not move over the broken bone, then rewrap it every day, and when the bandages are loosened, then restrain them;
et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut;	Let the misaligned limb lie on its back, and place a small pebble under the joint when it is asleep to help lift the dislocation.
si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors;	If the fracture of the humerus is aligned by the alignment of the shoulder, or if you bind the arm to the neck, and the dislocation does not return within 20 days.
puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez;	Then restart the splint if you see that there is still a need, and hold it in place until it is fully restored.
et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	It is restored within 28 days, and less for some people.
de la brisure de l’espaule	of the shoulder fracture
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement;	It rarely happens that the shoulder breaks or is dislocated from its place, and it only occurs when it is touched.
si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	if the shoulder bone according to the figure of the break, and the joint is reset according to its natural form, in all ways that you can.
puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double;	then put on the limb powder from the mill with plenty of egg, and light bandages, and put it on a double cloth.
puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment;	then put on a wide and thin splint, a little larger than the shoulder, and see that the splint does not touch any part of the shoulder, so use the hair of bandages of linen, so that the splint is evenly soaked.
et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor;	and then restrain it with a strong, tight bandage, so that the dislocated joint does not move from its place, and look at each joint every day.
et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit;	and whenever it is dislocated again, restrain and straighten it if it is out of its place, and press the painful parts against its side.
et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en XXV.	and the shoulder is restored in 20 or 25 days.
Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	And when these numbers are completed, if it dislocates again, and be careful, for it is not bones that move lightly.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a piece of the bone is sticking out before, and not removed immediately, then cutting it off, and the bone, and do what we have said in the breaking of the mallet to relieve an abscess.
de la brisure dou pis	of the breaking of the hammer
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc;	The bone is never broken in the middle, but this rarely happens.
mais il brise sovent au defuer.	but it often breaks again.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	And when it is broken in the middle, it leans to one side, and the patient feels great pain, and there is no relief, and everything, and possibly vomiting blood, and the jaw is open in the broken bone, and the patient feels very ill.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met I cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des II costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient;	And the restoration is that the misaligned bones are often pushed back into place above their own position, and the shoulder is placed between the shoulder blades, then the shoulders are pressed, and the ribs of the two ribcages are held in your hands, and subtly put back into all the positions you can, until the shape of the bone is as it should be;
puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en I drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve;	then put plasters and wet cloths above the broken bone of salt, or another light one, and wrap it in a bandage, and tie it to the broken bone, so that it does not move;
et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint;	And turn the joint roundly to the back, and steadily press, and warm every hour the book, and if it dislocates again, press.
et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures;	And if it is necessary to remove, for corrosion or for pruritus that comes to the limb, or pain or abscess, then hurry and remove it, and apply the ointment, and address what has come from methods of treatment.
puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then reset the ointment, and press until it is healed.
de la brisure des costes	of rib fractures
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses;	Know that the breaker of ribs comes only in the large ones after the back, and at the top inside, and does not break unless because they are brittle.
et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	and the smell is not good at the incision.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And the treatment is that you set the fracture as it should be.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	Then apply the plaster and splint it with a splint, if you know how to do so.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile;	And if the ribs are broken and displaced inward, the pain is very great, and pointed, like that of tears, because the bones pierce the flesh.
et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And there is a lot of blood, and everything is swollen, and there is great pain, and the old ones put great effort into it.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And for those who say it is necessary to administer foods that swell the stomach, to push the broken bone out of place.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not make this mistake, unless there is no pus if it has not come.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if it has come, then cleanse it.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison;	And they said none of those who put suction cups on the limb, to draw out evil, and that is similar to reason.
toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	However, doubt and because the suction cup does not draw out the excess from the limb due to its weakness.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And they said that no one should cover the limb with linen dipped in hot oil, and put tents between the ribs to even out the lung around it, then treat the care of pleurisy, food, and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac;	And if the pain is great that he cannot bear it due to the bone that does not support it, and there is doubt, then you must cut above the broken rib on the side, and you must place a remedy to protect the wound.
et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then you must drill the bone, and gently pull it out, and then sew the two lips of the wound, if it is large, and treat it with plasters until it is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu;	And if abscesses come from the feet, then place moistened linen cloths on red oil, and put on the limb.
et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	et cure while the limb that is necessary for an abscess, and let it lie flat on its side or as it should be, until it is healed.
de la brisure dou col	of the broken neck
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie;	No time comes when the fractured bone of the neck breaks, and rarely does it rain;
et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	and also in the spine of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	And when this happens to anyone, and you want to know if they will be healthy or not, if you see their hands softened and swollen and dead, and they cannot move or extend them, and when you touch them with a needle, they do not feel it.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	It is often deadly in many conditions, and if they move and feel well when you press on them, but not when you do not, it means that the joint of the bone is saved, and the pains are healed, if they are treated.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit;	And if similar things come to the spine of the back, and you want to know if it is healed or not, take notice if the feet are soft, and if the accidents that are in hand are as they should be, and on the back there is a sensation of emptiness and evacuation without volition;
et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	And when placed on their back, they involuntarily expel feces.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	And when it is laid on its back and it wants to sit up, it cannot.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz:	It is deadly:
si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	If not treated properly.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this accident does not come to it, then the thing is less serious.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez;	And the treatment is to reward if there is an abscess that is very painful, and put oil of rose or chicken grease on it, until it is soothed.
puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer;	Then apply one of the comforting and drying plasters, and bandage it with a bandage, and command the patient to rest.
et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And do not sleep on that side where he feels the pain, until he is healed.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur;	And if any bone becomes dry, it is necessary to cover it with oil.
et oste l’os, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And then crush the bone, then bring together the two edges of the wound, if it is large, at a seam, then apply the healing ointment with charcoal, until it is healed.
et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier;	And if the bone fracture is called "the key of the knee", then take your fist with your right hand and place it evenly on the other hand to your power, then apply the plaster and the splint, if you have skill.
puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	Then strap it, and if there is a dry bone, then crush it and the bone, and heal the wound until it is healed.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	of the fracture of the ribs in the back
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief;	It rarely happens that the ribs of the back are broken, and if it does, it is not due to a slight decrease in the neck.
et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	And making it long, and inclining to the side, and coming to the bone, causing pain, swelling, and inflammation where it is broken.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure;	And the restoration is such that you extend your hand over, as high as the fractured part.
et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li;	And saws off what is broken and its shape.
et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And if the break is only at the head, then put it back in place until it is in its natural shape.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the fracture is long, or it inclines inward, then make the patient lie on their back until the healing of this fracture is complete.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve;	And when you have set it even, place the ointment on top, then place a splint of wood or cloth, and hold the broken part still so it does not move.
et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	and apply pressure to the sides until the bone is even.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And instruct the patient to sleep on their side or on their back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit;	And if an abscess forms and comes, do not touch it until the abscess is calmed down, and then follow what we have previously said.
et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident;	and then return to the resetting, and hold it as it should be, if there is no bad accident.
et c’est li maniere.	And that is the way.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	of the shoulder dislocation
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des II manieres:	The assistants are what is between the neck and the top of the shoulder, and if it is broken, one should restore it according to one of the two methods:
dont l’une est que tu pren I fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	one is that you take a piece of gristle, in this form:
Et lie as II chiés II liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus I siege;	and tie the two ends to the two joints, and let them hang up high, and cut off the evil above the seat;
puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval;	then pour the broken arm over the stump, until it comes to ease, and has in its midst a piece of wood, then let it hang over any heavy thing or the assistant extends it down;
puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	Then place the broken bones evenly in the hands together, until the broken bone returns as it should.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a II ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout I liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And the other method is that one should prick the hairs above their temple, and then hold the patient's hand on their collarbone, then command two ministers to have one tug on the part that is above the broken bone at their hands, and the other tug outside of everything, and stretch each one to their part.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	And if you see that the extraction is too far, then hold the patient's limb outside of everything, and above the broken bone, and stretch each one of the ministers to their part.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure;	And if the broken bone is near the top of the shoulder, it is necessary to place the middle bone away from the shoulder, and the other towards the back, away from the broken bone;
et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute;	And similarly, if the broken bone is towards the back, it is necessary to place the middle bone gently, with effort, until the broken bone is even on the shoulder, and on the back;
puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	Then place the break evenly, as it should be, and hold it still, if there are no complications.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a VII jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez;	And if an abscess comes, do not hold it for less than seven days, and put milk and red oil on it until the abscess is soothed.
puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein;	then hold it, and the way to hold it is that you put the plaster on the broken part, then bring the arm up with the shoulder joint, and put your hand on the shoulder or on the chest.
et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	and put the bandage, and hold it with the shoulder joint, and on the arm, so that the arm is in its place, unless something prevents it, or if the bone does not move.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele I doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure III dois de chescune part;	And if you doubt that the bone does not move, use splints, and place a wider and stronger splint on the fracture, and have two inches of space between each splint, and let each splint be so large that it passes three fingers on each side.
puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	Then strain against the splints, as I said at the beginning of the chapter, more strongly and less in pulling them away.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit;	And if you see the position of the splints and the straining, as we have said in the chapter where you restore the broken member, and you doubt the abscess is healed, leave it to be tied after seven days, as we have said.
puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	then examine every three days the joint that itches and does not come to the skin, or the swelling cannot come to the limb because it is too tight.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	If as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac;	And if no such accidents come, then wait for three days or more, and let the pain lie on his back, and have his hands on his stomach;
et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens;	and put a bandage of flax evenly on the dislocation, and examine every hour of the day or night, that the appearance of the limb does not move, or the joints are not softened;
si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz;	if the pain increases by the power of medicine, and the meat that we have put before, in such a way that the meat is at the first subtle;
et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	When he begins to recover, if he is large.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout;	And it is customary that the shoulder and leg should be reset in 10 days after all.
et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	And then you must apply ointments and medicines to the limb to promote healing.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	If its structure is ugly and swollen, it may take 1 month or 2 months to reset.
de la brisure du bras	of the break of the arm
Li bras est compos de II os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet;	The arm is composed of two bones, called the "humerus" and radius, one of which is smaller and is the one that forms the elbow.
et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi;	And the other is larger and is the one that is outside, next to the small one.
par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	Perhaps the large bone is broken alone, or the small one, and perhaps both together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations;	When the small bones are broken, the restoration is light, and the healing.
et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	And when the large bones are broken, the healing is poor, and more painful than when they are broken together.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	If it is only the small bones that are broken, then it should be slightly extended and aligned.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort;	And if it is the large bone, then it must be stretched more forcefully;
et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor;	and extend it over the cushion, and tuck the palm of the hand higher than the others, and the small fingers lower than the others, and let the pains cross each other over themselves, and the cushion in front of him higher, so that the pains suffer no labor.
puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	then extend the assistants one arm to the part below their hand, or to their elbow, and other assistants to the other above.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And then he puts the mirror evenly, according to its best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if it breaks into pieces, put each in its place, and if there is no way to hold the bone together, and you cannot restore it to its place, then do as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler;	And if with the bleeder, I have spoken of it in the chapter alone;
si pren la cure.	if take care.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz;	And if in the beginning of restoration there are abscesses, then use the cloth of cerate made of red oil and white wax, which is not too hard or too soft;
et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	and tie the cloth gently, until the abscesses are soothed.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres;	And then remove the cerate, and put the poultice of flour from the mill with plenty of honey, then put the stars, and let the star of the bleeder stick more outside, and a little wider than the others;
et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions:	and it should have six or more arms in many positions:
soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II;	whether the breaker is in one of the bones, or in two:
et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre;	and held above the breaker more than on the other side, and always less in moving away, as I said at the beginning of this chapter:
et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres;	and let the cloths that are above the breaker be soft and moist, and not too hard or sharp:
et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	and let the thread that it is held with be of linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	Reward the member and the limb after some days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez;	And if any evil accident comes to the member, such as itching that comes to the member, then you must raise the member in hot water, until those itching are appeased:
et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	and allow the limb to remain at ease.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	Then restart the restriction, and if the limb is broken and the bones are dislocated, and similar things, then advise.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses I poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if the bruises cannot come to the limb, because it is too tight, then you must soften it a little, and leave it like that for some days, until the bruises have healed, and then restrict.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	If none of these things we have said come to pass, then do not delay in seeking help for up to 20 days.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos;	or apply it around, then place his hands on his neck, and make his neck even, and avoid movement and jarring, and sleep on his back;
et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	and that this fracture is restored in thirty days or thirty-five, and perhaps in twenty days, according to the compositions and constitutions of its virtues.
de la brisure de la main	of the broken hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	Wait until the back of the hand and as we have said before, there are few fractures, and it does not come but many times.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement;	And when the bone of the hand is broken or crushed, it is necessary that the hairs be cut straight and evenly in front of him.
puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint;	then place his hand on the extended palm, and extend the bones broken by the minister, and put them evenly in their places until they are well joined.
et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu;	and apply the plaster and bandages, if there are no abscesses, then put an estele according to the amount of the limb;
et soit envoloupee en I drapeil de lin.	and let it be wrapped in a linen cloth.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie;	And if the fracture is at the parched ends within the sole of the foot, then make a ball of cloth, and instruct the patient to press it against their broken foot.
et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	Then strain it with a long cloth, and let the estele of cow's udder be as large as the palm of the hand, and strain it as needed.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the fracture is in the forearm, it is necessary to place one splint above and another below the hand, so that the hand is open and straight, then bind it completely around the arm, and stitch the ligament between the two.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient;	And if the fracture comes to any of the other fingers, if it is the thumb, then put it evenly, as needed.
et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve;	and the restriction with the plant, and if you see that put a straight small stake to lift the broken part, and it does not move.
et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés;	and if the broken part is like other joints, such as the index or another, then put it even, and tie it with the healthy joint that is next.
ou tu les lie toz en I tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet;	or you tie them all together, as much as possible, or you put on a stake, like a splint.
et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	and take care in the restoration and in the positioning of abscesses, and support what comes to it, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	of the broken rib
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier;	The jaws of the mouth are often broken, and well seen when it returns in front and behind.
et li restauration si est c’on lie I liien desus la briseure, et I autre desoz.	and the restoration is when one joint is placed above the broken part, and the other below.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment;	And the bones are set back into place, then each minister attaches their joint to its equal part evenly.
et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	and this is when the break is placed in the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	And if the break is close to the root of the rib cage, then one of the ribs should be on top of the other, and the other ribs outside the broken part.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval;	And if it is near the hip, and then the joints below the hip are stretched downwards.
puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	then place the bone equally in both hands, as it is according to its natural shape, and then apply the plaster and bandage, and if there are no complications, it will heal.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure;	And if there is an abscess, let it calm down first, then return to your work and care.
li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	The leech is made in this way.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus;	It is necessary to wrap the broken bone in a bandage doubled over two or three times, and leave the excess, then bend the leg until the toes reach the root of the heel, and insert a long thread between the calf and the leg, below the knee joint, and bring the end of the thread to the top.
puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe;	Then bend over the leg and the calf, then place the bandage on the broken bone, and place a splint on the bone of the leg.
puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure;	Then place the patient's leg between soft cloths to maintain equal traction, then begin to twist about three or four times over the fractured bone.
et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint;	And as you go higher than the fracture, and lessen the traction.
puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet;	Then bring the two ends of the rope that you have tied between the leg and the thigh, and tie three knots on top, then return to the other end of the rope, until you come over the knee.
et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	And maintain the traction, so that it does not move from its place, then leave it thus, then when there is no infection or swelling or any other sign.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois;	And if it has happened, then dislocate, and straighten what comes, as we have said many times.
et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet;	and if there are pieces of bone that can be felt, then try to put them back if possible.
et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer;	and if it cannot be put back, then cut the limb and draw out the bone.
et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	and treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras;	And never break the ribs in such a way that they are put back, as in the dislocation and shoulder.
toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	Nevertheless, in this restoration made thus, it does not hurt the patient.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en L jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And it is said that the bone is restored at different times, according to the variety of constitutions.
de la ruelle dou genoil	of the way of the gentleman
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	It is said that in the way of the gentleman, there is little breakage, but it often weeps.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	And if it breaks, it is only a small cut, or a puncture, and it has to all wounds, and without wound, and it feels good.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet;	And the restoration is when one puts back together what was broken to its proper place, as much as it can be assembled when it is put together.
puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant;	Then apply the poultice, and if you have skill, use a round bandage, and treat it as it should be, then warm all the arrangements that we have said in other broken things, such as abscesses and similar things.
si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And for each accident, put what it needs, until it is healed.
de la brisure de la jambe	of the broken leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»;	Be aware that in the leg there are two bones, one of which is called "non-mustelz", and the other is called "foscile".
et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	And it can break in any direction as it comes to the arm, and for this reason, the restoration is like that of the arm equally, and the work is all there. And if both bones are broken together, then the leg from all parts returns.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the small bones are broken, then it heals in front.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien;	And if the large bone is broken, then one feels great pain, and it can be seen clearly.
et torne desoz.	And it returns disjointed.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement;	Therefore, first relieve the extension, and put it back in place, and tie the tendons equally;
mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere;	but anyway, it is necessary that the broken part be straight, and there are many pieces, so that the extension is less and lighter.
et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	and the herb according to its virtue.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren II faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz;	And when you have completed your work, take four strips of cloth that encircle the leg on one side and the other, and be long from the knee to the groin on both sides.
puis envoloupe en II leus I bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien;	Then wrap the four strips of cloth above and below, and tie it in the middle as well, and at this point it will not allow the leg to bend to the right or left, and thus it is good.
et aucun i aministrent I bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie;	And no one administers the long strip of cloth down the leg, and it is made of flax, and place the leg to prevent movement, and properly made, one puts it in the break or where there is a wound.
et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident;	And move each leg daily to see if there is an abscess or other accident.
si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	if the healer is healthy.
de la brisure des os dou piet	of bone fractures
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle, there is no fracture, but of bone fractures, it never comes and it is rare, and there are no other dispositions except for a slight bruise in some cases.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus;	And if he has broken bones, and you see the bones over each other, if you put your foot on the ground like it wants to walk, then put your foot on his, where the bones are lifted, then press until they return to their place.
puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a II chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	Then put the poultice and soak above the foot, and put a small tablespoon of the remedy on the sole of the foot, then strap it to the foot evenly, then wrap bandages around it and other things you know how to do.
Et quant III jors ou IIII seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when three or four days have passed, if you relocate the joint, you will find the bones even, whether they are broken or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main;	If there are any of the two broken, restore them as we have said about the two fingers;
puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment;	then place the broken one on the length of the other, and make it a bit wider, then place the bone in the hole that I mentioned, and strain it evenly;
et s’il en i a II ou III, ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en I drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet;	and if there are two or three or more broken, place each one on the length of the other, wrapped in a piece of linen, and strain the hole from outside the bone;
et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	and make sure it is on the top of the table away from the belly of the bone, so that it heals well.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit;	And it is necessary that you do not forget the other things that I have said about other fractures, as we have mentioned.
et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	and treat each accident as it should be.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	of the fracture of the finger bone
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier;	When the jaw of a woman is broken, if the fracture is enlarged, then incline it to the side of the neck, and hold it in place from behind.
puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto;	Then fill the hollow of the jaw with cotton, and put in as much as you can.
puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto;	Then raise the woman, and slowly lift her back, and then quickly remove the cotton until it reaches the entrance of the jaw, and the bone returns with the cotton.
et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor:	When she wants to urinate, remove the cotton, and when she has finished, return it, and thus do this for seven days or so.
si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature;	If she is healed from the fracture, and if you see, take a catheter of birch, and tie a string to the handle, and fill the entire catheter with urine in its natural state.
puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens:	Then blow into the string until the catheter is empty inside.
la nature si revenra li brisure;	The natural state will return to the fracture.
puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then it should be filled with cotton and left in this way for some days until it is healed.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche;	And when the tooth of the little finger of the hand is broken, or of the woman, if it is reset as we have said in the bone of the shoulder;
et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	and these fractures are not hidden from him who puts his study and his use to it, and listens to my book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration:	For the fracture signifies many positions of the right way of resetting:
enten le donques.	therefore understand it.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge;	In the finger, when it is broken, take a goose quill and insert the finger;
puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse III jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	then wrap it with cloths, and leave it for three days or more, and it will be healed quickly.
de brisure avec plaie	of broken with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is necessary for the one who has a broken bone with a wound, even if it is large, such as the bones of the ribs or shoulder or similar, that they be cleansed immediately, so that the cleansings that we have mentioned bear witness.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound is clean, and if the wound is dressed with vitriol, if you have no other means, then begin to restore the broken bone in the same hour or the next day, before the wound becomes infected.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if the wound becomes infected, then leave the restoration until the next day, until the infection is calmed, and do not touch it on the following day or the fourth, for you will bring about bad events.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the teeth are broken and appear above the gum line, it is necessary that you gently place them in your hands, with slight extension.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a VII dois ou VIII de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie;	And if you are not able to equalize your hands with this extension tool, which is made of iron and has seven or eight inches of length, and the width is according to the amount of the wound.
et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne III ou IIII, selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure;	and because it is necessary for the mirror to take three or four, according to how much it has in each fracture treatment.
et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	and it should be round and slightly thick, so that it does not press too much on the member at your work, and it should be thin behind, and thick in the middle in front, thus:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent;	And it is called "palainche", because it should be placed on the top of the head of the visible bone.
et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	and the cup is once, as much as it can, evenly placed against the other.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And if the fracture is subtle, and the instruments cannot well take the bone, then you must cut the head of the bone until the instruments have hold.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir;	And if you cannot reset the bone as we have said, then use an appropriate instrument for this purpose, such as a saw or scissors, to your ability;
puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	then cut away what is remaining in the bone of harshness and small scratches.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	And when the bone is returned to its place, and the pain is great afterwards, advise that it not remain in its natural position.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit;	If you do this until it is in its place, then wipe off the blood with black vinegar wine, and properly if it was in this state;
et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption;	and do not place anything on the wound except for cerate or other things where there is oil, that it does not cause putrefaction and corruption;
puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure;	then administer these ointments when you have restored the bone, and leave the wound open, and cover the dressing all around, according to the size of the wound, and take care that the wound is not pressed with the break.
et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois;	and many times have done this by the foolish man, and brought the pain or death or corrosion never.
et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	and let the astringents be softer and more gentle than other wounds.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles;	And if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt whether a bad accident has not occurred, as we have said, and you relieve pain to the limb, then it does not matter to put on ointments.
mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	but around, in place of stones, hard cloths, and bind them.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And when you see after an hour or two that the bleeding has stopped, remove what you have placed on top of everything, and put healing ointment on the wound, such as quadruple antifarmacological ointment and similar.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre II fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And it is necessary to clean the limb twice a day, in the morning and in the evening, until it is sound and healthy.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And it is necessary that the limbs be aligned in such a way that the bow can move freely.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if they continue to exceed, and it cannot be sutured but remains dislocated, there are small pieces of bone, so it is necessary that you tear the wound with a tent, and remove all those unnecessary pieces that cause that pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	And if a fistula comes to the limb, or another way of corruption, then it is necessary that you treat it, according to what it says in its chapter before.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse;	And when the bone is broken and open above the member, like the bones of the thigh or shoulder, and other similar large members, do not pull it out, for many times it causes death, but let it be until it can be fixed.
par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues;	perhaps it will fall out by itself after 20 or 30 days, then treat the wound if you can.
et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	and if you cannot, leave it.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	of sudden blows that come to the suture
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre;	Many times after the healing of the broken bone, specifically when it is near the joint, and the unpleasant thing is to see the shape of the member.
et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	And by chance, cannot do their natural works.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres:	Take then, since it is fresh:
si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil;	If you administer medicines that are styptics, such as aloes, incense, and myrrh, and sarcocollis, acacia, and similar others, in such a way that you take any of these things or all together, and mix them with stypic wine or abundantly with honey or vinegar;
et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors;	and put them on the tooth in a syringe, and hold it tightly, and do not let it out in your hands afterwards;
et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee;	and then remove it, and start another one until the swelling is gone;
ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite;	and you hold steady above a flat piece of stone well made;
car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres;	for the property of stone is that it removes all swelling from above the limbs;
et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent;	and if its dislocation has already become hard like stone, and it is necessary to remove it, then the cover above, and make the excess apparent;
ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	or you cut it with any knife until it is removed, and the care until it is healed.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	a weak limb that is after the garrison
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes:	When the fracture of the bone is restored, and remains after the limbs are weak and delicate, for many reasons:
de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit;	because it was tied too tightly, and not tied as it should have been;
ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre;	For because there were too many ligaments, and it could not come to the member's movements.
ou por multitude d’arosement;	For due to the multitude of swelling.
ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre;	For due to too great movements, not in its hour.
ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	For because it has little blood in its body, so it is weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui;	And the cure is that you make the hairs lie down, and make the body tense, until the blood is not multiplied in it.
et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce;	and give it a bath, and give it joy and ease.
puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre;	Then put poultice on the member, so that the poultice attracts to the great movement, and the swelling often of sharp pain, until the movement corrects the member.
et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And return to its natural shape.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	a dislocated limb after healing
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil:	When the limbs are twisted after restoration, and the bones are broken open, and the form of the member is misshapen, nevertheless, it does not lose its original work.
si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre;	If one does not believe the people who say that one must break the member entirely in two, and many have done this in our land;
et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors;	and these works are condemned, and great harm comes from them, and perhaps the death of the patient.
toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses;	Nevertheless, if the dislocations and tortures are fresh, it is necessary that they be warmed with hot water, or mollifying herbs be boiled, such as valerian, and roots, and meadowsweet, and similar things;
et li fai I emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus;	and the physician applies a softening plaster, such as fresh lime, and takes the muscle of the shoulder, and cooks it with goose fat or castor oil, and makes a plaster on top.
ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	and takes figs fat, and grinds them with flax seed, and similar medicines that soothe the pain.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	And never is it necessary to apply continuous and prolonged pressure with wet hands on a dislocation.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And you should allow movement to the limb every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement;	And if the distortion is awakened and hardened, like stone, and there is a need to remove it with iron, so that it covers the bone, at the incision slightly subtle.
et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	and place a bandage and apply pressure in the treatment.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	This begins the book of dislocations
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation comes to none, it must now be returned to its proper place.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu;	For if it is delayed, the shoulder swells, and if by chance it is reset, it may become stiff.
por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez:	Therefore, it is not advisable to move the shoulder when it is swollen:
maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors;	many times causing pain and other injuries.
toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez;	Anyway, when it happens, if the dislocation is corrected, then let it rest until the inflammation is calmed.
puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	Then raise the member with hot water and oil, then gently reset it, and care for each member as it will heal in its place.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have ordered the chapters on the dislocations of the shoulder joint from the elbow to the fingers.
des mandibules	of the mandibles
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc II manieres:	It is rare that the mandibles are dislocated downwards, and the dislocation of both jaws occurs in two ways:
ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc;	ou they are a little bit hardened from their heads, and softened a little bit;
ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	or they are entirely dislocated, and hang downwards, and the saliva from the mouth that it cannot hold, nor can it close its mouth, and wraps its tongue with speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is small, it often returns to its place in many positions.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie;	And if it is entirely and complete, then you must reset it quickly, and do not delay;
et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars;	and in such a way that the minister wets the head of the painful part, and pushes the finger slightly from one of his hands into the root of the dislocation of the mandible within the mouth, if the dislocation is of two parts;
et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal;	and the other two fingers should be missing, for it to be even.
et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	and instruct the patient to let the jaws relax, and move them from all sides.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And the fingers push evenly until it returns to its place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les II mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement;	And if it is grinding, immediately if they are both lower jaws together, then apply hot and oily cloths, until it is slightly loosened.
ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	do not wait too long to reset it, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens;	And when they are reset evenly, and the mouth of the patient is closed to soften it, then put on moistened cloths made of a red wax and wax, then tie it lightly with soft bands.
et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules;	and let the dislocated limb rest on its back, and its joints should be between two blankets, so that it does not move to the right or left, nor does it try to move, but take light food, until the pains are removed, and the jaws are closed;
et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	and then feed him what he wants lightly, and does not try to open his mouth for eating and drinking, until the jaw is well closed and healthy.
Et se les II mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	If the two mandibles cannot be reset to their proper place within an hour and are not converted to their original position, then fevers and sweating become customary, and possibly diarrhea, and possibly vomiting of black bile.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions;	And when you see this, then cut it off, as it is fatal;
et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en VIIII jors.	and many times those who have it die in seven days.
de la forcelle	of the forceps
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The forceps cannot be used from the side without continuing to the other side and the worst part, and it is not reset once dislocated, and it is well felt.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras;	And for the restoration, it is such that the hairs lie quietly on their backs, and extend their arms;
et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra;	then press the limb firmly to your palm, and it will return;
puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint;	then place the poultice and bandage, and hold it in place;
et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer;	and the one who is behind the neck cannot evacuate;
se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit;	if not, and if it ever evacuates, then reset it as we have said;
puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez;	then place the poultice and bandage, hold it in place, and command the patient to rest until he is healed.
et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	and thus the dislocated shoulder is returned to its place, when it is separated from its joint.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	of shoulder dislocation
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres:	There are three ways in which the shoulder is not dislocated:
de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz;	because one way is that it dislocates to the side of the shoulder blade.
et li seconde est a la partie dou pis;	and the second is at the back of the shoulder.
et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc;	and sometimes dislocates above, and this happens rarely.
et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners;	and it does not dislocate behind the shoulder, and it does not dislocate inside for the nerves.
et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment;	and it often dislocates to the side of the shoulder blade, especially those who have little fat, because to these it dislocates easily.
a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	To those who have enough courage, he leaps forward, and returns forward.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And sometimes it happens to some men, a blow or a fracture, and the shoulder swells with an abscess, and they think it is dislocated by this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains;	Therefore, you must first test him until you are certain.
et adonques encomence la cure.	Then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste;	And it is known that a dislocation occurs when it is pulled down towards the shoulder, and it differs between the injured shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find between them a clear difference.
et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes;	And you will find at the top of the shoulder a hollow, and desoz from the shoulder to the toucher the top of the shoulder, as if it were an elbow;
et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens;	and cannot move his hand to his nose, nor move from any movement.
et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier;	And thus, if it is dislocated at the top, it is not hidden, for you can see it clearly in the touch.
et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	And this method of dislocation is only to be used when it is new, or if the joint is injured.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu;	And the method is that the caregiver lightly grasps the injured joint at the top, then places their fingers outside the socket, and forces the joint back into place from above.
et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz;	And the caregiver lightly grasps and extends their hand, then places it outside.
si venra hastanment.	If it comes out quickly.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude;	And if it does not come out as we have said earlier, then it is necessary to soak the injured joint in hot, acidic water.
et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree;	and the softening and soothing ointment, such as the decoction of mallow and fenugreek and melilot in vinegar, and it is applied.
puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide;	then the hairs are shaved over their back, and a cloth strip of equal length is placed under the shoulder, not too thick or too thin, then the patient's foot is placed on the strip, and the shoulder is gently lifted, and the hand of the patient is pulled.
et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval;	and other assistants shave the head of the patient, so that it does not move down.
celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere:	that shoulder is now whole, and if you see if the reset is done in this way:
et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides;	and you must make sure to have someone who is bigger than the pain.
et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar;	and should be on the side of the chest, and below the shoulder away from the pain, and lift the shoulder high, so that the pain hangs in the arm.
et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	and other assistants pull the hand towards the belly.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	If the pain is too light, it can move with anything heavy, and the dislocation returns now.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere:	And it is also reset in another way:
et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile;	and it is that you place a long stick in the ground, which the patient should also hold like a staff, and not too heavy or rough.
puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust;	then it should be placed away from the pain, but with soft cloth above, and the pain should be on the long end of the stick.
puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment;	Then extend your hand to the other side, and the joint will return to its place quickly.
et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure:	And if it does not return for all these things that we have said, then perform this treatment:
pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	Take a bandage of two arms in width and four fingers in length, which has the head bent to allow it to enter into the opening behind the shoulder, in this form:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide;	Then tie it above the head with a soft cloth that does not cause pain to the injury, then remove it from behind the shoulder.
et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus I eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part:	Extend the arm above the cloth, and tie the injury with the cloth, and the arm at the top of the hand, then place the arm over one of the blades of a pair of scissors, and extend the hand below, and let the body hang on the other side:
li jointure reva ens maintenant.	The joint is still present now.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is healed in any way, it is necessary to place a soft cloth under the shoulder, then apply the plaster evenly with powder from the mill, with incense and a little honey, over the entire shoulder and around, then remove it from under the shoulder gradually, and return the limb to the plaster, and embrace the hand at its neck, and let the hands remain thus.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost;	And it is better that he move little, until the limb is comfortable, for it will heal faster.
et puis menjuce plus aprés V jors ou VII, et le mueve;	Then move more after three or four days, and move it.
et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And if it is stiff and not made flexible, it is healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint is strong from moisture that has come, or for another reason, then it is necessary to administer cautery at three points, as it is placed in front or in the chapter of cautery.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés VII jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis;	And if you do all this, and it dislocates again after seven days, and the joint does not hold, and cannot be raised to the shoulder, then cut the nerve at the head of the shoulder is cut or stretched or softened.
et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And cut that the joint will never again fit in its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure;	The dislocation that is behind the shoulder and the buttocks, or behind, is caused by impact and stretching of the hands, and there is another remedy administered.
et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and it is treated until it is healed.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after healing the member becomes stiff and does not move, then use the hairs many times in a bath until that stiffness is relieved and returns to its original state.
de la dislocation dou coute	of the shoulder dislocation
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient;	That the joint that hurts at the point is dislocated and returns.
et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien;	And it has been dislocated from all parts, and simultaneously in front and behind, and the dislocation is not yet healed, because one can see it well and feel it well.
et desalue selonc chescune figure.	And it dislocates according to each shape.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	And when you join the dislocated shoulder with its healthy counterpart, ensure the patient can see clearly.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	For the joint is sore, and it cannot bear the weight of the arm, nor touch its shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener;	And it is necessary to reset it as soon as the pain comes, because if the pain comes and goes, it would be painful to reset.
et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier;	And by chance it cannot be reset entirely, especially when it is at the back.
si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	It is worse than other dislocations, and causes more great pain, and sometimes it kills the patient.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes II mains;	And the resetting, when it is possible to reset it, is that you extend your hand to both of yours.
et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And its arms are spread, and the hands on both sides of the shoulder, in and out, and push the joint towards its pits, or to the root of its palm, until it returns to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is in front, it returns when he doubles his hand to his hand, and holds the root of the palm which is misaligned.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension;	And if it does not return to its place, then administer strong extension.
et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension;	and it is that two ministers extend the arm, and they tie it with two ministers, so that it does not move during extension.
puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large;	then turn the arm from every part, then that you have wrapped a double long and wide cloth;
et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne;	and when the patient sees the joint at their hand, if there is any oil to soften the joint, then rub the joint gently until it returns;
et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	and when it is in place, put above the dry plaster with some wool, and let it rest, and put the arm on the back of the bad, and leave it for some time, then remove it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse;	And if the joint is firmly in its place, let it rest;
et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis;	and if you see that the joint is not healing well, restart the bandage and the limb, and let it rest thus for some time, until it is firmly placed;
puis le deslie.	then let it rest.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez;	and if it feels gritty after the resetting of the joint, and it moves, then bathe and rub it well, and press until it is relieved;
ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain;	or you put a thick woolen grease on the joint, then let it rest for a day and a night, then remove it, and make it enter into a bath;
et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain;	And when it moves, rub the joint immediately, then reset the bone, and then give a bath.
et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And thus do it twice or three times until it is healed.
et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus;	And if you see, then place warm moist flour with butter on top, and strain it.
si revenra a sa disposition.	It will return to its proper position.
li dislocation de la main	the dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures.	The joint of the hand is loose, and the return is lighter than other joints.
Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	Nevertheless, it should be returned to its place immediately, in the same manner as it is dislocated, provided that the muscles are inflamed or there is an abscess forming.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne.	And when recalling, it is that you place your hand on the affected area, and extend the minister's hand, and the patient's hand is placed evenly, so that he places his palm on the appearance of the joint, and pushes until it returns.
Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu;	In any case, you must check if it is properly reset.
adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	Then place your hand on the back of his hand on the table for extension and recalling.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	And if the dislocation is in the back of the hand, put the patient's back of their hand on the table, and the other person puts their hand over the appearance of the joint.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien.	If it returns now, it is good.
Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If not, apply soothing counter-irritants and let it rest before starting again.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte;	And if he cannot bear it, and you cannot put it back in place after some time, then the joint will remain twisted.
et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout:	and will not heal without pain until the hand is washed, and nothing can be strained at all.
adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere;	Therefore, if the nerve is cut or the artery:
si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	then there is no other remedy but to cauterize the wound with fire, and perhaps nothing else will help.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse V jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hand is in place, put the plaster we have mentioned above it, then tighten and leave it for five days, then remove and leave it like this.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it cannot be moved well, and there is no pain, then apply hot water and rub it until it is healed.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	of the dislocation of the two fingers
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre;	Never dislocate both fingers at once, never at the back of the palm or on the wrist.
adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins;	then the two shoulders, and push the dislocation with your hands until it returns, then support the head of the shoulder, and push it towards the part where it is disjointed.
et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor;	and let it rest for two days, and then put it back in place.
et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut;	and bind it with a bandage as we have said, and the dislocation of the day, and the movement, and the binding.
et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and do this often, until it is straight, and everything else do the same, if it is dislocated in the belly of the hand, and do as you have done before, until it is healed.
et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	and do the same when it is dislocated on the other side.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	back pain from the curvature of the spine
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the curvature of the spine or neck is dislocated, and there are many dislocations, there is no cure, for the patient dies from the pain.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I.	And the signs are such that the dislocation suddenly moves out of place, and it cannot be held, and often soften any limb, or both elbows or the two arms or one.
Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars;	And often the shoulder moves at an angle of four parts;
celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»:	which is called "glenohumeral" if it moves to the back.
li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance:	The cure is that you reward the glenohumeral if it has come from childhood.
si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	if there is no cure or healing until now.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit;	And those that come from falling or from blows or similar things, they said the old ways of healing with great words, which did not help much at all.
mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	but I have abbreviated it according to my intention, and have made instruments in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit;	I say that in the globules which come before the worst, there is no remedy or health.
et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis;	and also those that come directly in the second rib, and one cannot cure except for that proper one which comes to the back, as I say.
et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece;	and it is that the pain should be extended over his face in one even line, and he should have some strain away from him, so he does not bleed.
puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles;	then apply the following bandages to the head in earth-colored cloth, and the other on the feet, and tie a bandage around the leg without the painful area, and the other on the back, and hips, and knees, and ankles.
et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons;	and two ministers tie the bandages, one on the head and the other on the feet, among the two bandages.
et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	and they should be well tied, the bandage as we have said, and the minister places his palms on the spine, until it returns.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee;	And if it does not return by this treatment, take a traction table of three arms long, and turn the painful area away from it, and the painful areas should be on the side, and press the head of the table away from the painful area, then place the middle of the table on the spine.
et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu;	and place the patient's feet on the other shoulder of the table, and press well until it returns to its place.
et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	and if you see, do it to the thumb that turns to the hand.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc;	And it is that you fix two ropes at the head of the dislocated arm of a strong person, and on each side of the feet, and between each rope, outside and inside, a long span of distance.
et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent;	and let there be in each rope one knot, where the thumb is straight, and the ropes are firmly on the ground, so that they do not move.
et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet;	and between each two ropes, let there be one rope turning, around which the thumb turns, and in the two turnings, two small ropes of a long span, to turn the thumb.
et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	Then tie the ligament that is among the tendons at the top of the shoulder, and the other ligament towards the feet at the other end, and each of the ministers turns its end to all the ligament, and the masters put the spine evenly as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And when it is even, put a drying plaster with abundant sulfur on top, then the dressings, and then the splint of a tablet of three fingers in length, which preserves the shoulder from the disease and the part of the spine healthy, then tie it with a ligament, as we have said, and use the subtle bandages until they are healed.
et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant;	and if no remedy comes at the end of the illness, then one must administer medicines that are soothing and stimulating, with the advice we have given before.
et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations;	and never administer a piece of lead, and never appear in the back of the spine, and be careful that it is not a dislocation.
et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption:	and it is the bones that are open, for which we should not have any presumption:
par aventure feroit venir la mort.	by chance it would bring death.
des dislocations de la hainche	of shoulder dislocations
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures;	It should be noted that the joints of the waist and the joints of the shoulder come only from dislocations alone, and not like other joints.
et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc IIII parties:	and the hip joint is dislocated in four parts:
dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier;	forward and backward;
et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	and more inwardly than that, and slightly dislocated forward and backward.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu;	And the knowledge of its dislocation inward is such that when the misaligned leg is joined with the healthy one, it is longer and more open than the healthy ones, and the misaligned cannot double over at the fire;
et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	and it is the thighs that are inflamed with abscesses, for the reason that the patient has lain there.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of those who come after is that this accident is contrary to what has been mentioned before.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement;	And the signs of those who have it in front are that they keep their leg well aligned according to the completion;
toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	Throughout, do not double the angle of the joint with pain, and if they wish to move it, if they cannot, and retain their urine, and swell the wound, and when they go, it passes over the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of those who come after are that they cannot spread their knee, nor double over, and that leg is more twisted than the other, and the anger is softened, and they have a pain in the ribs on the side.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure;	The removal of this similar dislocation is that you reset it if it is old, and it stays according to its nature, without any treatment.
et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	And there is no need for it to have pride.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des IIII manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre;	And in this case where the dislocation is fresh, and it is of four kinds of dislocation, you must hurry to return the joint, and extend it inward and outward, and move it to the right and left.
par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	If by chance it returns, and there is no other treatment needed.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil;	And if it does not return in this manner, then you must apply forceful treatment, and extend the leg firmly at two fingers, or at one joint that is connected to the thigh.
et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe;	And other treatments extend their hand above in this manner that they push their hands away from their armpits, then squeeze a cloth connected to the belly.
et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien;	And other treatments grip the head of the joint.
et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	And they extend above and below at once, until the pain is raised from the ground once and remains hanging.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as IIII semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This method of extension is common for four similar cases, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is well.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance.	If not, then you must put care to its appearance.
Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele;	When the dislocation is in the shoulder, you must first support the misaligned arm on its sound side, then place the bone over the root of the shoulder blade, and the limb that is outside the arm, then extend the bone upwards towards the arm and the collarbone;
puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment:	then take other assistants to hold his arms, and grasp the large bone of the misaligned shoulder blade, and extend it behind him in a proper manner;
si revenra a son leu maintenant;	if it returns to its place now.
et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	and this method of dislocation is less painful than others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres;	And if you cannot hold it in this manner that we have said, then it is necessary to bind the two affected feet together with a strong silk rope above the two heels, and above the two ankles, and let the affected leg be extended two fingers more than the other.
puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc;	Then it should be hung from the head of a stick, and suspended above the ground two arms' length.
puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	Then command the surgeon to grasp the neck of the wound, and have other surgeons hang with the affected leg, who grasp the wound properly, as the joint is now healing quickly.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi;	When the dislocation is in the shoulder, if the hairs are pricked as we mentioned in the case of gout, and the joint is held steady above the misaligned leg properly, and also above the foot.
puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme;	Then apply two bandages, one at the top and the other at the foot, then fold the bandage between the thighs over the misaligned area.
et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	And place wet cloths around, so it does not become dry, then stretch each helper towards him, and the mirror put equal to his hand, the dislocation.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	If it returns, it's good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If not, place it on the flat surface, and press as we have described in the grease, and cut the hairs off the sound side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit;	And when the dislocation is in front, it is necessary to stretch the misaligned leg quickly, as I have said.
et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	and places the fingers' pain above the bad joint, then presses with the other hand, and stretches it down towards the knee.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches;	And if the dislocation is on the other side, it does not require extending the bad joint downwards, nor lifting up towards the earth, but it should be as it was when it was dislocated on the other side, as we have said of the position of the two shoulders;
et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table;	and it should be on its face, and the arm extended as we have said before, and one must press on the joint at the table;
et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz;	and it will be in place when the bad joint extends its legs, and they will be even;
adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve;	Then apply heat to the knees, and put on the ointment, and wrap it in a bandage, so that it does not move.
et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus;	And rests for three or four days, then reset it, and put on the ointment.
et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors;	And if you see that they are even, tighten the bandage as before, and leave it for three days.
puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	Then reset it, and make the limb move well, until the member is comfortable.
de la dislocation dou genoil	of the shoulder dislocation
Li genous est desaluez selonc III manieres:	The knees are dislocated in three ways:
c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier;	That is to say, from the inside and outside, and behind.
et ne desalue point devant.	and do not dislocate again before.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez;	And the signs are that you command the patient to bend their leg at the knee, and if they cannot straighten it at the knee, then they are dislocated.
et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez;	And the restoration of all is that you make the patient sit straight, extend their leg if they can, and put your back against their face, and put their foot on your feet.
puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment;	Then take their knee to your palms, and pull it between your fingers, then bend the two sides of the knee correctly.
et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement;	And other ministers extend their foot, until the knee returns to its place, and the signs are that they can straighten their leg lightly at the knee.
et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie;	and apply the plaster on it, and let the leg cool down at the thigh, and leave them together for three hours or four, then release it.
et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	and do not work the hairs too much until the limb is comfortable.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	And if the limbs are not in place, administer strong extension, as we have said in the treatment of the back, until they are healed.
de la dislocation dou talon	of the dislocated ankle
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The ankles are never bruised and never fully dislocated, neither inside nor outside.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee:	And if the signs are that the joint is dislocated, and test before to the part where it is displaced:
li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	the return is light, and one should gently extend it to his hands when it is only slightly sore.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville;	And when it is displaced too soon, then you should make the hairs straight, and hold it with one hand at the leg, above the knee;
puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut;	then draw the knife towards yourself with your right hand, and then with your left hand twice, then extend it upwards, and strike the knife forcefully against the top.
et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet;	and do this twice, as we have said, by striking and drawing the knife.
s’elle revient, c’est bien;	if it returns, it is good.
se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient;	if not, if you start the work again, it will return.
et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide;	and if it cannot return in this way, then lay the limb on its back on the ground, and insert a firm splint between its ribs, and wrap bandages around it, so that it does not bend the limb.
puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet;	then the minister applies the poultice to the back, and other ministers extend the bandage over his hands or arms, so that it covers his neck.
puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent;	then each minister stretches evenly, and the bandages are placed between the fingers to hold the fingers in place as they stretch.
puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	then the minister places the injured hand evenly on the dislocated joint, and other ministers apply a poultice to the healthy leg at the same time, and the dislocation will return quickly.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois;	And when it has reached its point, if the plaster is applied and poultice is placed over it, and the bandage forms, and the bandage is tied to the leg, and the tendons that are above the ankle behind are warded off, so that the joints are not too stretched.
puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain;	then leave it for two days or three, and if its joints are not strong enough, then strain it.
puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors;	then reset it on the third day or fourth, and let it heal for four days;
et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	and if it moves before that time, then it is certain that it will dislocate again.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if an abscess comes, it is necessary to treat it as we have said elsewhere, until it is healed.
des dois	for two
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the two are dislocated, if they should be extended evenly with work, it is a simple matter.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne;	And if the dislocation is in any part of the body, then it is necessary to sit the patient on a flat surface or table, and place your hand over the joints, then press firmly until it returns.
et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie;	and when it is even and there is no opening, then place the back of your hand on a flat surface, strain it firmly, leave it for three days, then reset it.
et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And let him rest until he is well.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	of wounds and of dislocations together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert:	When a wound comes with the dislocation, and one wants to restore it, often times the patient dies from the pain:
si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis;	If you are not presumptuous in the cure, and if you are not wise in the art and have not used it long, and if you are not merciful and slow to act, then do not be harsh:
et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit;	and at the beginning of things, apply healing remedies gently, and leave the wound in God's hands if you see no hope of recovery:
et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne;	and when you see hope, then reset the member at once as soon as the healing remedies come:
et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis;	When the member is reset, administer things that soothe abscesses and cleanse the wound, as it should be, with dry applications of ointments.
et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples;	And if the member breaks due to dislocation, and bones are broken, remove them, and do what we have said in simple diseases.
et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	And beware of entering into the path of fear, as I have said, for it is better for you according to your Creator, and because of the knowledge of your arm and your body.
