O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	Oh, most noble sons, I have completed this book that is the back of the science of medicine, and I have finished it with its fulfillment and by its explanations and declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came to me in a vision that I should complete it with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, that is to say "surgery".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of hands is guarded in our region and is subject to all sorts of things, it has perished and been lost, and there remains nothing but the small descriptions in books of the ancients that the hands have moved.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this came the error and the vanities, and the ears are closed and the knowledge is distant.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	It seems to me that I can revive it together with the order of this treatment according to the way of exposure and declaration and abbreviation; and I will bring together the forms of the irons of cautery, and other instruments of the work with the addition of declaration and preparation of it, as it is necessary.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	Because of this reason that no good masters of hands are found in our time, the art of medicine is extended.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And it is necessary for him who enters into this that he should master the science of anatomy, as Galen says, as long as he knows the judgment of the limbs, and their forms and conjunctions and separations of all, and has knowledge of the bones and nerves and sinews and the number of joints, and the movement and resting of them, and also the source of their issue.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And because Hippocrates says that with the hand alone is not much, and with work is little; and likewise in the art of surgery.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	We tell you at the beginning of this book that those who are not familiar with the things mentioned before, if they attempt to perform surgery, may make mistakes and harm people; thus I have often seen many of those who engage in this science and abandon their knowledge and experiment.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa I apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	For I saw a foolish woman who cut into an abscess of the neck of a woman, and cut the arteries of the neck; because so much blood issued out that the woman died between her hands.
Et vis I autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens III jors.	And another case where a stone was removed from an elderly man, and the stone was large; it also took with it a piece of the bladder, and died within three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I had already been called to extract it, and saw the position of the misalignment and the size of the stone, and if one were to cut it, he would die from it.
Et vis I autre mire qui prist en cure I duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi I termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And another case where a duke of our land who had broken his leg was taken in for care, and with the fracture he also had a wound; and the healer restrained the fracture above the wound with splints for a long time, and did not allow anything to drain from the wound, and thus it remained until the end; and he commanded that it not be moved, and so it remained until the leg was entirely rotten and the foot and it came to destruction.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I was called to come to him, and I hurried to come to dislocate his leg; and when I heard it dislocated, it was in place and did not feel any pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	But all the way to the corruption was already confirmed or member, and could not be healed; and the corruption did not stop moving through the member until the member was completely lost.
Et vis I autre mire qui effondra I apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And I saw another method that would crush the abscess and inflame it, and then it flared up due to its lordship's evil.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For a chancre, when it is pure of melancholic humor, one should only touch it with iron if it is not in a place where one can remove everything that is corrupted.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en II divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	Therefore, dear son, I advise you to know that the work of hands is divided into two divisions: that is, where he is in many positions; and I will show in each chapter of this book where he has fear and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	For this reason, it is important that you keep these things, so that the foolish may not speak evil of you if you take up your arms in battle, and undertake your maladies firmly and steadily, and use the best way so that by the grace of God you come to salvation and are saved; and leave behind you the dreadful diseases of grievous sickness; and take away the things that cause doubt, and have faith in yourself so that you may come from this world to the other of glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	Galen advises in some of his admonitions: "Do not take care of a seriously ill person, unless you are called a foolish miracle worker.
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	I have divided this treatment into three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapters are about fire cauteries and non-fire medical cauteries, and the chapters are ordered from the top of the head to the feet; and about the forms of instruments, and about the irons of cautery, and about everything that is necessary in the work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapters are about cutting and piercing, and about wounds, and about the extraction of arrows, and about similar things; and the chapters are ordered and about the forms of instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things; and it is ordered from the highest to the lowest, and the forms of instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Whenever we remember the work, it is necessary that I tell the quality of each aid and the harm of every kind.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the qualities of aid and harm are the longest and most subtle speech and the secrets kept; and because of this many wise men spoke about it and agreed to it, and I do not use too many words because I shorten it.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que II complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that fire cauterization helps universally in every kind of matter, whether the matter is hot and moist, or dry and moist.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In hot and dry weather, they all agreed that the fire cautery was a great help; but others said the opposite: that the fire cautery is only helpful for diseases that come from heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	For the nature of fire is hot, and should not be used to treat hot diseases by heat or dryness; and those who said the opposite claimed that the fire cautery helps greatly with hot and dry diseases that come from within people.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you compare the body of man and its moisture to the hot fire, you harden the body.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this word.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	I have found it once by experience.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And in all cases, do not interfere except those who have experienced it, and who know from long experience the chapter on cauteries, and the variety of human constitutions, and their dispositions and causes of diseases, and the remedies and space of time; for other constitutions we have no fear, specifically in cold and moist diseases.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all the symptoms gathered and agreed on the cauterization.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, my sons, that cauterization with fire is one of the secrets of healing, and greater good than cauterization with burning medicine.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For the first, it is simple, and comes only to the member that is cooked, and does not harm other members if not named.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	The burning medicines come from member to another by separating, and bring diseases of great relief to the affected member; and perhaps it is the evil that the first causes harm due to its high heat and because of the goodness of its substance, if there is not excess.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	And I found this by experiment and because of the length of service and study that I have put into the art, and it is above the truth of things; and because I do not like to speak too long, I will tell you only the secret which is hidden or fire, and the quality of the work, how it destroys diseases of the body, as the philosopher says in demonstrating; now receive it in your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, my son, that they should be done at what time the cautery is to be applied, and if they prick at their base.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And I say that the cautery is beneficial in all times, because the harm that comes from it is removed by its help; and even more so if the cautery is for necessary pain, short or long, which cannot wait until the greatest harm comes to the member.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And never think, my son, as the foolish people do; for to the disease that is healed by cautery there is no return; and they say so because it is not as they think, because cautery is only medicine that moves the complexion, and dries out the humors that are the cause of pain, and is better medicine for its swiftness of value, and for the virtue of its work and its authority.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	And it is possible that the disease comes at any time according to the nature of the humor and the body's condition and its power; and they are gathered in him the superfluities by the acquisition of foods and similar things, if not cauterize administered in him where there is little superfluity and moisture, as cauterizing with dense for the pain, and similar things, and the pain does not return much; but it has little.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And many people do not understand why cauterizing is called the last resort of medicine, and it is seen; but they do not believe that cauterizing works after medicine, but their intentions are false, and cauterizing is called the last resort of medicine because when we administer methods of treatment in any disease and they do not work, then we administer the cautery, and it is worth it.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Therefore, it is clear that cauterization is one of the main methods of medicine, not according to the intention of those who misunderstand.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	The ancients said that a cauterizing instrument of gold is more effective than iron, and they only said that it was due to the quality of gold and its high value; and they said that the heat of the cauterization does not cause harm, but I have experienced this and found that it is not true in some people; and a gold cauterizing instrument is more effective than iron, as they said.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	And therefore, when heating a gold instrument, you should not wait until it is hot due to the color of the gold, and has been cooled; and if it is overheated, they put it in the fire; and thus it has enough protection.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And because of this, we use fire cauterization that we have prepared for our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	Or I have ordered this chapter on the shoulder joint from toe to foot, because it is easier to find.
dou cautere olivaire	The oil cauterization
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	This cauterization is good for moisture and cold on the head, and it is done for two reasons: because of a disease called "soda", and because of many humors that descend from the joint to the ears, and due to many dreams and tooth pain, and throat pain, and in fact for all diseases that come from cold, such as paralysis and soda and apoplexy and similar diseases.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief III nuis ou IIII, selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The form of this cauterization is that the hairs are removed by medicinal solution, which changes the head's skin III or IV times, depending on the virtues and age and custom of the hair, so that it can bear suffering; and then restore the head of the hair.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses II eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	Then let him sit cross-legged between your hands, and place his hands on top of his knees; afterwards, put the root of your palm above the root of his nail between his two eyes; and when you see blood flowing, then heat the cauterization which is called «olivare», of which this is the form:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os I sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren I poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse III jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	And apply ink to the bone, and by gently pulling and slightly stretching your hand, then remove your hand slowly, and if you see the bone small; and if you do not see it, start the cauterization again until you see the bone as I told you; then take a little silk, and put it in awe and soft cotton inside, and put on the bone, and leave it three hours; then put moist cloth on burn; and let it be healed until the wound is healed; then treat the burn called «tetrafarmaçon» until it is healed.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And the old ones said, that the longer one remains open, the more it purges; and for this reason, it helps to heal.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And none of these said that one should weaken the cauterization so much that a part of the bone is burned away, and then replace what has been burned off from the bone, and then heal it.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme I vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And the others said that one should weaken the cauterization so much above, and to put in as much as one can take away from the bone as wide as the spindle that women put in their hair for the reason that the humors come out freely; and the wound must remain open for a long time; afterwards it must be healed and sewn.
Et ces II manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And these two methods of cauterization do not seem to me to be entirely good for everyone, unless in some men where there is a view of fear; and I think that I should leave it; because the affected ones are weakened by continuous natural solutions, as we testify in other members; and indeed when the affected one is weak by nature, and the first appearance of cauterization is more safe and mild for me, and of this use I work in the following manner.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	of the ancient pain of the main
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	When the main pain comes from chronic conditions and lasts a long time, one should use the remedies of years and pills called "cochie", and cleansing of head and eyes and plasters; and if one does the cauterization that we have already mentioned, and it does not help.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	If the patient is very sick and has a high fever, and it is not too hot; then cauterize with that fire cautery we have mentioned above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai I cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est I leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	After performing the cauterization on each of the horns to the bone, as we have mentioned before, and using the cautery called "vasselz"; and place the vacuum tubes in the holes; and raise your hand so that you do not see the bone: the pain is much greater in this cauterization than in others, and I will speak about it later; and it is necessary that the cauterization of the horns be more subtle than the one used to cauterize the middle of the head, and this is the form:
dou cautere dou chief	fire cauterization
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc II manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When in one part of the head sudden pain comes, and the disease extends to the ear, and the patient is purged by laxative medicines, and the other cures that I have mentioned in the division of diseases are done, but nothing helps: then you should cauterize according to two methods, namely with medicine or fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope I poc as II chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi XII houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi II jors ou III; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	The cauterization with medicine is that you hold a piece of iron, and scrape off the skin and the flesh and apply it to the patient as two or three times, and then make a hole in the temple where the pain is located in such a way that you can replace the piece of iron outside the skin; and when it is replaced, hold it well and tightly and leave it for twelve hours; then remove it and treat further with a bandage, and leave the wound for two or three days; then put on a cotton pad soaked in butter until it heals.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the treatment of burns until they are healed; and if you see that some medicines are causing harm, which I have written or treat medicines causing harm.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	The fire cautery is done in this way.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Heat the cautery as follows:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait I poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And it is called "closed" because the head is made in the shape of a cloth or it has a little hook, and in the middle a small appearance; and place it on the painful limb, and hold your hand and gently press the iron a little, until half of the hot surface is gone; and release your hand so that the artery does not burn, which is before, and bleed abundantly.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par III jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	After placing cotton on a string and placing it on the limb for three days; then place moistened cotton on the wound, and cure the limb from inflammation until it is healed; and if you wish to cauterize this wound with the cauterizing iron called "cultellare", apply it at all points, and be careful not to cover the artery in this wound which is not ancient.
de emigraine	of the wound
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	If you treat the wound as we have mentioned in the divisions of diseases, and it does not improve, and you see that the cauterizing iron before mentioned does not cause much pain and does not suffocate the patient, then it is necessary to extinguish the cauterizing iron called "cultellare" until it is cool; and afterwards place it on the limb for a line of half a finger's breadth, and take your hand once, and be careful not to cover the artery and that it does not come near the bone; and guard against dislocation of the jaw when moving, and the nerves should only have regard to the mouth and that spasms do not cause pain, and guard against bleeding from the artery when cut, or when it is cut, with great fear and immediately to that one who does not know, and who is not studied and experienced; and leave the work in this way; but I will tell you how to stop the bleeding when the artery is cut, and I will show you where it is mentioned in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait II coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	And if you see that this fire cautery is not sufficient for the disease, and the patient is suffering, cauterize the wound as we have said, and treat the wound until it is healed; and if you see, administer the cauteries that we have said in the chapter of the extraction of the artery, with the cauteries that have two knives; and this fire cautery is better than the other and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	of the pain of the ears from cold
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When in the ear there is pain from cold, and other medicines have been administered and other treatments that we have said in the division, and the pain does not move, then heat this cauteries which is called "poins", of which this is the form:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les II se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait X poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After carefully scraping all around the ear, where the pain is felt on both sides, and moving it slightly away from the root of the ear as you have signed the direction of the wound; then apply a poultice made of X parts of each ear; after healing the ear, keep it clean.
de la torture de la bouche	of the torture of the mouth
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	Torture that must be treated with caution is only those that move from the gum, as we have said in the division of diseases; and do not apply cauterization to similar wounds that come from sores and spittle of animals.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de III cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des II levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When you encounter this appearance of torture that moves from a stream of tears and spurting of blood from the mouth and throat, and does not cease, then it is necessary to cauterize the pain with three cauteries: one at the root of the ear, and another a little further from the temple, and the third in the jaw; and put the cautery in the part that opens healthy, and make the cautery above a little bit outside the horn of the ear, and another in the temple as far as a little bit; and leave the cautery as long as half of the face is red; and this is the form of the cauteries:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the resemblance of this surgical instrument is similar to what we have placed before, but it is a bit more subtle and requires that the knife be a bit thicker; after care of the wound as I have mentioned before, until it is healed.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai IIII cauteres: II sus les II cornes dou chief, et I emmi le chief, et I ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When apoplexy is ancient and you treat it as we have mentioned before, and it does not improve, and the pain does not have fever, then make four cauteries: two on each horn of the head, and one in the middle of the head, and one on the vessel behind the mouth of the stomach; and cure as we have mentioned before.
de litargie	of laziness
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	For this disease, one should give the patient large and modified headache-relieving pills; afterwards, remove the entire top of the malady, and place the mustard plaster on the occipital bone, as written or treated in the plasters; and this is the way of the fire cautery: if you do so as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai III cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere I doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai I cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, II autres sus les II cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If he is thus healthy, it is good; and if not, make three cautery burns on the head by descending just above the collarbone, and leave a space of one finger's breadth between each burn; and treat as with the others, and if you have seen that it has stopped, and the maladies are suffering, then make one cautery in the middle; and if the work is, two more above the two horns, and treat until he is healthy; and let the cautery called "olivare" be as I have previously said.
de la froidor dou chief	of the cold of the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et I derrier et III sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai IIII cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	It is necessary to clean the head of years and mud that we have previously mentioned; then rub the head of the misalignment, then apply fire to the head and each horn, and behind and three above the spine of the neck; and if you have more trouble, and the body is moist and the pain is suffering, and the disease is outside, then apply four cauteries above the spine of the back; and leave it until the most painful part is healed, and remove your hand; afterwards, cure until they are healthy, and let the cauteries that are called "olivare" which we have previously mentioned.
de l’epilempsie	of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	Epileptics should not use fire cauterization except for that which is fleamatic, and it is first necessary to modify the brain of years and other treatments that we have said in the division when the pains are great and suffering from painful medicine.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai I cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et I cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if it is a child who cannot suffer, make them gargle and chew often with good meat; then let the chief be in the middle, and do the cauterization as we have said before, and the cauterization on the vessel, and on each horn; and if the pains are outside and painful, do cauterization as I have said to him who has paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and let the cauterization be olive oil according to the manner that I have said.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai I cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the pain is severe, then apply the delicate cauterization as follows:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When due to melancholy, the excess or corrupted moisture and fluid is large, then use the cauterization of parts as we have said to the one who has paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if due to melancholy, the excess or corrupted moisture is declining towards melancholy, and the corpse is wet with the painful moisture, then give it a drink of something by which the brain is cleansed, according to what it is before in the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai I torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com I cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After relieving the painful part; then apply a well-made bandage, like a circle, and put it on the head; and if the pains are crossed, and are held firmly from all parts; then present the linen, and use butter of burdock old; and heat it gently in the fire, so that the patient can bear it; then empty the circle by inserting it into the head, and let it cool; and do this to the painful part once a week with different governance until they are healed.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	Where you have seen cauterization done by making several points all over the cauterizer.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	This method of cauterization moistens the skull and then places cotton wool on it in butter and in goose grease.
de l’awe des eulz	of the eye's opening
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When the first sign of eye opening comes as I have mentioned in the division, then begin and give the patient a clean thing, guarding against all moisture, and make him sweat or bathe several times a day on an empty stomach.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai II cauteres sus les II temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as II eulz ensamble, ou en I se li dessendemens est en I; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	After that command him to turn his head, and make the cauterizer go over his head, and make two cauterizations on the two temples together, or one on each; and cover all the cauterizer with veins and arteries that are outside the skull, and let the cauterizer be long according to the width of the temple; and guard against blood clotting, and if you see too much blood coming out, then apply a cloth as you have.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les II os derrier.	And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and in the incision of the cauterization as you would perform it; and never once has anyone cautery or heated anything outside of the two lower bones.
dou cors des larmes	The course of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: I cautere emmi le chief, et II cauteres sus les II temples, et II cauteres ou haiterel desoz les II os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout I petit cautere.	When the tears of the eyes are old and accustomed and are above the veins, or below the arteries which are in the appearance of the main deformed; and one sees that it is superfluous cold flegmatic fluid, then make the cautery that I have mentioned at the beginning of this work: I cautery emmi the chief, and II cauterize above the II temples, and II cauterize outside the II bones; and if there is more, then wisely cauterize above the sorcil with every small cautery.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	through the path of tears through the eyes
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide III nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai II cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les II sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you treat according to what we have said in the division, and it does not work, then drink three bad things against evil spirits; after that, give the head a good drink, and cauterize or apply the caustic olive oil; and make two cauteries with the caustic called «clavilis» on the two sinews, a little below the chin; and guard the artery so you do not cover it.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the form of the caustic called «clavilis»:
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	When the paper of the oil is softened by disease and moisture, then use the caustic of this caustic called «olivare».
de coi ci est li forme:	Of this form:
Et se tu vues si fai II cauteres sus les II sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you see that it is necessary to make two cauterizations on the two sorbips as long as they are; and do not leave your hand except until the third part of the paper is burned, according to the manner that I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	the hair that does not oil
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	There is never the case that the hairs of the oiled ones are converted to pardens, and they prick at their base, and it is made on cauterizations in two manners: that is to say, by fire, or by burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they grow and are even, then place the eyes on the paper of the hairs; after, sign above the eyes a figure that is as much like the sign of the moon as possible, and is the beginning of the sign among the hairs; then put cotton moistened in egg yolk and muscadine oil on the eyelids, then heat the cauterizing iron:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi III jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then cauterize slowly and gradually on the figure that you have drawn, until the curer sees that the paper is retreating, and the hairs stand upright; then lift your hand, and leave it thus for three hours, then put cotton moistened in butter until the burn is healed; afterwards, treat the wound until it is healed.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if after this the hairs come back, and the paper is softened, then begin the cauterization again on the same joint, as you did before; and if the hairs are missing, then cauterize until the paper is raised to its natural level, and is even, and do not prick the hairs with it.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en I oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en I, et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse I poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The cauterizing medicine of burning heat is that you command the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; then make a piece of parchment in the shape of the leaf of mint; then take French soap and live quicksilver, each one separately, and grind them together well; and apply it quickly, so that it does not cool, then spread it over the form you have made like the leaf of mint, and put it on the paper of the eyes; and if the disease remains only in one eye, then cover it also; and put cotton moistened with oil behind the eyeball; and the patient should be in a healthy state and show his hand over the medicine, and press the pouch and the mouth all the times that the patient feels the stinging of the medicine, for it stings as if by fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done this for a long time, then take the medicine at your own discretion.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	And when the burn is passed, lift the limb up, and if you see the paper raised as it was raised by constraint of fire or by incision, then it is well.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If not, still apply the medicine on top of the limb or the medicine has not worked, until your work is equal and your eyes are set; then put cotton moistened in honey over it as long as the wounds are chosen, after care, the limb of the sore which is called «dyafenis» and others, until they are healed.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	And if you have the task of staying well within your work, by great care that it does not pierce with those.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And if the paper becomes soft afterwards, and the hairs are pricked in the oil, then begin the medicine again on the one that is molded by the proper paper, as you have done before; after the cure until it is healed; and this is the form of the fume of the myrtle:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And since the needles of men are different in size and smallness, and according to what you are constrained; and do not be answered the right way to that one who is the study of this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	of the treatment of fistulas by cauterization
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat fistulas as we have mentioned in the division of diseases, and your treatments do not work, then it is necessary that you cauterize them in this way.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	Command the patient to place his head in your safe hands; and wet the bandages on his head between your hands in this way that it does not move, nor remove his head; then put cotton moistened with urine or vinegar under the oil; then heat the cauterizer which is nearby: and fasten it to the head as if it were the form of a pen of lead, together with the quell so that it be the cauterizer; if you see, if it is appointed from one head to the other, and if you see, if it is also like a tent; but all the same, this which is fastened is useful for your work.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	After pressing the fistula, it is opened, and the pus is removed and dried; and if it is closed, open it and remove the bowels; after that, apply the cautery very hot, and hold your hand on the cautery at the part above the neck, where your hand does not burn; and put the cautery into the grease of the oil, and corrupt it.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	If you come to the beginning of the cautery just at the bone, that would be good.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	If not, if you can do it again, and then leave it for three days; after that, put on a moist cotton bandage in butter, and the care of the drying ointment until it is healed, and if forty days pass before it is healed, then put on medicine with a corrosive agent until the bone is discovered; and the king according to what he would have in his chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	And there is a certain way of cauterizing a fistula that none of the ancients mentioned.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	To a fistula, and fasten the leg; afterwards put into the wound a subtle form of this, which is the shape:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	And they make of the quantity of one drop; and hold your hand or the cauterizer firmly, and do not move the hairs until the plaster has softened and does not stick to its oil; and it is necessary to put above the hair a cotton moistened with oil in front of or behind: the plaster heals the leg of the fistula, and the healthy by a marvelous health.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	And if the fistula is healed by the cauterization we have mentioned, it is good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	If not, then one must administer pus to the sinew, and bring the fistula back to its proper place in the bone according to what is necessary in such a case.
des crevaices en levres	of cracks in the lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Many times there are cracks in the lips that are called "hair", and also in the lips of children.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe I petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these cracks as we have mentioned in the previous chapters, and the treatment does not help, then heat the small cauterizing iron in this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place the patient in those crevices until he comes just to the point of death; afterwards, care for the broken limb with clay until it is healed.
de l’aposteme de la goule	of the abscess in the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies I cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou II, aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When an abscess comes in the root of the throat or in the eye, or palate, or at the roots of the teeth, after it has fermented and rotted and grown old and becomes a fistula; and you cure it as we have said in divisions, and it does not improve: then it is necessary that you have the fire cauterization according to the quantity of the fistula; afterwards, plug or puncture the fistula, and keep your hand there until the iron comes to the end of the wound, and behind the limb; and do so once or twice, after caring for what we have said in cures, until it is healed; and if it is cured thus, it is good; and if not, if it is necessary to expose the limb and remove the corrupted bone, according to what you will find in its chapter.
dou movement des dens	movement of the teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat them with medicines but it does not help, then put the tip of a hot iron in your mouth; after heating the cauterizer in the form that you put on the tooth; and place the cauterizer deeply into the tooth, and hold your hand so that the pain feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth; then remove your hand and restart the cauterizer according to your will; after filling the mouth with salty water, and washing the teeth for an hour and rinse out.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in a similar manner, the tooth that was moving is fixed, and the gum becomes soft when it is stretched, and the moisture corrupted is dried.
de la dolor des dens	of the pain of the teeth
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc II manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When the pain of the teeth comes from coldness, or there is cold or heat, and medical treatments do not work, then it is necessary to use cauterization in two ways: cauterization with butter and cauterization with fire.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus I fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	Cauterization with butter is such that you take butter from a freshly killed animal, and the tip on an iron or brass spoon; afterwards, take cotton and wrap it around the point of a tent, and moisten it in hot butter, and put it on the painful tooth firmly and hold it until it is cooled; thus do often until its virtue reaches the root of the tooth, and if you see that moistened wool and cotton in hot butter is placed on the aching tooth, and put on the heated iron until the heat reaches the movement of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	The cautery is made by heating a sharp iron or brass needle until it becomes red hot; and if it is too thin, it should not reach the mouth of the wound; after heating the cautery, because of which it will form a scab afterwards, place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery has cooled; do this often, for the pain will be gone the same day or the next.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it is necessary that the wound fill its mouth with good butter in the urgency of this cautery, and then rinse it; and this is the form of the cautery:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	And make a fire cautery on the part of the head that you wish, and according to what you have available; and this is the shape of the chain:
des scrophules	of the chain links
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the chain links are wet and cold, and do not obey digestion by medicines, then heat the fire cautery of hair from which this comes, and have two openings for the fumes to escape through the other part; and put the cautery hot on top of the abscess once, or as often as it vies with the edge of the abscess; and if the abscess is small, put cautery according to the quantity of the abscess, and leave it thus for three days; and put above moistened cotton in butter until the burn is removed; afterwards treat the wound with ointments and tents until it is healed.
Li forme de la cainne:	The form of the skull:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	When moisture prevails over the channels of the body, and especially when it comes from a cold complexion, then it is necessary to first remove the hairs by medicines that dissolve; after that, apply cauterization at the root of the throat, and be careful not to come too close to the throat, and do not burn with too much heat but with a small amount.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	After that, apply another cauterization at the joint of the neck to the base of the spine, and let the cauterizing iron called "clavile" be used because of its shape; and cure the limb as we have mentioned before until it is healed.
de la toust	of the mouth
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et I autre cautere emmi le pis entre II mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When all and the disease of the mouth are from cold moisture, and the pains have no fever or sweat, and is an old disease, then make two cauteries on the forceps in their eyes; and the other cautery is placed between the breasts; and let the cauteries which are called «clavile» according to the form that is before said.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	And if you see, make cauteries by gripping the entire cautery which is called «poins» because of the form that is before in the disease of the ears; and let the poins be just a few, or around.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	After treatment, the patient according to what has been said previously, and let the burns heal for three days in this manner:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais III a cop.	And because the burns are lighter, because you make three times as much.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners douqueil ci est li forme:	Afterwards, let the hairs grow on their back and on their ribs; afterwards, relieve the swelling inside the tenderness of two fingers of your right hand; and if the joint is misaligned inside, then heat the burn cream that has two fingers' width in this manner:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble IIII cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a III ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a III ners:	et cauterize the wound until it pierces just at the costal, and then bring four cauteries together; and for this reason, cauterization is made with the cautery that has three prongs, because the figure of cauterization is these four cauteries; and they are the nerves according to the subtlety of a tent, and this is the form of the cautery that has three prongs.
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce I nerf por coi il i a VIII cauteres.	And never is it placed upon this one nerve because it has eight cauteries.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After place the cautery perpendicularly with silk; after rest the pain, and do not move the limbs by length for as long as it is well comforted.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	If it is dislocated above, this happens rarely, then make a cauterization on the thick edge of the cauterizing knife, or with many cauterizations in pricking.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	For the joint is closed, and is solidified by the moisture and is healed of the pains.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	When cold and much moisture come to the stomach until it is at its condition, and are multiplied by his vomiting, and are customary ways of cures that he does not profit from, then it is necessary that the pains be soothed above his back, and extends his legs and his hands.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture; et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	After applying three cautery burns with a small spoon, one after the other, to the clavicle bone, and two more cautery burns on each side until the shape of the cautery marks forms at three angles, and there is equal space between them so they do not touch when they grow together; and let the cautery be applied so that it pierces both parts of the chest, and let the shape of the cautery marks follow this form without twisting:
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme; et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche; puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if you see that the cautery is too large in the stomach, following this form; and if someone has fear of this cautery, apply it by pricking and holding above the stomach, and then cauterize the entire cautery mark called "point".
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the care of the care that we have had before, as long as they are healthy.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez; et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil; et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient; et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi; et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere; et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez; et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais; et c’est li forme:	When the liver comes with pain from heat and moisture and great swelling, as long as it is not forced out of its natural condition by excess; and the hairs are treated as we have said in divisions, and it does not help them much, so it is necessary that the hairs be left above their natural position; and the sign of three cauteries according to this form and figure and quantity on the liver, below the hypochondres, where the neck of the ox comes; and there should be space between each cauterization the size of a finger; and the cauterization should be long and thin, and not press much with the hand at all over the cauterization; and it should be arsed so that only half the back is bent, and the hairs should be straight up; and if it cannot, then it should be lying down, and extend its legs, and lift its arms; and this is the form:
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors; et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	And if you wish to cauterize these cautery tools with a surgical knife, if you are skilled and wise in the art, and you guard that you do not burn the whole court, for you would make it harder all over; and that it does not come close to boiling, for the courts are very delicate there, and the skilled ones must see.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile: s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort; et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	When he has an abscess in the liver, and you know whether it is in the flesh of the liver or in the cloth: if it is in the flesh, it does not cause much pain; and if it is in the cloth, it causes severe pain.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste; et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	When this treatment is done, if the hairs on the patient's head are not smooth, then one should cover the head or the abscess with a cloth, and then heat the cauterizing iron, which is shaped like a spike, from which this is made:
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers; aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez; et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	And cauterize with the iron until the wound is healed, and it comes just to the surface, until the poison is completely gone; after the treatment according to the treatment of wounds as long as they are healthy; and it should be used by no one except those who have studied long in the art of medicine, and by whose hands these diseases have never been corrupted.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	Therefore, it can be boldly attempted, and in all ways, it seems to me that it is worth leaving it.
dou cautere de pleuresin	For the fire cautery of the breasts.
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize I cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et II petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et II cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et I cautere emmi le pis, et I autre sus l’estomac, et I entre II espaules, et II as II costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre II espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	The ancients said that one should use the fire cautery of the breasts with the roots of aristolochia, and in this way: take a long root of aristolochia, the longest you can find, and dry it, and as big and long as your fingers; and grind it in oil, and apply the cauterizer to the fire, and cauterize the cautery between the breast and the neck, and two small cauterizers a little down in the part that is outside the beard; and cauterize between the fifth rib and the spine, declining a little behind; and one cauterizer at the bottom, and the other above the stomach, and one between the shoulders, and two on the sides of the breast, and one in front of the cautery that is between the shoulders; and do not press your hand, but apply it openly as if smelling.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	And the ancients said that no one uses a fire cautery like a razor, and they scrape it and put it between the ribs, until it comes to the abscess; and then the pain is as we have said about the liver abscess.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	But in this work, there is fear or the pain is now deadly, or a fistula comes that cannot be healed.
de la mice	of the mouse
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent III manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the disease of the mouse as we have said about the divisions of treatment, and it does not improve, then they resort to three methods of cauterization that are all good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos; et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	When it is a certain way, you make three or four cauteries, along the length of the mouse, according to the shape of the fire in the liver that we have mentioned before; and do not press your hand on the entire cautery, and let the hairs be on its back; and another way of cauterizing is that you heat the cauterizer with two needles, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; and lift the wound that is located near the mouse's ear, or the pain from the ear comes towards the left, and let the elevations that you lift the wound according to the curve, according to the length of the body, and the cauterizer should be according to the width of the body.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	After applying the two fingers and inflame them until the curved part is perceived from the other side, then draw out the cautery, and thus enter with four fingers. If you see, then cauterize the entire cautery with three fingers.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After treatment when the patient has gout due to long standing, and this is also useful for the other treatments mentioned before.
de ydropisie	of hydrops
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	Cauterization is not useful for hydrops, except in the manner which is called "asclytes".
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	When you treat it according to the methods that we have mentioned in the divisions, and your treatment does not help, then it is necessary that you make four cauterizations around the belly, and one above the stomach, and one above the liver, and one below the mouse, and one behind the back above the spine, and one in the worst place; and let the cauterizations be close to the curved part.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les II ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	After leaving the fire cautery open for a long time, do not neglect the care of the wound after the cauterization; and healing would hasten, and together with God's help, both intentions would be achieved.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The shape of the fire cauterization for the belly is like the one we have shown before; and for the back, it should be olive-shaped, according to what has been written before.
de l’enfleure des piez	of the swelling of the feet
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	When the feet are swollen and have plain yellow wounds, it is necessary to cauterize above the back of the foot between the auricular and annular parts; and gently move your hand with the cauterization towards returning.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	And do not enter too deeply, thus avoiding the yellowish part, and let the cauteries be done in this form:
Aprés fai sus II jambes II cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After making two cuts on each leg at the tip of a sharp knife; and let the cauteries be long, one behind the knee in front and the other in front of the knee, inside the leg; and leave the cauteries hanging for a long time to cure the wound that is inside. After curing the other treatments that we have mentioned.
de la menoison	of the menstruation
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai I grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et IIII cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout I cautere clavile subtil, et II cauteres sus les hainches.	When the solution of the belly comes from cold and moisture, as long as the retentive and digestive powers that are in the stomach and in the intestines are blocked, and cannot be cured by other means of treatment; and you see the pain is very severe and of great benefit, if you make a large cauterization on the stomach according to what it has spoken about before or a cauterization of the stomach, let the cauterization circulate; and four cauterizations around the belly subtly to all the sharp cauterization, and two cauterizations on the hips.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et I cautere sus chaicun yle, et II petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	If you see abundant moisture and the patient is suffering from pain, then perform fire cauterization on the joint, and I cauterize each wound, and II small cauterizations over the stomach below the large one, for the cure is beneficial when it has good assistance.
de la cure des emorroydes	of the treatment of lice
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois; et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	When the lice are firmly attached, or one or more, and are ancient and are large humors that are cold and moist and corrupted, and are treated as we have said in divisions, and it does not improve, then perform cauterizations: III over the spine of the back, which is all before unmedicated little by little in triangulating, and I cauterize outside the belly II doses; and if you think that his stomach is cooled, and the food does not cook, and one sees the face swells, then the face has I large cauterization over the stomach, as it is previously said, and I other over the liver, and I other over the mouse all the cauterization clavile; and leave the cauterization open long.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After care, the limb when it is healed.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the charnel pit which is called "thelul".
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou II, et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you approach the charnel pit, if the caustic seems like a razor, and then put it all burned on top of the charnel pit covered; and let your hand so that the cauterizer comes to the birth of the vein, from which the blood flows; do this once or twice, and if there is much charnel pit, cauterize each one as we have said; then cure wounds as long as they are healed; and if you cauterize with a large caustic above the charnel pit, it will have more help.
de plaie mal curee	of poorly treated wound
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the wound cannot bear a lancer or an opening, which we will tell you about in its place, then comes the disease that cannot be healed except by cauterization.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	When any comes fistula, and is alert and poured with pus and corrupted moisture, then you must apply a thin tent throughout, and guard that you remove the entire tent as soon as it becomes full.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	After heating the cauterizer, which seems like a razor, and pressing it into the fistula according to the amount that the tent has entered, and then reapplying the cauterizer until the corroding and corrupting parts are destroyed, once, or twice, or three times, depending on the amount of need; and guard against burning the nerves which are near, and large veins.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	If the fistula goes to the center of the bladder and intestine, you should avoid these areas, and only do so in cases where it is necessary, and think that it is not healed; after curing the area as long as it is healthy, and if the areas are sealed, and the matter is removed along with tension, then wash the areas that the area is completely healed; and if the matter is not removed, seal the area and corrupt the bone at the source; and thus as one of these that we will say in its area.
de la maladie des reins	of the kidney disease
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra III cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When severe pain comes to the kidneys, and great swelling, and does not take on the form of a woman, then it is necessary that you apply cauterization to the kidneys on both sides with the clavile cautery that we have previously mentioned; and if we cauterize in the middle, there will be three cauterizations in a line, and they will be greater help.
de la vessie	of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et I a destre et I a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais I cautere defuers le dos, ou II se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladder is small and weak from heat and moisture, and it retains urine, then perform cauterization in the part before the bladder, where the hairs of the pubic area begin, on both sides, and each cautery should be as long as a pin; and perform one cauterization behind the back, or two if you have need; and let the cauteries be clavile according to the form previously mentioned.
de la marris	of the marsh
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice III cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et II cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the marsh is cold and wet, and does not allow conception, and the flowers are corrupted and their terms late; and when they come, they cause great pain: then it is necessary to perform three cauteries around the waist, as we have said in the cauterization of the bladder, and two cauterizations behind the back; and let the cauteries be clavile, as we have said.
de la hainche	of the waist
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a I cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When the thick viscous fluids descend to the hip of the waist, and for this reason it moves out of its place, and the signs are that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and the legs are found to be uneven, it is necessary that you cauterize the pain above the hip of the waist with a cautery similar to a circle, and sign before the bone around the hip as it turns, so that the hip is inside the circle; and if it is such a cauterization as has been done for the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai III cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if this cauterization is not present, make three cauterizations of the olive grove large, and let the cauterizations be done as all the others; and the care until they are healed.
de la dolor de la hainche	of the pain of the back
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain comes in the back of the waist, and it is from cold and moisture, and the ailment is caused by what we have said in the division and the cure does not work, and the disease is ancient: therefore it is necessary that you purge the ailment of large humors with fetid pills, or other good-quality pills similar.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	After the firing; and the manner of the firing is as follows: that is to say together with burning medicines, and fire cauterization.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	Fire cauterization is in many ways, of which some are: that you cauterize above the back of the waist three triangular cauterizations according to this form, and make good depth and great, and there should be between each cauterization a space the size of a finger, and let the cauterization be olive; never made on the middle above the back of the waist, because it is there four according to this form:
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you see that the cauterization is done with a circle as we have previously mentioned in the dislocation of the shoulder; but do it in another manner so that the circle contains the entire shoulder and all the tendons should be arched.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	And this is the way it is done in lithotomy, when the pain remains in the shoulder and does not reach the thigh or the leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if it comes to the thigh and the leg, then make two cauterizations where the hairs are located, and one cauterization above the ankle four fingers wide, on the right side a little; and both cauterizations should be sharp, and the tendons should be arched; and if the hairs feel that the pain extends to the feet or near the knee, then cauterize where it feels the pain three points or four at the cauterization called "points".
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if the profession is, do more to him; and if the pain is dislocated from the groin towards the thigh, apply cauterization with a surgical or circular cautery, and be careful in all your cauterizations that you do not leave the cautery for too long, burning nerves and large arteries, and do not cause greater harm and contraction.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	I have also seen many who applied cauterization above the ankle, and left it for so long that the leg was entirely blackened, and the foot also, and all the flesh was rotten.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	After a purging of the stomach where they experienced death.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	And if the pain is in both parts together, perform cauterization in one and the other, according to this method.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	And the wise say in the cauterization of the belly, of which this is the method, use such a sharp and as big as a navillon of a finger, or a little less, and it should be inserted between the ribs and inserted from one to the other at a distance equal to the amount of a small nail; and the ribs should be over two parts, and they should also be like a needle, and there is a good belly knife.
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois I cautere reont et lou laisse III jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And heat it until it is completely red and glowing, then place it on the back of the misaligned shoulder, and turn it over to the healthy side; and cauterize once with the cautery and leave it for three days; then apply a butter poultice, and keep the wound open for a long time; after the treatment of ointment until it is healed.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Albucasis says that we use this cautery little because of its fearful appearance, and few see those who use it; and nevertheless, this is a good cauterizer, which can bear the pain, and where it is applied.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi; et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	The fire cauteries are made such that you make an instrument of thin sheets of metal or iron at the edge of the door, and on one side, it is long, and on the other, it has two points, and on each side, there is the quantity of a small drop; and they are open below and above, and join together in this form:
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche; aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	After placing the bandage of the back hanging on its side, and quickly bringing your hand over the bandage of the back; afterwards, pour between the two circles of hot water that has been heated in the fire for a short time, and leave it an hour, and let the hairs suffer the heat and burn.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu; et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit; et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait; et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Because it is true that there are also cauterizations as of fire; and when the cauterizations have passed, gently remove your hand with the instrument and lift the backbone slightly, and leave it for three hours, and put butter on until the black scab of the burn is removed; and let it rest for three hours so that the wound may be healed; and this would be the last aid after the care of ointments as long as it is healthy.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument; et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	And if the pain has extended to the thigh or to the leg, then make the instrument that tingles the back according to what you have done in the backbone; and this is the way of the hot needle, and I have written about it in the treatment of medicine correction.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	Take equal amounts of lime and live chalk, and grind them together, and put them in a new pot.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir; et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main; et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	If there is a small hole where the point of a razor cannot fill it; and put that pot in another well-pounded pot, and put over it lime and chalk and pour warm water on it until there are two layers of powder, you will have it well prepared in your hand; and let it soak until all the water and chalk and lime have settled at the bottom, then take all the powder, and pour it through a sieve over lime and lime, as before.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	And if it is very painful and administered in the form of various medical works and cauteries for other members, because it does its own work as it should, and if it is other medicines that are well cauterized on the back, such as anacardium and chalk with soap, all these things mixed together.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	Galen tells us of a cure that some people were cured of the pain in the back and sciatic veins, and they were very much healed, and said that no other cure was done, and that they were cured once when this cure was made, and he was bathed as he teaches afterwards.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie; et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	And in this manner, you press a fresh, green, and dry vert plant, and grind it well with a little bit of grease, and put it on the back and on the thigh and on the leg where the pain is, and tie it; and let it be for three hours, and as the hairs do not feel the burning anymore.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	And then let him enter a hot bath until the heart is a little bit warmed, and let him enter a bed, and the pain will go away completely and will be healed.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	And let it be known that no one should use such cauteries or medicines unless after the evacuation of blood.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout; et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	And Dioscorides says that when the vein of the temple is cauterized with the fleece of a goat, it helps much; and it should be done by the cauterizer in this way.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	Take the other and the old oil, and put it on the groove that is between the thumb of one foot and the other which is called the first metacarpal.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains; et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee; et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	Then take some goat hair, and put it in the fire until it is charred, and put it on the cloth, and leave it until it is soaked; and do again in this way, and do not stop doing in this way until you think that it is close to the back, and that the pain has stopped; and this method of cauterization is called "goat hair cauterization".
de la dolor dou dos	of great pain in two places
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, whether from falling or from impact or from too great evacuation, or from similar expanded cold matter, none of these things is worth cauterization, because it causes cold to those who have recently undergone infusion of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne V cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai III cauteres ou IIII au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	It is necessary to apply foul-smelling powders or similar things, which are placed on top of the back, where the pain is located, three lines wide, and in each line five cauteries or more according to the strength and quantity that the pain can bear; and let the cauteries be made with the cautery called "puncture"; and if you see, make three or four cauteries with the middle-sized clavicle according to this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	Often this disease comes to small children, and the signs of onset are that they have a stiff neck when walking, and fear; and you will see it in the last spinous process of the back and in us the appearance that comes above the other spinous processes.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this and you want to cure it, if you cauterize with the fire cautery in this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	If the fire cautery grasps each part of the spine equally.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	And if you see, then cauterize around the spine with the fire cautery holding two or three lines, and the points close to each other.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	After healing the patient for as long as they are healthy according to what we have said, and ensure that you do not administer cauterization in a way that is painful or causes damage to the nerves.
de la dolor des jointes	of the pain of the joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When the pain of the joints is due to moisture that is spread to each member of the body, and when the pain comes suddenly, which is properly called "gout", and when it is caused by cold and cannot be cured by medicines, then it must be treated with cauterization in this manner: apply a large amount of cauterizing agents around the joint, and let the cauterizing oils be applied in this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	And if there is a belief that you should hold the face down during the cauterization, then perform the entire cauterization as claimed "not to point".
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if the pains come from the gums and other joints, and this often happens, then perform cauterization on each tooth with three or four cautery of each part, at the entire cauterization; and if you have more skill, do more, but do not hold your hand further than the end of the tooth until the spirit of the patient is calm.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	And if the pains descend to the gums and back, then administer the cauterization that we have mentioned in this chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	And if the pains are severe, make a point around the nail II lines; and if it does not remain painful, make a point above each joint and above the hair of the hand; and if the pains come just at the wrist or shoulder, cauterize each part, and good governance to the patient and many medicines.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	For if you give good governance and purge the humor, it will be healed by the help of God.
de la routure dou syfac	of the wound of the eye
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When the wound comes in anger, and the pus descends to the joints and it is new, then you must wait until when you cure the eye, that he does not move much that day; and that he uses things that relieve the stomach, so that the feeling of the gut does not come out of his stomach; afterwards make him sit upright on his back between your hands, and command him to cover his eye as long as the pus is not restored, and roll it to your side, and sign over the wound above the bone of the thumb, and at all a sign that is similar to half a circle above the body; then heat the cautery with this form:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	until it is white and sweats senselessly.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	Then remove the mud from the joint; and the ministers stain their hands above so they do not return back; and work well the thighs against the pain, and put disinfectant on him the castor and the serum above the thighs, and the other above the worst that stains his hands; then put the cautery on all of his hand, and hold it straight and hold it until you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, start again with another until you come just to the bone; and be careful that the mud does not come out when you do the cautery; that you do not burn it; and that by this the pain does not kill him, or other harm.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	And if you do not see the bone at the cautery, your work is worthless.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And the cauterization of children should be subtle according to their measure of bones, and for large people also large according to their measure; after three days care for the wound of the cautery with bread until the eschar is formed; then care for other inflammations as long as it is healthy, and cut the hairs 40 times on its back until the wound is well healed; and it should be that their movements are restricted for a long time, so that the pus does not seep out when they move around.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	And after forty days, when he wishes to get up, one should apply a well-made bandage for forty more days; and have good rest, that he works little and avoids too much drinking and eating, and too much high heat; and if he follows this instruction, he is completely healed.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And I will tell you about the treatment of cutting into his chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	of the rupture of the belly
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	When ruptures come in other bellies and are known, and you see that they do not increase, one should apply the fire cautery according to its quantity, and let the third part of the care; after the cure as we have said; and none of the ancients have said that it should be cauterized with the fire cautery at three angles in this form:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	but the first sign is to straighten the limb and make a line across the width of the fracture, and another one in front, and then apply your hand to all the cauterizing iron.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But the first cauteries are lighter and less painful.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	of ancient pain in any limb
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	When pain comes to any limb, whether it is to fall or to be injured, and this pain lasts long, and the medical cure does not help, then it must be cauterized with the cautery called «poins», and the cauterization should be according to the length of the limb and its smallness and weakness and its virtue and its location of twists and its pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	If it is safe for the first cautery, it is good; if not, begin another cautery above that one, for it is usually customary to let the patient die at the member where the injury is closest, because it is necessary to perform the cauterizations until the wounds are healed.
de meselerie	mesenteric
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	The mesenteries are never cauterized by cauterization alone, and at the same time, the disease that comes from the putrefaction of fluids and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief: I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	If you see that the cauterization is not curing the disease at the beginning, and if it has been cured according to what we have said in the previous section, and if it does not remain or disappear, and if you doubt that the corruption will not spread throughout the wound, then perform the following cauterizations: I on the forehead, and the other on the front of the head at the end of the eyebrows; II on the two temples, and I behind the ears; and leave as much space as possible between the cauterizations and the bone, and until the scabs come out so that the vapors of the large humors can escape; and then cauterize again according to what is in front.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et I cautere en som lou neis, et II cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et VI cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et I grant sus la crupie et I autre delez, et II sus les II espaules; et II sus les coutes, et II sus les tendrons dou pis, et I sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et I autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et I autre sus lou foie.	And if the splinters are scattered throughout; and they are clearly visible, it is necessary that you cauterize with these cautery that we have said or chief, and the cautery in the nose, and two cauteries above the spine of the neck, and six cauteries above the spine of the back, and one great one above and one below the buttocks, and two above each shoulder, and two above the elbows, and two above the knees, and one above each hand and foot, and above the hand wounds; and beware of the nerves that are above the bones, that you do not burn them; and never make a cautery above the bone of the little finger, and one above the bone of the stomach, and one above the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	And the more you use the cautery, the less you need assistance, and it benefits him; and the hairs do not feel pain as they do for the healthy one, because the body is already corrupt.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	It is necessary that the cautery be large and small according to the members and joints, according to what you will find in the manner of irons.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	After curing the wound with flour and honey and other treatments until it is healed.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	When inflammation comes to any member and is treated with medicines and oils and poultices, and it is not healed, then you should cauterize the member according to its size and smallness; and the cautery should go a little into the depth of the wound; then treat the boils until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	And never cauterize with the hand and at the foot and at the back, after the nerve that moves the limb, and thus it is set in the swelling; and it does not interfere with anyone if they are not knowledgeable about the members and their issues of moving the body.
de albaras	And never cauterize with the hand and at
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the disease called «albaras» is awakened, and medical knowledge does not help, then cauterize with a cautery a little in front, according to the quantity of the herb, until the bones are set and the color is restored; then treat with flour and lentils with rose oil and plantain leaves, and salt of colon and salt of almond, each in equal parts; and mix everything together, and bind it all with a cloth, and apply to the wound until it is healed.
li cure de chancre par cautere	the treatment of chancres by cauterization
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	When a chancres appears at the beginning, and you see it stop growing, then cauterize it with the cauterizing iron that seems to be in the shape of a circle, all around the edge of the chancres.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	And all the wise say that one should also make the cauterizing iron in the middle of the chancres; and I do not think this is good, because I believe it should not be ulcerated or corrupted, and I have never seen it happen once; and a more important thing is that it should be cauterized all around, with the cauterizing iron that is called «circle», as we have said in many cauterizations.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	of the swelling that cannot die
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi.	When anyone has a disease called "adubelati", and it lingers to die or due to the excess it causes or due to the age of the patient when they are too old and have little blood, or due to tension; then you see it hastening to die: therefore cauterize around with many small cauteries pricking; after leaving it thus.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	For it will surely die.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see it piercing through all the cauteries, then heat the cauteries with what is in its form:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	And place your hand in the middle of this disease that is called "adubelati" until the cauteries have pierced the skin, and be such cauteries that the hairs feel afterwards in a similar manner as the course of the porridge is alleviated.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	After the cure until it is perfectly healed.
li cure dou feu par fer	The cure of fire by iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	Another way of disease is called "corrodens", and it is nothing other than a piece of member, for it twists the members as if the dry reeds did.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	If you see this disease in the limb that can suffer cauterization together with fire, then heat the cauteries cleverly very small and great, according to what is necessary for the limb or the disease; after cauterizing all parts until you reach all the corruption, and nothing remains of it, so that all that is corrupted is removed.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	Then leave it for three days, and put oil on the wounds, cauterize with suffering until the scorched flesh is removed, and all corruption.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	After the treatment of boils, ulcers arise.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	And if you see after three days that healthy ulcers do not arise, it is good; and if not, if the cauterization begins again on the part that remains corrupted.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	And this method has never been cured by medical plasters in place of fire cauterization; but fire cauterization is always greater help, and I have already told the cure of the medical plaster in the division: take it when you have occasion.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	of the pores that come to the feet
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	often comes to the feet through the pores, which is called "clos" according to our understanding, and is a great thing that causes pain in the foot.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	And the cauteries of this disease are according to two methods.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	That is to say, fire cauterization, and water hot cauterization.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	Fire cauterization is that you heat the cauterizer as if it were a quill, and it should be made of good iron at the measure that it can pierce the nail from all parts, and that it has thin margins; then put it all hot on the nail, and turn your hand all around the nail until it reaches the end of the nail; and leave it thus for three days until it begins to rot; then make an ointment of wild savage herbs pounded with silk, and leave the ointment all night, and the nail will fall off and will be uprooted from its roots.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then cure the limb of burning by applying a cool herb until it is healed.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	And if they are converted by previous burns, and often in hands and feet, then it is necessary to apply cauterization with very hot iron; and it is in this way: take a needle of iron or steel, or a pen of owl feathers, and place it on the nail and the cuticle, that is to say, the rough skin; then place the hot water on the needle so that it surrounds everything, then hold your hand tightly and press your hand as you turn so that the edge of the needle comes to the root of the nail, and find the very hot water penetrating deep into the root; and suffer the pain of the hot water for an hour; then leave it like this, and it will fall out at all its roots.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	Then do another one after that, until you have treated all those that are at the core, then treat the wounds that engender char.
li cure dou trembler	the treatment of the shaking
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices IIII cauteres ou IV sus l’espinee dou dos, I cautere entre chescune espinee; et I cautere ou pez, et I sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	When anyone shakes from cold or from a quartan fever or other, it is necessary to make four cauteries or four on the spine of the back; one cautery between each spine; and one cautery at the chest, and one above the stomach at the olive cauterization; it will let them shake, and hasten the recovery from the cold disease.
des pustules puans	of pustules that stink
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	No matter how often the body is washed, or pustules appear, which come from large corrupt matters.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	If it is necessary when they appear that a cauterization be made over each head of the pustule: a subtle cauterizer of willow bark, of which the point is grasped in the fire, or of the long root of aristolochia, or with the lenticular cauterizer.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	And no matter how often they are cauterized at the beginning when they appear, in this manner, and it cannot grow more, but is broken down the excess from which they come, and are healed; but it is necessary that this be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	when the artery is cut
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	Many times there is great bleeding from the artery that is cut at the wound that comes to the periphery, or at the incision of the abscess, or in the cauterization of the limb, and similar things; and it is a very painful thing to stop.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren I, ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	And in any case when this happens to anyone, quickly place your finger on the wound of the vein, and press very hard until the bleeding is stopped from your finger, and no more blood comes out; then put the cauteries made of olive oil into the fire several times, both small and large, until they are all red; then apply I, or a great or little one according to the wound and the limb where the artery has been cut, and hold the cauteries on that vein where you placed your finger, and hold the cauteries there until the bleeding is stopped.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement I autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	If you suddenly fall forward while holding the other end of the cautery over the vein, and the cautery is extinguished, then quickly take another one that is at the fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des IIII manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And do not cease to do this one after the other until the blood is stopped; and be careful that you do not burn the nerve that is next to it, and that no other misfortune comes over the wound; and see that when the artery is not cut off, it cannot be extinguished immediately when the artery is large, unless by one of the four methods we have mentioned: or by cauterization, or by extraction when it is not yet treated, or by a very thin thread, or by medicines placed above which have power to stop blood; and it should be tied and held tightly.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Whoever will administer the tightening of lacing or tying things together tightly over, or other similar things, does not benefit if not properly.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And if this happens to anyone and they do not have any medicine present, they should put their two fingers on the wound of the vein as we have said, and well tighten until it is stopped up over the wound and over the vein; and they should not move it, but keep it cold with often cool water until it is frozen and swollen and stopped up; and they should make inquiries about what they have to do with cauteries and medicines.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Here begins the second book of cures for tails
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	We have told you in the first chapter all diseases for which it is necessary to cauterize with fire, or with burning medicine, and the symptoms and causes and instruments and forms of the cauteries; and I will put this chapter of the shoulder joint from head to foot, and I will go into this chapter by this very way because we find more easily what we want.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And therefore when I begin this chapter, it is necessary, dear child, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first of the cauteries, and for this reason it requires greater caution.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	And I warn you not to undertake foolishness.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	For many ways of people come for treatment.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	if they come from such people who are so with their disease that they die immediately from the remedy they receive for their disease, and from the greatness of its wickedness; and of these one must have fear.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse.	And of these, there are those who give you their sense, and say: "Wait, I am burned"; and the illness is spiteful.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	It does not matter that you allow those who come to you who have this manner, but put more great caution in your honor than in your need, and do not open madly but wisely of what you are certain and what you have taken and lost; and use prediction and indication in the treatment of your ailments for which health is converted; and this will help you to achieve good reputation, glory, and memory for long.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Very dear son, Our Lords give you good understanding and truth, and if you wish to breathe from the holy inspiration of her hand, indeed.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	I have ordered you this chapter by explaining through chapters, according to what is before a chapter on cauteries, which I have explained from the beginning to the end, so that you find it more easily what you will have to do.
dou chief plein d’aigue	full of sharp
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	This disease often occurs in children at birth, and when the child's head is held too tightly; and sometimes it comes from a reason that one is not aware of.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	I have never seen this disease except in children, and to all those I have seen it has killed the patient; and therefore it seems to me that it is better to leave the work in the hands of others for these treatments.
Et je vis I enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com II nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	And I saw a child who was suffering from severe pain in the joints, and the head was swelling each day until it could no longer support itself; and it died of the moisture, and this moisture is assembled outside the bone above the hip, between the thigh and the bone; and the techniques are such that if the moisture is between the thigh and the bone, and the abscesses are small, you should make a wide incision in the head; and it should be as long as twice the width of the spatula, so that the moisture flows out; and retrieve the form of the spatula.
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai II fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is more severe, and the abscess is larger, then make two incisions in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief III fendures selonc ceste maniere:	And if the moisture is outside the bone, and the signs that you see the commissures of the joint open on each part, and the sharp pain occurs when you press it with your hand inside, and it does not return: then it is necessary to make three incisions in the joint according to this manner:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	And after the incision, evacuate all the moisture outside.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	After applying dressings and powders to the incisions, and putting in wine and oil, leave it for the fifth day; then remove it, and cure the wound with bandages and probes, and keep the joint immobilized, and gradually introduce dry meat to alleviate the pain until the limb is comfortable and healthy.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	Another way of incision is to look at the size of the abscess and the position of the sharp edge; for it is never in front, never behind, never on the right side, and never on the left side.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	Therefore, make the incision according to the size of the abscess and the position of the sharp edge, and make the cut as best you can; but be careful not to cover the artery; and if blood flows, it may cause death from the accumulation of blood and the evacuation of moisture.
de reume	I'm sorry, I don't understand
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les II arteres.	When it comes to a certain disease called "cataract" that affects the eyes or the pupil, and the disease is ancient, and medical treatment does not help much, then the surgical cure is used by covering the two arteries with it.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	It is therefore necessary, when you see the bones, that the hairs make their head; afterwards, rub the bone with a rough cloth until the arteries appear, then straighten the bones on the entire cloth; then look where the vein is bleeding, and the ears are on one and the other side, and they are not replaced; then sign the ears of the head, then cover one and the other with a strip of adhesive plaster, until the wound comes just above the bone, and it should be through the width of the head.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com II dois au traver.	And if you see, cut the strip of adhesive plaster away from the artery and cover it above, cutting as much as it should through the middle.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is cut, the blood should continuously flow outwards.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And if the artery does not open at first feeling, then measure the quantity of the space of three fingers, then signify and apply it to the bone; and as much blood as is necessary to put out should be six drops, and perhaps a little more or less depending on what the wound can suffer, and the replenishment of the artery; then look at the wound: if it remains above the bone pointedly, if the poultice that we apply does not bring any blood, then strain the wound and bind it, and the treatment of the ointment until it is healed.
de emigrainne	The first sentence is already in English, so there is no
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When ancient migraines come, and the catarrh is active, due to the moisture of tears and the chills in the temples and ancient sweat and similar things, and it is treated by means of medical cures and nothing seems to help, then we should strangulate the arteries of the temples and cauterize them, as we have told.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	And the manner of their extraction is such that the hairs of his temples face backwards, and listen to the artery that opens in the temple, because it opens well by its beating, and it is not restored until in some men who are too cold; and if it is restored, then strangle the head with some cloths, then rub the leather with any rough cloth, and raise the leather with hot water until the artery opens clearly; then take the spatula of which this is the shape:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	Then gently scrape the light skin until you reach the artery, then cut it upwards with pincers, and remove all the threads that are glued to each part; if the artery is thin, turn it back to the tip of the needle, then cover that part according to the amount of the two threads.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	For if it is not covered, it will not heal all at once.
Et trai dou sanc des VI c/, jusc’a III; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en II leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les II liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And draw out blood from the sixth chamber to the third; and if the artery is large, it is necessary to tie it in two places with a strong silk thread, which prevents the blood from coming before the healing of the wound, and causes corrections of blood; then cover the excess that is between the two ties in the same hour, and then, if you see, cauterize the wound with a cauterizing iron just up to the bone until the threads are covered; and this is the most difficult work, if the pain is not feverish and he is of hot constitution.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	For the fire cautery is to finish the swellings: for it is of greatest help to swellings.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de II pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	For when it is necessary for the extraction of arteries, one should fill the limb with old cotton and place wet gauze on top; and when they are removed, one should care for dry medicines that create heat and gauze until they are healthy; and if there is no copper present, one should use a vinegar-soaked cloth and hold it to the wound so that the wound does not become dried out; and if one does not have this present, one should place ice on the limb for as long as the wound does not freeze, and raise the limb with cold water until it is constantly cooled, and it should be kept as it should be; and what is slower and lighter in the extraction of the artery is that one cauterizes the vein of this cautery cutting from II parts, but the cutting should be well spaced to last longer.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when instruments are too tight, it holds less heat.
Et doit avoir entre les II coutelz I doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les II leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en II leus; et soient esloigniet entre les II chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it should have between the two knives a space of large, and then when you have marked the two edges, and you heat the iron hot above until it comes just to the bone, and cope the vein in two edges; and they should be separated between the two knives because it is not sure of this cauterization throughout all; and this is the form of the cauterization:
des larmes	of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When the tears of the eyes are falling from the veins that are above the skin of the forehead, and it does not profit much in medical treatment that we do, and you see the face of the pain swell, and feels like a tremor; and it is often held and moist so that the hair of the paper is wet, and the papers are wrinkled, and burned by the heat of the tears, if there is a need for this treatment.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins; et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	And they called the ancient "wound healer," and you should make three cuts or front evenly according to the length of the forehead; and one of the cuts as two above the nose, and the others two on the ribs by the side of the papers, and guard against incision of the arteries that are on the two ribs by the side of the papers; and move your hand away from the continuation of the two jaws, and let each wound the quantity of three drops across; and have prepared a piece of sponge and much cloth to soak up the blood, then boil the spongy part of two parts of which this is the form:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les II fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	From the incision that is made from the temple to the second incision; and scrape off all the skin that is between the two cuts to the whole face which is above the bone, then make another part of the same incision towards the other second, and then extract this span.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	If you place the instrument called "curette" in the first cut, which is very sharp on one side, and blunt on the other, it is not very sharp. And this is its shape:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	And place the sharp edge towards the skin and the blunt side towards the bone, and scrape until it reaches the other cut.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And cover all the vessels that descend from the head as far as the eyes until the incision is continued up to where the wound opens, and then do the same on the other side; and then extract the arrow equally, and express the blood for the wound taken; then put in each incision a piece of old cloth, and put on dressings made of mild wine and oil and vinegar, and make sure that abscesses do not come; and to the wound apply a plaster of fresh honey, then the healing ointment of basilicon with rose oil, and other remedies for treating wounds, until they are healed.
dou reume des eulz	repetition of the eyes
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	When anyone comes for the fire cautery, you see the eyes closed and small, and weakened vision, and burnt papers; and the hairs are shaved, and the pain in the forehead is great, and the limbs sneeze; therefore, these materials and that cautery come from many wounds, and the healing process that is, is this.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	And it is that you command the patient to turn his head back, then make a deep cut into the forehead, and another wide one at the temple.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	And beginning from the cut at the right temple to the left, and let the incision go as far as the bone; and move your hand away from the nerves of the temples that move at will; and when the bone is exposed, soak up all the blood with a sponge, and then scrape between the two lips of the cut and put on cotton and linen; then bind it with moistened cloths in wine and oil, and guard against an abscess forming; when it is removed, it is necessary to rub the bone until charcoal begins to form, then treat for things that cause inflammation, which are poured into the char.
En teil maniere: pren II parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine IIII parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In this manner: Take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of collophonia, and make a poultice; and apply it to these wounds to draw out the char for all.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of ear stoppage
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des IIII choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	All that which sticks in the ears is one of the four things: either grains, or beasts, or stone of the mine or similar thing like iron; or seeds, such as beans, peas, and similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	When it sticks in the ear or any other kind of thing that does not adjust to the ear, it does not grow in the ear, then put the ear to the sunlight.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus.	If you see an arrow, if there is any drop of purple oil or hemlock oil, then apply it to the extraction; and this causes him to vomit from condition, and stops up his nostrils when he sneezes, and puts pieces of cloth or wool around his ear; and keep the ear raised.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	Many times vomiting comes from this treatment; and if it does not come, then apply it to the extraction with fine pincers, of which this is the form:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If it vomits with the pincers, it is good; if not, then apply it to the extraction with a fine needle; and if it does not vomit by this, then make a small incision in the top of the ear or near the ear canal, and stop up the opening with molten wax so that nothing can enter with the needle; then remove it properly, for many times vomiting comes as we have said; and if it does not vomit in this way, then take a piece of cloth and put it on the ears, and put any instrument that is sharp at the point to make, and put a little cotton around; then press the cloth on the arrow or whatever else, and remove it.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if she does not follow all of these things that we have said, then quickly cut the ear as soon as an abscess forms and bleeds, and spasm; and the manner of the cut is that you first make a small incision into the painful part of the ear, and extract the pus according to its measure of virtue, then place the pus between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and make a small cut at the root of the ear where the grease depends; and let the cut be as like a moon, until you come to the bone, then remove it according to your power, and suck it vigorously to your mouth; and the cure as long as it is healed.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre I spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if it is small grains that are embedded and swell, administer extraction; and if it cannot be removed, administer the following subtle method according to this form:
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	and make an incision of that grain.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	But do not make a small incision when you think the grains are moist due to earwax, until you have made many pieces; then extract with fine tweezers and saliva, as we have said, so that the extraction is aligned.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	Therefore, in the case of something that falls into the ear, it is necessary to use blowing and a large piece of old cotton.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	And let it lie flat on the ear itself or the sharp part.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	If it jumps out because of the wind, that's good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	If not, take many thin, long stones according to the length of your finger, and heat them in the fire; and place the hairs one or two pieces of earwax into the ear, and from the other foot, and strike with another stone over the stone that is in the ear; and do not stop doing this stone after stone until the sharp is completely out, and thus it will all come out; and if you see, take the reed, and strike one of the pieces in the ear, and the other piece from fire as long as the most dry reed is burned; then make another of the other stones until the sharp is completely out, as we have said in the stone.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	In the extraction of the animal, if it is small in size, like a mouse and similar things, proceed as we have said in the division; but if it is large enough to be felt, then minimize the extraction of pincers; and it is the lightest thing to remove that is in the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	In the extraction of worms in the ears, if you cure them as we have said in the division and treat distillations, and the treatment does not help, then look at the ear in the sunlight: if there are no worms, then remove them with fine pincers; if there are none, then take the form of a hook.
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	And it should be narrow below and wide above.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	And apply the narrowest bandage to the ear according to the amount of pain, then it is often used throughout the entire head; do this as often as all the vertebrae are visible.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And if they do not comply with the extraction, then apply a cotton swab around the head as I have mentioned in the stone; and if they do not succeed as we have said, then administer distillations that the ancients have discovered for the relief of vertebrae, and you will find them where to treat distillations; and if you distill your oils and medicines into the ear with this instrument, of which you see the form as you see:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a I petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a I estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren I raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations I poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And it should be of silver or lead, not too thin for the small pores, and above overs to distill; and to press within the distillation with a well-made silver instrument for this, and if you see take the razor and wrap around the point evenly with cotton; then pour your oil or juice, and whatever you see from your medicines in the cane, and the cane should be in the ear; then press inside the razor all the cotton, and press your hand temperamentally until the oil is distilled or chevement from the ear; and the smell of the oil is inside, and it should be the distillations a little heated to the fire as they distill in the ear; and guard that it is not too cold, for the medicine would not be good.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the swelling of the ears
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient I poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born without some swelling in their ears; and this same thing happens to men by swelling of a wound, or by a bone growing inside the ear, and this swelling never comes from within the ear, if one cannot see it; and it always comes from outside the swelling, and one can see it well.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	Therefore, that which comes from within, if one cannot see it, is a serious infection in many positions, and in this one, where one sees, it is necessary to put the ear with the bad pain in the sun; and look inside: if you see the appearance of an opening, if the work has all this space of which this is the form:
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	And let the gauze be placed in front and behind the entire ear, so it does not stick to the ear; if the opilation is made of char cloth or horsehair from the ear, then hold the delicate pincers and the copper lightly, until that char is completely removed.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	And if the opilation is placed inside the ear, then take a thin razor and slightly heat it on the fire, then place it where the ear is.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	If you feel the opilation that the patient feels gritty in the ear, slightly pierce it, and make sure not to damage the nerves of the ear; then place in the ear a tent according to the width of the perforation, and moisten with Egyptian vinegar.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Do not touch the wound until it is healed, or take a tent and moisten it with rose petals, and sprinkle sulfur powder on top; if you see the ear swell, then remove the tent and apply another tent made of rose oil and wax, until the swelling is removed; then treat it as needed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if blood flows out, soak a sponge and apply cold cloths to the ear, and use other treatments that remove the flow of blood which are used to treat distillations.
de la char des papieres	of the writing of papers
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	This is the method for writing on papers when they are wet and then dry: extend them with tacks and pincers, and the copper from its roots; then place it on the lead broken glass.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And if without removing it, the cautery lenticular subtle, and the cautery-maker after the incision is good; and many times they repair, but nothing remains of their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
de la gresle	of the gravel
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	Frequently come in papers of the eyes things that seem gravelly in their form and hardness, and because this disease is called "hail", and is an assembly of large moisture above and below; the workings are such: if the hail moves from one part to another, it is a light thing to know; then make the opening wide, then scrape each part slightly, then take it with pincers, and cover.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	If you do not cover it without piercing the paper, it does not harm the patient; and if the wound is large, it gathers at a seam, and cure it until it is healed; and if it is small, do not force it, for the inflammations restore it soon and cause pain.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	And if the splinter is large and descending into the depths of the ear towards the upper part, turn the paper, and place the splinter in a pair of pincers, and hold and press it from both sides; and if the paper is separated by the incision, it causes no harm; and when the splinter is cut, pour some oil of strong salt, and cure the wound with what has been injured until the wounds are healed.
de la graisse des eulz	of the fat of the eyes
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	Exinach is a fat that is squeezed from the paper above, and it has more in children than in adults, and it hurts their eyes, and they vomit it in the morning, and they cannot look at the light of the sun because their tears flow to their eyes; and because they lie on their faces, they sleep on them, and their papers are outside their eyelids moistened by the exinach that appears in the oil.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	And when you press the joint to your touch and feel the extrusion between them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren I drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	And the way of the work is such that the hairs put their head in your hand; then take a cloth of linen, and make a tent in the shape of a circle according to the quantity that contains extrusion from each part, then put it on top of it; and press on one side and the other so that the extrusion is assembled within the circle; then cut in the middle of the moisture at the sharp blade a slit not wider than the wound on the skin of the vein; and cut the skin until you come to the extrusion; and in many positions, extrusion from the slit, according to the shape of a piece of white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Take the piece of cloth from the entire room between your two hands, and turn your hand to the right and left until it is spread; and guard that you do not press into the wound, that you do not come to all the space above the oil, that you do not harm it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	And if it does not open at the beginning of the wound, then slightly rub the wound until it opens; then extract as we have said, then wipe cloths in gentle and sharp, and put on the limb, and bandage well.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	And if there are such men who break silence and put on to corrupt the moisture that is remaining.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then the healer as long as they are healthy.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it comes to the abscess, which is too hot, then the healer applies wet compresses until they are healthy.
des poilz des papieres	of hairs of papers
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc IIII manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When in papers hairs are born that are not natural, and are awake, if they harm the eyes, and bring about various diseases as tears accustomed and softening of papers and albugine, until it is caused by the destruction of the eyes; and the cure is according to four methods: either by cauterization together with fire, or by medicine cold according to what is before or chapter on cauterization, and it is done or by incision and stitching or by cauterizing, according to what I will say.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai I fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai I fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	It is necessary to place the injured part of the body in your left hand, then return the paper of oil to your right hand; if it is inverted, it is good; if not, if there is a needle at the end of the thread, and above the margin of the paper where the hairs grow between these hairs, and draw the thread above the paper, and return the razor; then in the part outside the paper, outside the hairs, covering all the skin from the great calf to the small; then straighten the thread, and place on the paper a small tent of cotton and linen, then above the paper a figure of a bowl, like the bowl of a mirror, and throughout it is necessary that the figure be according to the quantity you saw lifted the paper that is divided into both.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor; et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	And if the patient has skill in cutting out a great quantity of paper according to how the paper is soft; then make all the spaces above the two lines that you have marked, and begin with the large leg joint just below the small one; and let one of the tears be near the natural hairs at the base of the root, then bind the one end in one of the two angles of the wound, then scrape off all the skin; then assemble the two lips into a seam of an needle to all the thread of fine silk, and suck out the blood, and let the superfluity of the hairs above the two edges to anything that is glued, if you see it done; and if not, if you have no care, then leave the seam and the threads just below three or four days; then cure the wound without sewing things that are dry and constricting, because the paper revives at the moment of the wound and its assembly, but the seam is dried (as they say of the ancients), and it is work without fear; and if in another way: and it is that you sign the paper in a figure that is as alike as the pattern of myrtle, if you have three threads according to the form that is here:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	then apply pressure evenly according to the form that is here:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans; et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	And if you cannot hold the needles, and the thing is not even, take a needle or there is a thread, and place it in the shape; and the other thread over the big bone, and the second thread over the small one, and gather the threads evenly between your fingers; then lift your hand evenly, and lift all the skin above where you have marked, as we have told, then gather the two lips of the wound by sewing, and cure it until it is healed; and if an abscess comes to your incision, soothe it with ointments and similar soothing things; and never once are the hairs of the skin turned: if you use what we have said about the incision; but the sewing on one and the other is more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai II caines par art, et II liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as II chiés de II pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les II cainnes des II parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	The care of the canes is as follows: and it is that you convert the paper and the thread inside according to what I have said, and then make two canes by art, and two fine threads as long as the paper and the width of the space is; and cope with the two questions of the two parts where you hold the threads; then assemble the one and the other subtly above what surmounts the paper of the oil, and strain the two canes from the two parties form; and leave it in this way for some time, and the skin that was stretched will die and rot and putrefy, until it falls off by itself.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	If it is delayed, if the copper has one force, then heal it until it is healed; and when the wound is dressed, and if the paper is lifted, and they will not grow back the hair; and this is the form of the two needles that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of long and wide:
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute I fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse I autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a I ou II ou III ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	The workings are such that you grasp a thin needle, and draw out the silk thread softly and thin; then assemble the heads and not the other thinly, and let the lengths of the threads be one palm long; then order the other thin silk thread briefly in the trap, and not the heads of the thread; then put the hairs on your skin; and so it is beyond the sun so that the workings are declined, for this is a thin and small working, then draw the needle through the entire trap at the root of the hair pushed aside, and let it pierce into the paper firmly until you remove it from above the natural hair; then pull the hair up to the trap, and let the other hair in the trap, if there is one or two or three or more; then pull your hand so that the hairs come out of the entire trap with the natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo II jors ou III, tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne I poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	And if the bone is treated and the hairs do not come out with it, then treat the bone with the same thread that you have ordered, until the bone becomes fully healed and you can see it through the oil; then tie the thread and leave it closed for two or three days, until the hair grows back in its place and the flesh grows on top of it. And if the hairs are small, accompany one long hair from the sheep's wool, and raise it with the other where you leave it, until it is fully extended and then lift it.
de la porriture de l’oil	of the healing of the oil
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	When this disease, which is called "aleacrati" or the pride comes from within, there are two ways: one natural and the other unnatural.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	And it comes from a wound, or a cut, or cauterization, and similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	And the method of treatment in this is that you remove that suture, and dry the lips of it, and put inside tents of linen, and bandage it until it is healed; and you should only use in its care things that dry and constrict.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	Because if you do this, the disease will return worse than before; but in the work of things that are softening, such as fenugreek; and the rose of sharp or high and seeds of linseed boiled, and some drop of oil of cloves, and there is wrapped a tent, and the care of this.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the treasures of your care are that you take heed that they do not sound according to their former form; and this work that we have said is only to guide them away from this disease, that they do not return according to their former form.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	of the oil that comes in the oil
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	This disease that is called "akrazat" truly is natural and accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	The accidental comes from wounds and cuts and cauterization and similar things; and the way of the work is that you hold an needle, in which it has a double thread, and the char in the oil, and make it pierce from the left leg to the right, so that the thread comes out of both the char; then the char is placed above all the needle, and the covering is wide.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the paper's shape returns according to what it should be, it is good; if not, take the razor and put it in the incision, and return the paper, and make two cuts inside the paper; and let the ones who have the two cuts at the angles of the incision you have made be together, so that the shape is as if it were a letter with no "Greek" (ie, not crooked); then remove that char, according to the quantity that its cost is from, of what the paper means, then add the two missing parts and thread them with a thread of linen; then care for what we have said about medicines that soften and tents, until they are healed.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les II leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	And if the illness comes from a cut or a stitch or cauterization, then it is necessary to make a plain cut between the hairs and the papers, and according to what has been said before; then clean between the two sheets of a tent, as I have said; and one must do the work according to the form of the illness, for it is very different in form, and the wise masters compare all their knowledge to see how they can make the figure return to its natural shape; and the patients themselves, according to what is necessary for work and instruments in many dispositions.
dou soudement de la papiere	and of the paper
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	When this suture is done by many people in a certain way that the paper above is smeared with the white of oil, and it cannot move or do its natural work, then you should go out the point of a razor outside the paper, and lift it up; and stretch it with pincers, until you remove what is hard to the subtle spatula, which is not too rough nor too sharp, so that the hairs cannot suffer that the spatula is too rough and does not burn the oil; and your incision, from which you scrape that assembly, lightly, so that the paper returns to its natural form; and that whole assembly is healthy, and never put in vinegar or sweet water, and chicken broth; then between the paper and the oil, put a linen tent, and put on top of the oil a thick wool cloth; and after the job use the chicken broth and other things as long as it is healthy.
de l’ungle de l’oil	of the elbow of the oil
Saiches que li ungle est selonc II manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a I dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	There are two ways in which the elbow is affected: one is nervous and resembles a hard, thick, white substance, and another that is not nervous but resembles frozen moisture, so that when touched with iron and heated with pincers, it cannot be removed; and both start from near the large arm bone and grow slowly until they cover the whole eye and light and movement of the oil.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met I poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et I fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	And the way of the incision is that the hairs put their head in your hand, then work the eyes; and lift the paper to your hand, then bend the elbow with pincers of small double, and extend it above; then take a needle, and put the hair of a horse, or a cow, or a cow, and the thread strong; and double the point of the needle a little and insert it into the elbow, and push the needle through the whole needle, and tie the elbow with a thread and extend it above, and scrape all the hair on the side of the elbow that shows the pearl and the silk to the hair just below, then cut the remaining at the root of the arm bone with very thin and small forces, and leave the natural skin of the arm so that by the incision no blood comes out as usual; and once it has been extended only to the elbow, and the thread, as we have said:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	And be careful that the spatula does not touch the charred flesh and break it, and that the prickling does not pierce; and after the incision pour a little broken silk oil, and apply a collar of litharge, and leave it just above the other wound; then treat as necessary until it is healed.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And if the joint is not sensitive, and you cannot insert the needle, and the incisions cannot enter, many times this appearance of a joint of medicines is cured; and they are born as I have said in the division, and if you see it covered, then apply oil to the painful spot, and take the spatula lightly with a sharp edge in this form:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	And carefully raise the angle above subtly, and if you see that it does not soften and the skin is close, then drip from your mouth into the oil collier made of litharge and red collier and worn-out silk, and stifle the oil just after; then begin the other work according to this same method, until it is completely out.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing is contrary in the oil, such as an abscess, then milk, and first cure the abscess until it is healed, then begin the work as before, until it is healed.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if the appearance of the flesh on the arm is night in the oil due to great harm, then soak it in vinegar, and apply a part and not all at once, that there may not be any crying; then pour in the oil a red liquid called colloidal sulfur.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	of the char that grows above the pupil
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre; et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	Some men never grow red hair above the pupil, and it covers the pupil and stretches over the paper and turns to the defense, and it seems like a balustrade rose; and if the work is that the hairs put their head in your healthy skin, then work the eyes, and cut all that hair with suitable scissors to the skin, and hold it at force; then cover the first hair, and go all scraping to the razor just to the end, and be careful not to bleed the oil at the work; and let the incision of the spanish fly that we have said in the incision of the nail and as small forces of which we take the base, so that the form after this chapter demonstrates; and when the incision is made and all the hair is removed, then use oil of silk broken or you distill colloidal sulfur and similar corrosive medicines, and put on the oil behind cotton with a little bit of wool, so that it is ensured that an abscess is fully healed; and if nothing remains, and the swelling goes away, and you doubt that an abscess is fully healed, then leave the oil and cure the abscess with calming abscess remedies; then return to your work until it is healthy, and thus make all hairs that are stretched in the oil by this similarity.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	But in any case, it is necessary that you raise the care of each one of these weaknesses of the natural way; and of the accidental way, in the work of iron; and do not put your hand into any of these works until you see that this member suffers from that work.
des voines des eulz	of the eyes'
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	Red veins that are covered over the eye, and take away from sight their work and weaken the eye always.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	Therefore, the first thing you should look for is whether there is that red vein in the eye, and if it is not, then there is no other disease besides that; then the work is done in this way: command the patient to put his head on yours, then suspend those veins all around according to your wisdom, and let the lines be subtle double in this form:
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en I cors selonc ceste forme:	And let them be done twice, by degrees, in one day according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	Then apply those forces to the veins gently, and soak the blood clots after another hour, until you can remove those veins from the oil; and guard that you do not pierce the oil with points of the spatulas, and do this work at noon in front of the sun, and be very fervent in your work so that you do not cope with those veins; and when you have done this, distill green and red wine into the oil to corrupt what is left behind.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	And if you cannot collect all the blood in that hour, then apply a plaster on top of the oil with things to relieve the pain of the eyes, and let it stay for some time until the pain is relieved and you are sure of an abscess, then start again according to this method as long as it is not healed; and this is the form of forces:
de la fistule de l’oil	of the oil fistula
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	If the patient calls it "arissati" fistula: when you cure it with fire and medicine as I have said before, and it is not healed, then put it in the place where you cut out the abscess, where it should die, and drain all the pus that is there, until the bone is exposed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a I chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bone is exposed, and you see the corruption and the blackness, then remove all the instrument that is in its form; it is called "hard head", and make a new one from iron as hard as the one in the present form:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And place the broken bone above the joint, then turn it between your two hands, and press your hand slightly until you feel that the corruption is removed; and do this once, then restore the bone with drying remedies.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	If the bone is sound and flesh has grown, and the wound of the bowels is sound and remains thus for forty days, and it does not reopen and is not abscessed, and no bad accidents happen, then remove it when it is healthy; if not, there is no other remedy than to bring the fistula to the opening of the neck according to this form: and you should uncover the bone the second time with iron and with wet dressings, and when it is uncovered take the forehead according to this form, and let the head of the shoulder be at three angles, and let the fistula be attenuated just above the chief as you see here:
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	Then place it above the bone of the arm, and move your hand away from the oil and the flesh, then return to the whole forearm until it pierces the bone and the patient feels the pain because if he holds his hand on his neck; and then restore the joint with dry medicines, as I have shown you, and when the char is born and hardens the muscles, if the matter goes to the neck, it is a lighter thing for the pain.
de l’issue de l’oil	from the end of the oil
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil I liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en IIII, et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the eyes open fully and do not come out of place, and do not dislocate, if they are dislocated, then you must tie the pain; then clean it, then put on suction cups or heat to draw out the pus, then put on the oil and a poultice made of acid, aloe, incense, and sarcocolla, and then strain the oil, and apply the plaster with bandages and cloths; and the manner of the cloths is that you take cloths that are soft enough, and double each into four, and then put one on top of the other according to the quantity that the eyes have in their work; then strain it through a sturdy cloth, and start the suction again without hurting; then remove the suctions and leave the oil strained day and night, and if the eyes dislocate again, you must strain them more; then remove the poultice after the morning and night, and if you see the oil heal, it is good; if not, then start the plaster and cloths and poultice and suctions until they are healed.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	The breaking of a broken thread
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com I grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait I fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When disruptions come in the broken thread, then open it, and it comes out like a strong piece of paper, and is easy to see; if you see it covered, the work is such that you put a needle at the root of the part below this above, then put another needle or where the double thread of the arm is; and let it pierce, and leave the first needle according to its position; then cover the double thread of the thread and wrap a part of the cloth around it, and hold it tightly, then remove the needle and pour some oil on the injured part; and leave it until the thread chooses with the cloth, then care for the oil with comforting things until the wound is healed; and once the wound is closed by the cloth each part of a circular piece of cloth, until it is healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the hairs appear to be too long, pierce them with a thin needle that comes from under the oil, and remove the moisture and descend the hairs, and immediately enter; then extract them until they are clean.
de la bowe de l’oil	of the edge of the oil
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	This disease that is called "alcunnati" is nothing more than a blade that is assembled in the oil, resembling a sharp edge descending, and it is not a sharp edge; and the manner of its appearance is such that you make the patient sit with the sore on the seat well-covered and straight, then take the chief between your hands at two parts, and the movement until you see the blade coming up to your eyes; then it should be hidden, and not descend and be disassembled in the light, and see the things as they were; and if it does not descend, it is a sharp edge, and if it does not descend from the blade, it is not well-covered as we have said.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If the pain is between your hands, then take the thin spatula and make it over the cornea of the eye and gently by the continuation of the conjunctive with the cornea and the crown, until the boil is out; and when it is out, then pour in the hot oil mixed with honey, or hot or fenugreek is boiled and honey, then cure it with other cures until it is healed.
des aigues de l’oil	of the hot oils
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit.	We have similarities of the oils in the division, and what is needed to pierce; so work according to health.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	It is necessary for you to make the dislocated joint rest between your crossed hands, outside of the light by the sun, and with clean and tightly stretched oil; then place the oil paper at your right hand if the joints are on the left, or at your left hand if the joints are on the right; then take in your right hand if the joints are on the left, or in your left hand if the joints are on the right, the instrument called «almagda», or in your right hand if the joints are on the right; then place the point of the instrument above the crown of the oil at the larger end of the oil to the part of the lesser arm, then strike the instrument called «almagda» forcefully, and with your hand restored as long as it pierces through the crown of the oil, and feel that almagda is approaching the empty thing; and it is necessary that the measure of the way almagda be at the beginning of the space from the gold to the end of the needle; and this is the crown of the oil; if you see the bone in that paper for the clarity of the cloth, and then place the instrument above or at the sharp end, then extract one after another.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	If he sharp now sees the hairs in front of him and the instrument in his eye.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	After resting a little, and if he sharp raises the second vein, put the thread with the instrument, and when it is stuck and does not rise, gently pull slightly around your hand and and; then put in a little bit of silk, and leave the eye inside.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	Then put by default the eye soaked in rose oil and enough vinegar, and tie with clean oil.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	We, and those who are of our kind, put on top with enough vinegar.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if the splinter cannot be entered into the oil due to its hardness, because there are some men who have very hard eyes, then you must use the tool called "alberit", of which this is the shape:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	Therefore, pierce only the conjunctiva, and do not go too far in front, but make the eye gentle, then push the splinter, as we have said; and at the completion of the work, compare the patient's sleep with the darkness in which he lies on his back in the dim light; and for all movements, take light foods, and do not move his head to the right or left, and be tied according to his disposition just before this time; then remove him from this same dark room, and test his vision, and see some things, and then return the bandage to the seventh day; and you should not do this in the hour of the cure or after the incision now, but it is necessary that you elevate him, because the sharp pain quickly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	When an abscess is ready to burst, you should let the oil out in front of the seventh hour, and give it what satisfies the abscess; and when it is calmed, if you let the pus out and put on its face a gold leaf or something to cover any light, and let it stay in that dark house.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	And then go out of the house little by little, and convert into its case; and cleanse that no disciple should intervene in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	Some came to us who was of the Yrach, who told us that in some countries people do all kinds of things with it, because of which the needle is successful, but I have never seen any in our land, nor have I read about it in the books of the ancients; and perhaps it is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And these are the similarities of the forms of almsgiving, because those who do not know them see them as such; and they are made of pure gold properly.
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en III angles ague.	And the heads of these are of the same subtlety, and the others in three angles.
de la char sor le neis	of the garment for the neck
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	No one ever has or will have garments of various colors, because there are some that seem like scorpions at the neck; and if there are such, or if there is a garment with a bad color, and if it has a good color.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	In that case, in those garments that are good and not enhanced, it is necessary for you to place the pain between your hands against the sun; and work its nostrils, and pour the wine into those garments, and the others outside; because this corresponds to what you can support from the subtle spirit of one part, as long as you know that that garment is completely clean.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout I des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	And if there remains nothing that can be covered, open it with all the subtle and light instruments, so that nothing remains; and if it is a pustule, apply a warm cloth, and cut it as it should be; and if it is malignant pustules, hurry and cauterize it until the wound is not stained and all the poisons are removed, then pour or cleanse with vinegar and water.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	If the wound does not heal, and moisture comes to the palate, if it is not healthy; and if moisture does not perforate as it should, because there is a bone above, where the instruments do not come out to cut: therefore it is necessary that you go with a piece of linen slightly thick, and hold it in your hands, and have between each end of the space an equal or unequal amount; and put the bad parts of the thread in the wound from above, and pull it through the mouth; and often do this to the child at school, and it is a light thing for one who wants to do it; then hold the head that comes out of the mouth with one hand, and the other head that comes out of the mouth with the other hand, and clean them one after the other as we are who are or thread.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	Do this until you see that the hairs have not been corrupted by the new wound, then remove the son, soak in blood, and moisten the thread with Egyptian eye salve, and return it to the nose as before; do this three times or more, until the mummification process has removed all that remains of the wound; then place a piece of cloth on the nose for several days until it is healed, and if there is a need for dry medicines, use them; and this is the form of the instrument for purging the head, by which oils and medicines are distilled into the nose.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait I mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	And it should be of silver or brass, resembling an open lantern, like a cat, and conduct it thus; and if you see, make a closed cat, and let the instruments plain for purging the head; and have one hand on the head to hold when heating the oil or any liquid.
de la char sor le neis	for the sinew of the neck
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	Often a disease arises at the head of the neck, which is called "telul", and grows and becomes large over time; and for this reason it is necessary to cover it from the beginning, and remove all the bone, then put the fire cautery or the burning medicine on the wound; and if it is difficult to cover it until it is large, if it is hard, of pale color, and poor sensation: if you do not touch it with iron because it is an infected abscess, for when it is covered once, great harm comes to the pain; and if the abscess is softly touched, not of pale color, and you see that it can be completely covered, then remove the pain and the cover without fear, and cure the wound of similar and constricting things.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	When the nose is cut off and sewn
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	Because of the continuous solutions that come in one of these cartilaginous bones, which is very rare and occurs in few people.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore, if the wound is fresh and full of blood, then look to see if the lips are separated on both sides; and then stitch them together at a seam, then treat it until it is healed; and if the lips are already separated on one side or the other, then you must scorch all the parts that are not healed until they are, then gather the two lips together at a seam, and hold them tightly, and powder with dragon's blood powder and frankincense; and place the powders on a piece of strong or other plaster, and leave it until it heals through it, then treat the wound as an ointment until it is healed.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The way of the seam is such that you assemble the solution: either by needles, as we have said in the sewing of the belly; or by thread, as I have told you.
des apostemes des levres	of abscesses of the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	Some people have abscesses inside the lips, hard and small, and larger ones; therefore, it is necessary to turn the lips, and cut under each one, and take out the pus with pincers and clean every part; then apply the wound after the incision of broken glass, until the wound is not soaked; then apply ointment, and cure the wound with dry things until it is healed.
de la char des gencives	of the toothache
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Often toothache arises from the gums due to the old name "albulus"; it is necessary to hold it with forceps, and cover its root, and let out the pus or blood; then place on the tooth viper's powder, or other powders that strengthen and dry; and if the toothache returns after the incision, and often does, cover it again, and cauterize: if it does not return after the cauterization; and these are the forms of instruments for covering.
des sordens	of the deaf
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	Sometimes the tartar is gathered at the root of the teeth, between the gums and the teeth, rough and sharp scars; and sometimes the black, yellow, and green teeth and stains come from the gum corruption, and are also smelly; it is necessary to seat the pain between your hands, and its causes should be in your holy place, and remove the teeth or the scars as long as nothing remains; and thus remove the black, yellow, and green, and the jaundice and other stains, until they are cleaned; and if you remove what is at the first layer, it is good; if not, start again on the second day and the tool, until you have removed everything; and know that the teeth have different forms of tools for cleaning, according to what the work demonstrates, because the tool used to clean between the teeth has other forms than those used to clean around the teeth; and these forms and others should be prepared with you.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	It is necessary when you are treating a tooth for its pain that you delay drawing it as long as possible, because this should not be done by anyone; for it is a substance very high just like that of which we have no excuse to draw.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	Therefore, when the tooth is very painful, it is necessary that you be sure of the tooth being dead.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	Many times the pain of the tooth is relieved, and you should be careful that it is not a dead tooth, and draw out the good tooth; and in any case, the pain does not depart until the evil is extracted, for we have already done this to such saints; and when you are sure of the dead tooth, it is necessary that you scorch around the tooth on all sides; then move it with your fingers or subtle forceps at first and at first, until it is well dislocated, then firmly fix the forceps; and let the one who has the pain in your saint between your teeth, and hold it so that it does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	After straightening the tooth correctly without breaking, and if it does not jump out, take any of these tools and gently push it into each part lightly, and shake it as you did first.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	And if the tooth is pierced and damaged, it is necessary to fill it with cloths where the pus is; and if the extraction is subtly held by hooks, that it does not break when being extracted; and it is necessary to cover around the gum to discharge the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	And be careful not to break it, and that a part remains, and reapply the pain by the evil of the root with greater pain of the first.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	And you must guard that you do not act as the ignorant do, who, by their haste and audacity, break the chariots at once, and never mend what we have told; but bring about great disease through the roots that they delay, or through the chariot that they break, as often as we have seen; and when the dense matter is drawn out, wash the limb with wine or alcohol and salt; and if blood comes out, which often happens, use the broken glass of vitriol; and if it does not work, cauterize.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The shapes of the instruments, by which one moves the first tooth, should be long points and large handles, so they do not bend when you pull the tooth; and these are the shapes:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And they should be thick members so they do not bend when pulling, and they should be made of good iron, and they should be sharp to hold.
de la racine des dens	from the root of the tooth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou ij.,	When the root remains when pulling, then you must put a piece of soft linen cloth on the wound or two or three.
tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	until the wound is softened, then push the forceps called "alligator", of which the patient seems like a beak; and they should be made inside like a hook and this is the shape:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not want to come out with all these needles, it is necessary that you dig around the root entirely, and place the instrument called "althali", which is a spoon-like tool, of which this is the form:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	And if it is too large and does not break at once, and the root jumps out through the hole, it is good; if not, with all the instruments, of which the forms come hereafter:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait II rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if one uses this instrument that has two prongs, of which this is the form:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other forceps that are before in the region of the teeth, and of this instrument which seems like large needles, of which this is the form:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	And this instrument is not to be broken, and it has many sharp edges; and also other instruments, which are not mentioned; and the wise masters find their own instrument, according to what their work and the disease show, because there are some diseases where the ancients did not teach about the instrument due to the diversity of the cases, and if they break the cartilage or other bones, or if they hurt, if they search for the instruments that are necessary, as I have told you, and help with gestures, of which this is the form:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And be thick and well-holding to hold the bone, so that it does not escape, but let him hold and remove; then restore the limb with appropriate medicines according to this, and if there is decay in the bone, and it is small, if he has all this tool:
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a I petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When the tooth appears not according to the natural course, and its shape is ugly, and especially in young women, it is necessary that you remove the tooth after the tooth, and it is not in the right place, and one cannot be made or filed: therefore, the razor; and if it is stuck with the tooth, take this tool which is shaped like a small beak, and it is similar to a sharp iron point:
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And the copper coin is slowly and slowly placed in the mouth for the hardness of the tooth, and because you do not move the other teeth, and if it appears that it can be removed, then the coin is removed with a small piece of cloth like this:
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	And it is also like the copper wire used to make arrows; and in the tooth, slowly and slowly place the coin in the mouth for a short time, so that it does not move until it breaks; then scrape the entire surface with any sharp instrument, and if the tooth is too sharp and it bleeds the tongue, it is necessary to remove the sharpness until it is even, so that it does not bleed the tongue or corrupt the speech.
quant li dent lochent	when the tooth aches
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	When the tooth in front aches, or by percussion or falling, and the pain cannot be relieved because it keeps moving, and you treat them with restricting medicines, it does not help; then you should restrict them with a gold wire, because the silver wire becomes green and rotten, but the gold never changes; and let the wire be neither too thin nor too thick, according to the quantity of the space between the teeth; and if you see that the teeth are moving, take the wire and double it between the two healthy teeth, then put the sick tooth between the healthy ones, if there is one or more, until you feel safe on the other side of the tooth; then continue the covering towards the part where you started, and gently and carefully tighten your hand until it does not move; and let your string be at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	Then cut the loose threads with a needle, and gather them, and place them between the healthy teeth, so that it does not bleed the tongue; and then leave it tightly as long as it can stay, and if it loosens, or the thread breaks, then tie another thread; if it stays, it will serve in this way throughout its time, and this is the form of healthy teeth and the arrangement of two healthy teeth, and two missing teeth, as you see.
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And when the tooth dies, if it is replaced in its place, from fresh to fresh, as we have said; and it does not interfere with anything that is wise and painful, and it is never made into the shape of a goat's bone tooth, and it is placed in the place where the defect is, and it is tied as we have said, and it stays and serves in this way for a long time.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	to copper the tongue's tie
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	There are no times when this tie comes from the tongue or by nature, that one is born thus; or by accident of a wound burned; and the operations are such that you open the mouth with the painful tongue, and hold its head in your own, and relieve the tongue; then copper the nervous tie with the wide, until the tongue is dislodged from its place, and if there is hardness or not, and it is by burning of a wound, then boil the splinter and copper the wide gently; and be careful that the wound does not open too much, for the artery which is out; and when you have done, lift the tongue of high rose and of ease, or of high cold, then put out the tongue a linen tent; and treat the painful spots every night, so that the wounds cannot close.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	If there is bleeding from the wound, apply a fragment of broken glass to the limb; if it does not stop, cauterize with a slow-burning firebrand, which is good for the wound; then treat it with other remedies until it heals.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	If you see that the wound is of a dark or black color and hard, and the patient does not feel pain, do not touch it, for it is a chancre; and if it is declining towards suppuration, and there is moisture, pour water through a narrow spout, and deliver it from one side and the other; and if it does not stop bleeding at your work, apply a fragment of broken glass until it stops bleeding, then return to your work until you have removed all the blood; then lift the limb up and down, and treat it with other remedies until it heals.
des apostemes de la gorge	of throat abscesses
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	Never come from within the throat blisters that are called "godaths", and they are properly called the II amendments, and when you treat them, as we have said in the division, and if they are not healed, then be careful: if it is an abscess hard and of small size and of fusse color, do not touch it with iron.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	And if it is red and the root is large, do not touch it with iron, as for the outflow of blood; but let it be until it is soft, and then you will break it, or it will break by itself; and if it is of white color and the root is thin, have prepared the instrument to cover, but first check that the abscess has not moved and is calm.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	Then place the painful part in front of the sun, and his joint should be in its proper position, and the work of the mouth and the jawbone between his hands, and press the tongue out from all the instrument, from which this is the form; and it should be of silver or fine brass as some knives:
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	If you press the tongue with all this instrument, and you see the abscess, then take the needle and the thread in the ammoniac, and draw it up above as much as you can; and take nothing else with, then cover the instrument with which this is the form, which resembles a forceps; and in any case the teeth are bent, one on the other, and they are very sharp, and it is made of iron or tin:
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have this instrument present, then use a pair of tweezers, with which it is shaped like this:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les II amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les II amandres igament.	And on one side, it is sharp, and on the other side, blunt; and when you have grasped one of the tweezers, grasp the other in the same manner, and after the incision gargle the sharp pain with hot, sharp, and cold water, and if there is blood flowing, gargle the sharp pain with hot water, or use pounded green pomegranate skins, or mullein leaves, and similar things, until the wound is clean; then treat the cure until it is healed; and never do other abscesses than the two tweezers, so grasp them in that way.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	And I treated a woman with an abscess that was lodged within her throat, specifically a small abscess; and she had almost completely closed her throat, such that the woman could not breathe due to the swelling that was choking her, and could neither eat nor drink, and died if she remained thus for one or two days.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	And the abscess was so large that it had been inserted with two fingers through the two nostrils.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	I therefore immediately opened it, and inserted a finger into one nostril, then removed the pus through the other nostril, and cut out a large portion of the bone; then I repeated this process in the other nostril, and pressed on her tongue; afterwards I inserted the finger into these abscesses, and removed a part, and only a small amount of blood came out; and thus the woman was able to breathe again, and began to drink water and wine, and did not stop cutting away at this abscess for a long time; the abscess would then close up again, and fill the cavity that I had emptied, becoming very large; therefore I inserted a probe and cauterized it within her throat: thus it did not grow back; and I removed these parts, and only God knows what happened to her afterward.
de l’uve	of the eye
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	When referring to the eye, and it is protruding and long, it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is not too large and round, it is called "uvula".
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	When it is treated as we have said in the section, and the cure does not help much, and you see that the swelling of the abscess is calmed, and it is thin, then you must lance it; and the one that is rounded together and is not too long; and if it is bloody or dark red in color, then you must avoid the incision of the wound.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	There is great danger from the misaligned limb.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	Therefore, when you see it, according to the method I have mentioned, you should place the misaligned limb in front of the sun, and press the tongue with the instrument we have previously mentioned; then make an incision in the vein, and draw out the blood, and bandage it with one or two of the instruments I mentioned for cutting into the two arrows.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And it is necessary that you do not bandage more than the superfluity which is beyond the natural limit; for if you bandage too much, it will cause great pain to the voice and speech; and after the incision, use what we have mentioned in the cutting into the two arrows, and care for it until it is healed.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	And if the pain is too great, then it is necessary to use an engine for the cauterization of the sensitive pain.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	The method of the cauterization is sharp and quick.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	And the pain puts his head on your sound, and then press the tongue to the instrument that we have said or chapter of cauterization, and fix with sharp and live fire, so that it is not too thick or too clear; and in using the movement of this instrument, of which is the form:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés IIII jors ou V Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the head has one hair or put the medicine, as the movements of a spoon, and put the instrument to all the medicine over the vein; and the pain lies on his side, so that the saliva and muscle juice from his mouth of the medicine inside, so that it does not drip down the throat and the blood; then hold your hand to all the medicine and press it over the vein, the quantity of half an hour, until you see the benefit and the medications of the medicine are calmed; and if you see, take cotton and wrap it around any instrument, and wipe the cotton in the medicine, and blow the instrument to all the cotton inside, until the cotton is burned over the vein; and do this often, until the cauterization of the medicine is perfect, then let it dry, and boil after IV or V And if you have the task of restarting the cauterization of the medicine, so start again, and after the cauterization bandage around the vein, with cotton greased in butter, and clean what is around the medicine; and be wrapped in sharp cold, and be treated with gargles until they are healthy.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en I pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait I estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This cure is safer from incision than from cauterization; if it is treated with fumigation in this manner, take chamomile and hyssop and origanum and rue and camomile and similar herbs, and all or some of them in a pot, and put vinegar in it, and make it boil; and the pot should be well sealed with strong earth, and inside the pot have an instrument like this:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	And it should be of silver or tin, and one of the prongs inserted into the patient's mouth until the steam rises from the wound to the eye, until the wound is dead; afterwards, repeat often, until the wound dries, and guard that you do not make steam at the beginning of the appearance of an abscess, for many things happen; and do not make steam except at the decline of an abscess.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	And if this instrument is not present, take a needle and place it inside the head, so that the mouth does not have too much heat; for the needle does not cause excessive vapor to burden the mouth, and it is a good cure together with safety.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou I morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge I fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren I estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Many times, it has been found in the throat with an oyster shell or fish spine, or nothing at all; therefore, you must remove what you can see, and press the tongue against the sun at all instruments, so that you can see the thing; and what does not open and is returned to the throat, it is necessary to make vomit the bad thing as soon as the food is cooked in the stomach; perhaps if the thing is opened by vomiting; or the bad things swallowed a piece of sponge, or a piece of naval, or a lettuce root, or a small piece of dry bread; and tie the sponge to the thread, and then it is swallowed; and when it comes back to the throat, it will stick, and then pull out the thing; and if it does not come out because of what we have said, take the instrument according to this form:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	And let the crooked instruments be bent at the head so that they can more lightly enter the throat, and raise the head high; and guard that you do not touch the epiglottis, that the instrument does not go there, nor push too much bone in; and it is better that the hairs push the instrument, for it is easier or the thing is already there; if it goes down, or it pulls it all along the instrument equally, as far as it is full.
de la sansue de la gorge	of the throat sinew
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	There is no medicine for the throat sinew, as I have said in the division, by the cure of medicines; and if it does not help, then look at the throat hairs to the sun, then press the tongue against the instrument that I have told you.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	And if you see the sandal, then trace it with all the small nails, or with thin needles that are worth its weight.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	And if it does not work, then take a hairy skin, and put it in the throat of the patient, then pull or move the hair of the skin, and do this often with the iron that is heavy.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	And if the patient's wounds become infected all day long.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	Then take full the cup of cold water, and open the mouth, and pour it down to prevent swallowing, and move it to its hand often; and as soon as the sandal feels the cold, it will stop.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	And if she does not choke as we have said, then suffocate the bad smell of garlic, with the instrument I mentioned in the fumigation of onions; do this many times, for it will eventually stop.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	And the way of the fumigation is that you hold a pot with burning charcoal in it, and place a cloth cover on top, and in this hole put the instrument; then pour your fumigation, and put the bad smell of the mouth under the chin, close the mouth, so that the smoke does not escape but goes into the nose; and the nose will now cry out, and if she does not choke, start the fumigation again many times; and let the patient suffer thirst, and eat salty things and others, and do not drink any vinegar; and then it is necessary that she be cured by this government.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	And the shape of the instrument used to treat the shoulder, so that when it can be seen, resembles a crooked hook entering the throat; and it has the shape of a beak, and there is roughness from lime, so that whatever it takes, it cannot slip. And here is its shape:
li chapistres des apostemes	the chapters on abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	There are many kinds of abscesses, according to what the memory comes here after one and another in this book, and they differ in puncture and cut; and it is in two ways that one is in its own shape itself, and because it holds moisture.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	And the second method is for those who are at the chest.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	For the abscesses of the head are different from those of the foundation, and the abscesses of the shoulder are different from those that come in joints, and each has its own judgment in the work.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	And if there are abscesses that one should not pierce until the boil is ready to burst; and if there are others that one must pierce when they are ripe, and do not die as soon as they are completed, like abscesses that are beyond joints.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	For when abscesses come beyond joints, and one leaves it until it is surrounded by pus, there is a chance that the ligament and nerve of the joint are corrupted, which is the cause of contraction in that member.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	When the abscess is located deep within the limb, and if you delay the perforation until it dies, it will harm the main limb; or if it is located deep within the base, if you pierce it too late, it will not be able to pass through, and will remain long inside, and there will be a fistula; and it cannot be healed in the end.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	And it is necessary to drain the pus from the perforation of the abscess that has died according to its completion, and this is when the pain is relieved, and the departure of the fever, and the decrease in pain and inflammation, and the debatement and relief of the main abscess, and the other signs; and it is necessary to make the perforation where the abscess is most dependent on the limb, and where it opens most easily; and let the perforation be long along the body, and if the abscess is in the hands or feet, or in joints and nerves and arteries, and in all equal places where there is no bleeding.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	In these cases, according to the affected limb.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	And when abscesses are in the limb, it is better to leave the puncture until it is confirmed that digestion has been completed, as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	For if you puncture it before that, it may spread along the vein of blood from him, and is plainly full of much filth; and by chance harden the lips and deepen in him.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	And if any abscess that is punctured according to the wide vein, according to what the limb has to do.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	And it is necessary to treat small abscesses, small incisions; and large abscesses, large incisions, and many cuts according to the appearance of the size of the abscess; and if such abscesses or it is necessary to cover the cure, and cover; when it has become as the cloth, and is softened, it is necessary to do as one does with bubbles: and if such are cut in three angles, and if such are covered like the fuller's soap, and other shapes and covers.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	Those who do not have a head, such as superficial abscesses, it is necessary that you lance them openly; and if the abscess is large, and has collected much pus, and you lance it, if you do not draw out all the pus in that hour, but only a part; then stop the abscess on the other side, then do nothing else; do this gradually, many times, until all the pus is drawn out; especially if the wounds are of weak virtue, or women bearing, or small children, or old decrepit people.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	For the experienced never touch the wound until the pus has been drawn out, because by chance the wound may die, and you will not be harmed.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Avoid this chapter with great caution, and when you have perceived your abscess, dry the wound, and see if the wound of the abscess is small; and if a tailor complains, apply strips of linen or wool cotton; and if there are large abscesses, and much pus, it is necessary that you stuff each one with old cloth or shreds of linen to prevent moisture, and tie it just above the wound; then open, and treat the wound with ointment until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	And if blood flows from your work, apply sharp cold and cool, and wipe the wound, and put it on the affected area repeatedly.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the flow of blood persists, apply governance and care, and the powders I have mentioned in this book, and if it is too tense, and if the wound or abscess is very painful, it is best to put on tents and clean cloths soaked in wine and oil; and if it is in a state of inflammation, and the wound is charred, it is best to put on clean cloths soaked in cold water, wine, or warm oil, as we have said; then drain the abscess and dress it and treat it, as it should be, until it is healed.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	And this is what should be done universally in the treatment of abscesses: now I have told you how to proceed before treating abscesses, and here is the chapter.
des soros	of sores
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	When small abscesses come from the head, and are of various shapes, like the journals of a goose, and many similar ones.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	There are also fat and such abscesses that have moisture like chicken; and there are others that are hard and rough to cut, and there is no doubt if the artery is not involved.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	And the work of the incision is that you try all the instrument called "entromissoire", from which the shape comes after, what it contains.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	If it contains moisture, then make a cut through the long one.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	And when the moisture is drained, scrape off the hair that contains that moisture, for it will return if you leave anything; then soak cotton in Egyptian oil, if it is present; if not, use sharp and silk, and apply to the wound, and leave it there the next day; and this will prevent what remains from the night.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then restart the cotton, as before, the second day, and the third, until you are sure it will not remain overnight; then treat the wound with oil that is suitable, until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	And if the abscess does not hold much pus, then cover it with this form, lengthwise; and pour in vinegar, and scrape off the skin from all parts, and put on all your care to draw out the pus from where it is; and if the artery gives contrary signs, do as I have told you afterwards.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	And if the abscess is pierced, then cut and treat it as I have told you.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	And if the cut over the abscess is pierced and moist, then it is lighter, for it contains little blood.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	And if any of these abscesses or boils or has no moisture, and of these were the abscess or boil that I copied or from an old woman; and found the abscess also like a hard, rough, and white stone, and could not be broken; and if one had been pierced, one would have made as bad a wound as from a stone.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	Other abscesses coming or chief, because those who come to the head of children and to the roots of the ears, the opening should always be at the most dependent joint, to let out the pus; and treat as it should be.
des scrophules	des scrophules
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	Many times there are abscesses at the neck, and they dislodge the jaws, and they protrude, and sometimes they come from other parts of the body, and they are very large, and they are intertwined with each other.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	And each abscess is properly within its own side, as with the one and the abscess of the head, as we have said; and the similarities of these abscesses are many.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	There are some that contain moisture, and if there are evil ones that do not want to obey health.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	In those that you see in good disposition to the touch, and resembling the color of the flesh, and silent from every part and not attached to the artery or the vein or the conduit, and not deeply embedded; if it is necessary that you remove it from above, and scrape every part, and stretch the two lips of the wound as one, if you have skill, as we have said in abscesses of the head; and treat it little by little, and be sure that you do not cover the nerve or the vein, and that there is no spider web or tearing, that the hand does not escape, and do not see too much before, that you do not cover what you should not.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	And if you cut the vein or the artery, and it does not allow you to close it, put in the wound vitriol broth, or some powders that stop bleeding, and bandage the wound; and let it stay until the abscess is soothed, and the wound is softened, and begin to heal.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	And when the wound is cleansed, return to your work, until you complete it; then ask yourself if there are any small scabs remaining, and remove and drain them.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	And if there is a large vein at the root of the scab, it is not advisable to cut that scab at its root, but bind it with a strong double thread, and let it drop through it without harm; then fill the wound with old cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, then treat it.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	And if you remove all the scab, it is necessary to gather the two lips of the wound and hold them together, then since there is no delay for excess due to the size of the scab.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	it is necessary to cover the root of it and draw out the core, and hold it as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Those scabs that hold excess, pierce where it opens and dies; and pierce thus as before said, depending, then apply bandages and similar things, so that it does not corrupt what remains of the corruption; and when the wound is well covered, if the cure of ointment encouraging char, until they are healed.
de squinance	of wobbling
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	The ancients spoke and said of the throat-cutter; but I never saw one in our land, and this is their written word.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en II amandres.	To those who have wobbling, it is necessary that the cut of the throat which is called "epiglottis" be avoided; and this cannot be helped because all the veins and the marrow of the injury are in those who have abscesses high in the mouth, or in the throat or in the jaws.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the disease is in the marrow, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to avoid the danger of strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige; et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	Therefore, when we wish to cut the epiglottis, it is necessary that we cut it out in three circles or four, with a small incision across between the two circles or by the amount of the incision through the soft tissue, but not into the cartilage; and these are suitable for the section of the epiglottis as there is no danger, and the vessels are long and do not bleed much.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit; et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix; et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	And if the master is afraid, it is necessary that he stretches the skin of the neck all around, then cuts the throat until it reaches the windpipe; and avoid the vessels of blood, if you see anything, and then clean the soft tissue, as we have said; and this is demonstrated by the section of the stream of the windpipe which jumps out through the bone that is broken, and by the lack of voice; and leave the wound open for a piece.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les II levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the hour has passed for which we doubt strangulation, gather both lips of the wound together, and cover it entirely with a cloth; then administer medicines that cause heat to rise until they are healed.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Albucasim says that one should not do this until the throat is completely stiff, and the pains are judged to be mortal, and the defect has passed away.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort; et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee; et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	Therefore, one should cover the epiglottis for this reason, that the pains cannot remain, and he breathes through the wound, and thus is kept from death; and because they commanded the ancients to leave the wound open until the malice of the disease had passed, and it had passed in three days or four. And then they commanded to sew up the wound and cure, as long as it was healed; and I will tell you what I saw.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon; et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	I saw that a young lady took a knife and stuck it in her throat, cutting part of the windpipe; and I was called to heal her, and found her as if dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I discovered the wound and found the arrow that had come out of it, and although she had not coughed blood or bled from anywhere except her throat, the blood flowed through the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee; et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition; por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	I hurried and cleaned the wound, and healed it until it was healed; and she did not die as long as she could speak, and she returned to her usual state; because I believe that in the lining of the epiglottis there is no fear.
de la grosse gorge	of the large throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes; et est selonc II manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	This abscess is called «hernia of the throat», and it is a large abscess in the color of a raisin, and it is very common in women; and it occurs in two ways: natural, and accidental; or naturally without cause.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere; et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire: se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point; et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And the accidental one is in two ways, one of which is similar to a large goiter, and the other way is similar to an abscess that comes from us through an artery; and there is fear, and it should not be opened except by a small incision in the neck, and the proof and search are throughout the entire intramural: if you find it as I have described, and cannot be removed at all, if it is covered, as one covers goiters, and remove it all together, if there is any; and search well and treat it as it should be, until it is perfectly healthy.
des nous	ourselves
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances; et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	We have many ways of doing things, of which I will say all the similarities; and now it is necessary for me to tell the difference that is between us and the issue.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that issue is cold and fever lasting, until the blisters have passed, and is accompanied by purgation; therefore the fever and cold rest.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros; et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	With our way, we have neither cold nor fever nor pain, and it contains the blister, which is its own sac and is according to the color of the body, and begins like a boil, and becomes large; and they are in two similarities, whether dry or moist, and many colors are as I have said in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	It is necessary, when you come to the cure of a new instrument, that you first try and inquire about it before any other tool called "entromissoire", according to its form as it appears in the chapter that follows.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme; puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	And the manner of inquiring about abscesses is that you press or more moisture on the part that you trueve in the abscess, and return your two fingers slowly, until you know that the instrument has pierced the core, then according to the size of the abscess; then remove the entromissoire, and be careful that it does not slip.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes; et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout; et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	If moisture runs through a cut, as it has color, make it so as I have said for other abscesses; and if after the wound does not come moisture, scrape off the fat, then make a cross-shaped incision, and take out the skin with pincers, and scrape off lightly from every part and remove the coat where it is stuck so that you take it away clean with the knife; and if you cannot take it away clean, tear it off in pieces so that nothing remains.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois; et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	And if nothing remains, it often returns; and if it stays for a short time and does not bother you, apply some corrosive powders to the wound, and hold the wound, and put on things to soothe abscesses, and treat other cures until it is healed; and if it is very large, cut out both lips of the wound, and treat what remains.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet II jors ou III, tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	and if it be contrary to you or another if it hurries and fills the joint with broken glass powder, and let it lie for two or three days until the wound heals, and remove the clotted blood; then return to the copper that was left behind.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule; et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule; et sont de III manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	See the shapes of the instruments for puncturing, and there are three ways: large and medium and small; and there are three quarters that are called "albaret", and one that is called "breb", and there are also three ways: large, medium, and small, to reach the abscesses of fistulas; and they are like the needles that one buys for syringes, and they are made of yellow brass, or iron, or silver, and they cost as much as those that are already yellow, and they are more effective at drawing out black pus to reach the boils of fistulas; and they are three ways: large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the diameter of the holes.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi; et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	The forms of nails are of many similarities, as you see here: large, medium, and small; and if there are nails with two teeth in three ways; and if there are nails with three teeth, and they are also in three ways; and if there are nails with two teeth, and one tooth nails, and they are also in three ways; and all this is necessary in their place.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf; et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes; et sont de III manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois; et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus; et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	The heads of these that we make are sharp, and there are some that do not cut except from one part, from which we remove the nails, because we do not want to cut the vein or the nerve; and of these intermediaries are the awls returned in needles, so that the pain does not persist at the opening of the abscesses; and they are of three kinds: large, small, and medium, as you see; and we use only one small instrument, similar to nail extractors for draining blood, according to this form, with which we drain pus.
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	and put it back only once in its place that is healthy for veins, and arteries, and once again according to this great form:
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme; et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	Never inflate the breasts of some men when they begin to rot, as they seem like breasts of a woman; and they remain swollen and inflamed, and whoever wants to cure them, it should be according to this form of this line .b. to .g.:
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures; de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.; puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif; et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	then scrape the fat, and fill the wound with healing charcoal, then sew the two lips of the wound together, and cure it until it is healed; and if the breast sinks down, and is greasy like women's, then cut into the ribs above, by similar incisions; so that one holds to the other at the end of one and the other, so that the largest line contains the smallest according to this form, from this line .b. to the line .g.; then scrape the skin that is between the two lips, and remove the fat, and bring what we have said about sewing and powders, and what is necessary in the cure, until it is healed; and if it is not healed, or the incision is not completely made, for the reason that the pains do not want to rest, or because of the flow of blood, then it is necessary to fill the wound with moistened cotton in a corrosive ointment; and leave it until it melts the remaining fat, then cure it until it is healed.
des apostemes des asselles	of abscesses of the ankles
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	These abscesses that come from the ankles are hard lumps with cuts or cracks, and they contain moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Those that contain moisture should be cut along this form, from line b to line g:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when all the pus in the abscess is drained, apply old cotton to the wound, and leave it there until the next day, then remove all the cotton, and treat the wound with an ointment suitable for such a case until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscesses are similar to scrofulous ones, then make incisions in them as we have said about incising scrofulous ones, and if the wound opens again, then cauterize it as we have said before.
de la routure de l’artere	of the bursting of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme; et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont; et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans; et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	When the artery is burst and the skin above it is swollen, then there are often abscesses, and just as much blood comes out of the vein; and if you know that it is for the artery, then make incisions longwise; and when you feel it with your fingers, hold them steady; and if it is for the vein, then make incisions across; and it is foolish to cover this abscess, and especially when it is outside of the bones and angles and collarbone and in many other places, and it is very large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc; puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte; puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples; puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme; puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient; puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit; puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil; et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus; puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez; puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	It is therefore necessary to avoid the use of iron, and the one who is at the head should also avoid it, and in the one who is swollen from arterial bleeding by pricking the skin above the long muscle; then open the abdomen with small incisions, and carefully expose the artery of the web, as long as it is not discovered; then insert a needle on the other side, and pierce it with another needle from the other side, and tie the artery with a double thread according to what I have indicated in the extraction of the two arteries that are in the temples; then do not remove the flap that is between the two bellies of the intestine until the wound is healed, and if the abscess is in the belly of the vein, it is necessary to stain the hand with what comes from the abscess on all the skin, then remove the needle from the flap that you hold in your hand, and pierce it, and there should be a double thread so that you can pull it from the other side; then tie the abscess as I have indicated to you, or with the thread of one of the two parts of the needle at the incision of the first needle, and if you doubt that the thread will not fit, put another needle at the end of all the abscess at the incision of the first needle, and tie the threads in four, then cover the abscess until the excess is removed, then cover the wound and leave what is tied; then apply a moist cloth soaked in wine and oil, then treat the wounds and inflammations until it is healed.
des apostemes des ners	of abscesses of the neck
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	As abscesses also come in the artery and the vein, abscesses come to the neck when they are cut, or from too much hard work, and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor; et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur; et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction; et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	And these often occur in the joints and in all the limbs where there are joints, and this is very painful, and its color resembles the color of blood, and it is in many different positions with pain; and when one stretches it, if the pain increases, and it does not stay in place, but moves away from the skin; and it moves from all parts, and does not go forward or backward, nor up or down, and those who are in joints do not need to cover them with iron: perhaps there is contraction; and those who are in the head or face, causing leprosy.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine; et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the abscess is small, if you have a lancet, and cut at its root; and if it is large, if you hang it from its tip, and scrape, then remove the bone, and stitch the wound to the edge, and care for it until it is healed.
des grosses boces pendans	of large boils hanging
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans; et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	Never found in bellies and never elsewhere, and is a disease called «funge» by the similarity of its appearance to mushrooms, and it has subtle roots, and large grains; and there are small and very large ones; and I saw the man who had two or belly that were more like funges than anything else, and there was no difference, and they were white, and had small roots, and were always moist.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine; si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	I copied and found in one XVIII ounces heavy, and in the other VI З., and the work in the incision is that you look if the hairs are moist, and the color of the artelul is white and moist and of subtle root; if the coping with the spatula wide, and they are in your presence the fire cautery.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer; et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors; et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	For in cutting often comes many great corrections of blood, and if you see the hair is spouting and painful from the incision of the iron, then take the thread of good quality, and tie the artelul as we have said, and leave it II days; then restrain, and do not stop pulling the thread of good quality until it covers the artelul, and cut through it with labor; and if the roots are large, then apply the coping directly to the belly, but you must well coping the half, then cauterize that it does not return; then cure the wound, and guard that you do not cover the flesh which is of pale color and poor sense and of light regard.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For these infected abscesses, I will come to treat them with leechcraft later on.
quant li boude ist fuer	When the belly is swollen and hard.
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit; et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	If the appearance of the swelling comes from fire cauterization or cuts in the face, and is above the belly and has some of the pus, as it has in other wounds, or blood that cuts veins or arteries according to what is before, or inflammation; and if it is from the cut of the syphilitic sore and from the issue of the dysentery, then the color of the abscess is like the color of the flesh, and it is a light thing without pain, and open from various issues.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is due to the end of the intestine, then it is the most diverse, and when one presses it to its place and it returns, and perhaps it is torn, and greatly enlarges at the entrance of the bath and for great labor.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit; et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	And if it is due to moisture, it is a light thing, and opens well when one presses it with the hand, do not constrain too much; and if it is due to an arrow, it is large and hard, and is like a boil according to a quantity; and if it is due to windiness, it is soft to the touch, and the appearance of the work shows whether it is for the blood of the artery or the vein or windiness.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	If you must leave the care.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	For it has doubt and fear, as I told you in the chapter on abscesses, for the artery and for the vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude; puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine; puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz; puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine; se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre; et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit; et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier; puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi; ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit; et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	And if its appearance is for the intestine or the bladder, then you must command the patient to dye his linen, and be extended straight out, then sew all around the belt; then command him to lie very still between your hands, then go around the part that you have marked with a sharp instrument, then extend half of the abscess upwards on the whole rib; then tie it tightly with a strong silk cord, and let the intestine be loose; if you pull the linen, and if you release the intestine, and bleed the intestine out of the lower part of the belly; and if you pull the bladder, then take it at the neck, and cut off the excess; and if the artery makes you go against, or the vein, then go around, then return to your work and take two needles, and take two threads of thin silk, and bleed the abscess as you have done in the cross that you will pierce; then strain the abscess into four parts above the needles, and if you see, remove the needles, and let the part remain until it can rot, and cut off the dead flesh by itself; or you catch it when it has become thin and rotten, then cure the part as we have said; and strain out the pus or the moisture that you have taken, then cure the part as it should be, and soak the part.
dou chancre	For the fire cauterization, instruct
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	For the fire cauterization, instruct
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide I boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the workings, when it is in a place where one can remove it, as we have said, is that you purge once the evil of black bile; then make it clean if it has manifest repletion, then wipe the evil from the good flesh to do the working; then pour your needles or chancre, and the hair from all parts, and the bone from all parts without leaving anything; and let the blood flow fully, and wipe well the place with your hand or any other thing, and if the blood flows again against the incision of the artery or vein, if it is cauterized until the wound is not stained; then cure with other cures until it is healed.
de ydropisie	of dropsy
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer: lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	We have said in the division the similarities of dropsy, and in what manner the assembly of the swelling is made, and the signs of each similarity, and the cure which is made by medicines, and that which is cured by iron: if it is only swellings; and one should not touch iron in these two similarities: that is to say, tympanites and hyposarches, for it is a deadly thing; therefore when you treat this similarity of dropsy which is called "eclites" by medicines, and the cure does not work, if you look if the pains are weak, or if he has another disease besides dropsy, as all and solution of vomiting and similar things; then do not touch iron, for there is doubt; and if you see the patient of great virtue, and he has only dropsy alone, and he is neither too old nor too young, then thus: lift the patient upright over your hands, and the assistant presses the belly by leaning the swelling to the lowest part downwards, then take the spatula in this form:
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	And let there be cutting of two parts.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier; puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu; puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	And let there be cutting of two parts at the point, and ensure that no part is so thin that it can reach the intestines when it is thrown, and cannot be bleached; then check if the hydropsie is turned towards the intestines: if it is for the disease of the liver, then your cut should be on the right side of the third rib three fingers above the nipple; and if it is for the mucous membrane, then it should be on the left side, and it should not be that the hairs grow over the cut so that the excess does not run to the weakest limb; then pierce all the skin with the instrument, and press, and remove your hand from all the space between the skin and the face as if in scraping a quantity of an egg or around; then pierce the face until the space reaches the desired length, and that is the length of the scar, then pull it out, and close this instrument with this form:
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus; et II d’autre part, et I d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	And it is similar to a thin silver chain, and is made of light rain or archaut, and has in its part not covered by the skin, small perforations; and on one side, three perforations; and two on the other side, and one on the other; and the tailor cuts it like a pen, and this is the shape of the incision that the scribe makes to cut the pen:
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort; mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit; fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	At the top of the instrument is the awl, so that when the instrument comes to the edge, it should now be placed above the edge; without the half or the third part, because if you remove more than it needs in that hour, by chance if the patient dies from the resolution of his spirit due to the weapon, or he falls palm, or approaches death; but in accordance with the quantity of its virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the virtue of the wound signify, and its thorns; then remove the instrument and retain the edge, and it is retained now for the one who stops the perforation that is above the syringe, of which I have spoken, that you pierce in this manner; then start the instrument again the next day, if you see the patient suffering so, and take a small quantity from the edge; do this every day, and guard against following too much until it is only a little edge.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	And if you doubt the pain, and leave much of it uncovered, the cure for the sepulture or sand chafes, and by much sweat or bath and in the sun, and becomes tainted from drinking; and the cure for desiccative medicines until they are healthy, and cauterize above the stomach and above the liver and above the spleen after the extraction of the sharp object, as I have said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	of the stoppage of the rod
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	No child ever is born without a wart on the rod, or the wart is small, or it is not in its place.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	If it is necessary to prick at all times very subtly according to this form:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	then place or pierce the thin cloth subtly on the bottom, and tie it and tie him thus three times or four times, and when he wants to urinate, if it is possible, remove the cloth, and let him urinate, and then put it back; and perhaps it is not convenient, because the urine that comes out does not leave it closed.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	If the one who is pierced is small, then he is treated with a thin cloth of the bottom, as we have said, and it will expand.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	Those who do not have the piercing in their foot are blue, because no one is born with the piercing at the top of the thigh, because they cannot urinate before their thigh is up; and they cannot defecate because the matter cannot come out to the marsh, and it is a very bad disease.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the manner of the work is such that the hairs lie silently on their backs, with the head of the knife and the coping as wide as the tail of a pen, so that the puncture is made in the middle, as it should; and beware of bleeding from veins which often occurs, and if it does, apply the bandage that stops bleeding from wounds, and treat the wound until it is healed.
des pustules de la verge	of the pustules of the knife
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a I oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Often come blisters on the knife, and it is an appearance of a bad wound; and there are both malignant and non-malignant ones; if it is necessary to prick them at once with a thin needle, and to cover and clean all of them, then place on cotton moistened in Egyptian oil; then treat the wound until it is healed.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	And if the inflammation is malicious, with a putrid color and foul smell, then you must apply heat.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	When you have cleaned it, and if the inflammation is inside the flesh and has part of it within the skin and part outside, then you must first remove the inflammation that is inside; and when it is cleansed, then treat the part outside.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	For when you treat them together, if the wound is not healing, and becomes darker and more corrupt and pus-filled; then you must remove all that is black and corrupt, then apply a poultice of honey and flour made from the shells of grenadine pumpkins and vetch, then treat with other remedies until it heals.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	And if bleeding occurs, then apply the lunar cauterization according to this form:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars; et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	The cauterization is helpful in two situations: when bleeding occurs and when corruption sets in; and if the patient's penis is corrupted and retracted, then it is necessary to apply a piece of cloth soaked in urine between the head of the cautery and the glans, and piss on the wounds; and when the skin has grown back at the end of the cautery which had not been circumcised before, or if there is a wound or an abscess, then it is necessary to scrape off the affected area with a sharp instrument until the flesh is removed, and deliver the patient from the cautery in all parts; and if it is a difficult matter to decide whether to cauterize or not, then it is necessary to scrape off the affected area at the tip of the cautery and the skin, then deeply cleanse between them, and apply a thin layer of fine linen cloth that is cold, so that it does not grow back.
de la circoncision	of circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Circumcision is not like other wounds; therefore, when we perform this work of our will, and properly on children, it is necessary that we do the best work, and the lightest for health.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancients did not mention circumcision of their children because they did not use it in their law, and we have only what we have acquired by experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor I dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a II toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	For I have seen the majority of masters and surgeons who performed circumcision around the head, and with force, and in all one novacule; if it was the case that the two threads were not evenly placed and the one above and the one below did not meet.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	Or the recovery is prolonged, and the pain is doubled, and the wound cleaning which is done by the end is not always sure at the tip of the member; and the wound cleaning of the angle may escape the iron, and correct the work, and many times it is born such that it has no need of cleaning and I have seen.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	Of the wound cleaning which is done by force throughout the entire limb, I found the benefit of the experiment, for the forces cut just as well above as below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien; et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge; puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	For when you press your hand, it cuts equally through the entire body; but let the thread be well wrapped around the skin; and the method of the first operation is that you make the child think, if he listens, that you are only binding the thread around the rod as much as possible, and then throw it into your hands straight, and press the force between your hands or outside your feet so that the child does not see them, nor any of the instruments; then close your hand on the rod and blow gently, and pull it up high until the part of the rod is clean; then clean the dirt that is gathered there, then tie the limb with a double thread, then tie it to the other limb; and take it as two in the second operation in the pouch and in the index, and cover between the two limbs, then lift the gently and pull out the head of the rod; then let the blood flow slowly and slowly, for that is the most dangerous; and put powder on top and on top of the powder glue a piece of dried bread cooked with red wine vinegar, seasoned with rose oil and fresh, and leave it there until the next day, and treat the other limb as long as it is healed.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The form of forces for the anointment is such: the two hands should be tense and piercing, and the hands should be equally large:
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	The error of the anointment is that the finger is too close to the incision; therefore, you should extend it to your elbow, and also the copper, and if you cannot hold it at your elbow, then use tongs, and then the copper.
Et s’il trespassent III jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	And if they last for three hours, and what is outside the rod is inflamed, let it remain until the abscess is soothed, and scrape it lightly; and the copper, as you can move it, and guard against the part of the rod, it will not harm him.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore, treat the patient of things soiled with wound powder, which we have said or treated for powders, and if it is done with excessive care, it will not harm; therefore, treat it as we have said until it is healed.
dou retenement de l’urine	Retention of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division; et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e; et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	Retention of urine is due to the compression of a stone, or blood that has frozen, or a bowel, or a cow's horn, or similar things that we have mentioned in the division; and if the urine is not discharged, and you see the retention due to the stone which is in the bladder, then it is necessary to bend the patient's legs over their knees; and their feet should be placed on their back, and their belly stretched from the part above the back, and the stone pressed as much as possible; and thus the bladder is compressed above the stone, so that the urine is discharged, and if it does not come, then as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then it is necessary to administer extraction with all the instrument called «siringue», of which this is the form: and it should be made of fine silver hair, like the quill of an owl; and it should be thin at the tip of a palm's length and a half, and fine at the top.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede; puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine; et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	And the manner of the issue of urine is such that you take a double thread, and tie the head of the thread to the end of a piece of wool or cotton, and pull the head of the thread through the tube; and cover the excess of the wool and pull it towards the head of the tube, then oil the tube with oil or butter and egg yolk, and make the patient sit on a chair, and the urine and the cloth moistened with olive oil and vinegar; then place the tube lightly in the cloth, until it reaches the root of the cloth, then double the cloth upwards over the bottom; then pull the tube forward just before the cloth, and the patient feels the urine coming close to the empty thing, and this is not done according to this order except when the conductor or she goes is twisted; then the thread is tied to all the wool piece by piece, and the urine follows the wool, then remove it, and correct the urine; and restart the tube until the bladder is empty, and the patient is aligned.
des maladies de la vessie	of diseases of the bladder
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When scarlet fever or blood comes into the bladder, and pus is assembled, and you see it distilling watery and medicines, then use all the instrument called «clepsedre», and this is its form:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus: II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est; et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	It is closed, and has three points: two on one side, and one on the other, as you see; and the threads by which the medicine cuts so that it stops well the urethra, so that they can draw out the moisture, and put as needed; and when you see your medicines entering the bladder, put the head of the syringe in the moisture, and pull at the end that is outside; if you pull the moisture to the syringe, and then press the end strongly; the moisture will enter the syringe, and come to the bladder now, so that it feels the pain; and this is the form of the subtle clyster that one clysterizes the bladder: if it is thus:
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie; et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	And it is of silver or of lead, and it is the highest of the bones; and from there to the shoulder where the joints meet; then take a sheep bladder and put the moisture that you see clustered in the bladder, then tie it between the two breasts with a good woolen thread doubled, and heat the moisture above the fire; then pour the head of the poultice into the stick, then hold your hand on the bladder all around the moisture, until the hairs feel that this moisture has come to the bladder; and if you do not have a bladder, take a piece of parchment, and make a circle, and pierce it roundly around; then tie the thread strongly in these holes, then assemble the circle as one assembles the saddle, and put inside what you see oil and moisture and vinegar, and tie it in the instrument; and do as you did with the bladder, pressing with your hand until the moisture comes to the bladder.
de la piere	of the stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have already mentioned in the division the ways of stone, and extraction together with remedies; and I have said the difference between a stone embedded in the rain, and all the signs, and in what kind of stone one should make an incision; and in the bladder, and in the staff; and I will tell you clearly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont IIII ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I say that the stone which is embedded in the bladder more often occurs in children, and this is a sign that the sharp pain of the bladder resembles a sharp pain in its subtlety; and it has sharp pain, and great pain in the staff, and it happens many times, and then it returns; and from many of these jumps the foundation; and it is light for the healing of children until they are four years old, and it is very painful in the elderly, and it is constant in those who are between middle age and old age; and it is a lighter cure for those who have a large stone, than for those who have a small one.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	And when we come to the cure, it is first necessary to cleanse the wound with a poultice, to draw out all the matter that is in the intestines.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	For it never hinders one from seeking the stone.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche dedens; se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	Then take the wound by the feet, and stand up and move it towards the outside, so that the stone descends to the edge of the anus, and never comes out of the upper part; then let it sit between your hands, cleaned, and its hands away from its thighs, so that the anus is completely turned downwards; then take and touch inside; if you feel the stone in the space, hurry now to cut across the stone.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	And if she does not chase away the doughty one all at once, then moisten your right index finger with oil from your right hand, if the pain is sharp, or your middle finger, if the pain is dull; and place it on the base, and strike the stone, and when you feel it at your finger, then moisten the back of the anus; then press upwards on your finger, and cut where you see it tail off.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	And command the minister to press the anus with his hand, and command him to extend the testicles to his right hand, and with his left hand remove the skin which is outside the testicles in the part where the incision is made; then cut the spatula shaped, of which this is the form:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans; par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	And making between what is between the ribs and the foundation, not in the middle but on the side of the right nave; and straight up the stone, and your tail should be at the foundation or the bottom, and straight through the cut so that it is wide by lack, and narrow inside, according to the quantity of the stone, not too large; perhaps the pressure of the tail that is at the foundation, that it would jump out of work; and if there is a piece of stone where it has angles, and margins: if it is gray to issue; and if there is a piece that is soft, similar to a glass, and rounded, whose issue is light.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole; et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	When there are angles and margins where it should be cut, make the incision larger; and if it does not spring, it is necessary to strain it with pincers that are as sharp as a lime at the chief, for straining the stone so that it does not escape; or you can use a subtle hooked instrument at the head; and if you cannot engage it in this way, expand the small opening, and if there is no de-cortication, then strain it with vitriol; and if there are more than one stone, first remove the largest at the neck of the bladder, then cut above, then remove the smaller ones afterwards.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	And if it is very large, it should be cut to make a larger wound.
Car II choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces; et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	For two things happen to the wound: either it dies, or the urine comes out through the place where the stitches cannot hold; but nevertheless you must try to draw, or tear with pincers, until you tear it into pieces; and when you have completed your work, apply incense and aloe and dragon's blood to the wound, and bind it, and put a moist cloth on top of the oil and wine, or oil and vinegar and cold rose water, to soothe the abscess; then replace the wound on its collar, and do not remove the bandage until the next day.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you reset it, let the joint rise well with oil and vinegar, then apply a poultice of honey and mustard, as long as they are healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit; puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	And if an abscess comes into the wound and corrosions, and clots of blood in the bladder, and is retained by the urine, which is known in a similar way that without urination: then put your hand on the wound, and extract that blood, because if it remains, it will rot the bladder, and destroy it; then lift the wound with vinegar and salt and oil, and help it in all ways that you can, as long as it is healed; and it is necessary that all the remedies that you cure it with, that you bind the two thighs, and gather the medicines above the wound.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	And if the stone is small, and it is guided with a spoon, and pushed in, and the urine cannot come out; then according to what I said earlier, you should cut it many times, or excuse the cutting for this cure.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	I have already experienced this.
Pren I foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a III angles fichiees en I tison:	Take an iron rod of this form and folded at three angles and covered in one thread:
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	Then take a thread and tie the rod around the spoon, so that it cannot come back into the bladder; then gently push the rod into the spoon until it reaches the stone; and gradually turn the rod in your hand into the stone until you can pierce it from the other side; then the urine will come out immediately, then press your hand over what is left of the stone that is inside the spoon.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides; et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is already broken, and has been torn with urine, and is splintered in the wounds; and if you cannot do this for any reason, then remove one of the bones from below the stone and the other from above, then make the rod in the middle between the two, then extract it, and release the bone, and clean the clot of blood that is in the wound; and treat it until it is healed.
de la piere des femmes	of the stone from women
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por III choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	It is rare that stones are inserted in women, and if it ever happens, the cure is difficult, and it is forbidden for three reasons: one is that perhaps the woman is a virgin; and the second is that one cannot find a woman well-versed who will expose herself to shame, specifically when she is chaste.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere; et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	And the third way is that by chance one cannot find a woman well skilled in this art of hands; and the fourth way is that if the woman's stone is larger than the man's, because it is necessary to make a deeper incision, and there is great fear involved. And if it is necessary to perform a surgery, it is necessary to seize a woman who is well skilled, and to point out where the true stone is, and if you do not know where it is, it does not matter; and present a sharp knife in the life of women, or a woman who knows part of the art, and command her to do what you command in the examination of the stone; and look very closely if the woman is virgin: therefore it is necessary to put her hand on her abdomen and ask for the stone; and if she finds it, she must hold it outside her body, and recommend that she put her hand on her abdomen or near the pain, and press and move her right hand firmly over the vagina.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite; puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	If she finds it, it is necessary that she move it from great to great from the entrance of the anus until it reaches the root of the thigh; then cut across the stone at the root of the thigh against the middle of the body, where it is muscle-bound and feels the stone in that part; and do not move her hips above the stone or away from it, and let the tailor make a small opening in the belly, if you feel the stone causing pain so much that the stone can be removed, and know that there are many ways of stones: that is to say, small and large and sharp and smooth, long and round and those with thorns.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	if you know the similarities to recognize the outcome.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre; et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	And if you do not know, put the wound in vinegar broth, and give it an hour until the wound is cleansed; then return to your work, until the stone is fully out, and have instruments that I have told you in the extraction of the stone for men to help in your work; and if you do not know, and it is the artery that is cut, put powder on the wound and tenting and bandages, and do not restart, and leave the stone and do not pull it out, unless by chance the patient dies; then cure the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of the blood is calmed, and the wound healed, return to your work until the stone is formed.
de hernie carnouse	of hernia carbuncle
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit I autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	Ramice aquouse is nothing other than an assembly of moisture or white sphacelus, which is outside the curd of the cheese, which contains the whey; and it is called «sphacelus», and never is properly in the web of the cheese, if one considers that it is another cheese; and this is the skin of the curd between the white sphacelus that we have said; and it does not have a pore.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the generation of this branch is weakness that comes from thinning, and it spreads that matter.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus; et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	And sometimes it comes from impact on the thinning, and this moisture has many colors: or it is declining to yellow, or without red, or black, or aquous white, and there are more; and these are the signs to know this assembly, for if it is white like we have said, then it is the abscesses, I poc long as the figure of an egg, and does not open the wounds, because it has moisture all around.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef; et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	And if it has moisture in its own cloth, then it is the abscesses with part of an egg, and because people think it is another egg; and if the moisture is between the skin of the wounds and the white like we have said, then it feels good; therefore when you want to know the color of the moisture, try all the previous forms.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to what comes afterwards, judge what is inside.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz; puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions; puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir; puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue; et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when we treat it with iron, it is necessary that the hairs be cleaned according to the power and replacement of its body; then place it on its back, on something a little high, and put much cloth around it; then lean towards its right side, and command the minister to lean towards the left, and extend the lancet to one of the two ribs near the ribs; then take the spatula and scrape the skin of the ribs from long to beyond the knuckle, and make your cut straight in dividing the skin of the ribs towards the white face, and scrape the skin subtly according to the power; then pierce the white plain with a sharp knife at a wide hole, and remove all the sharpness, and then put your tweezers, and press the white face up; and do not touch the ribs, but only the white face; scrape everything or even in pieces carefully the side of it subtly, if you do not scrape it well, it will return to the sharpness; and if the sweat suddenly comes to your work, then reset it in its place when you have completed the work of the white face; then gather the two flaps of the ribs at a seam, then treat it as the other wounds until it is healed.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	And if you suspect the wound has become infected with another disease, it is necessary to tie the vessels that are hanging, in doubt of the evacuation of blood; then cover the wound with a bandage, and remove the wound, and treat it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset; et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	And if the bone is assembled in two parts together, which are two branches; then cover the other part as you have done the first evenly, then soak the blood, and put moistened cloth in rose oil in the wound; and put on top of that another moistened cloth in wine and oil, and put above the two bandages, and put doubled cloths on top, and tie it to all the limb that is according to this form:
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier; et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers; si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	Then take two cloths, and place them with linen charpie according to this resemblance and be assembled by sewing around the waist of the drawers, and one of the cloths is taken above the base of the back, and the other at the part of the elbow; and the other head above the two angles, and everything assembled is restricted in the loop of the drawers; and never is this branch of cautery in the form of an iron tail, and it is that you take one cauterizing needle fine, and cover the skin of the wounds, and be heated as we have said, so that the white pus that contains the acid is revealed; then take the cauterizing tool according to this form, and perforate that pus with small holes, and the skin with this subtle cauterizing tool:
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille; et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	In all ways you can, until you have removed everything; and make sure the blade does not touch the bone; and clean this work to be safer; and guard against bleeding, and avoid injuring the surrounding tissues; and if anything goes wrong, such as an abscess or bleeding or other thing, treat it according to what has been said before.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit; pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer; puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee; et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	If the pain is too great, and does not want to undergo this work due to its horror, then use perforation as I have told you; and when you are certain that the abscess has been drained, as we have said, place the painful part on the highest seat; then pierce the abscess in the lowest part of the wound, and make the perforation long along the body; and let the wound be wide enough so that all the sharp edges are removed; then put cotton on the wound, and tie it up, and leave it to heal; then treat the wound until it is healed; and if the white cloth does not stop the pus from coming out of the wound, it is necessary that you insert a needle or the instrument used to drain the abscess, as its form has been described before; then expand the wound, and let the pus return, and it will be reassembled after six months or sooner, and when it is reassembled as before, and thus the pain will pass.
de l’aposteme des coions	of abscesses of the testicles
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse; et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	Because in the section of this chapter, many times I have seen more than one position, because it seems to me that it is better to leave it; and I will tell you the work and similar things about the abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	I say therefore that many abscesses come from the groin and also from the testicles; and it is due to many cases.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion; et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief; et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	It is to know by excessive acid and ague, which is spread in the groin, or from impact; and the color of the abscess is according to the color of the blood; and it does not cause pain, and it is a severe abscess; and perhaps it is some gray and pale abscesses, and of yellowish color, and sometimes comes from an outflow of artery, or from inflammation of vein.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois; et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	When it is due to an artery, it is known by the presence of an abscess that is high and full, when you press it with your fingers; and you should only touch it.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars; et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	Those who are made of opening a vein are known by their appearance when gently touching with your fingers, and can often make a cut above this resemblance, and on other parts; and you should cover the wound with a clean cloth, then lift up the edge, and pull out the tube from all parts of the wound.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope; et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	If the wound is already sewn with these stitches, then you should cut the wound and the stitch; and if it is open to the surface, or in the part that is inside the veins, then you should remove all of that which is held, and cover it roundly.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the arrow's head is in the back, then it is necessary that you cut off the entire thing, and extract the tip, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your work is done, apply the wound with linen moistened in rose oil and wine, then treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the teeth
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait; et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	These are abscesses enveloped in an envelope similar to a bursa, with the softening of the teeth, and the pain is great when moving; and the treatment of this disease is as difficult and dangerous as the previous one, and therefore we will tell you the work of this, according to what the ancients did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment; puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples; puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief; puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues; puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions; car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz; si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	It is necessary to seat the dislocated part above the stable joint, then hang the suspensory ligament of the tendons down to your fingers, and all the veins that are close to the bone, and tie them with the master knots, and extend them evenly; then cut through the fascia at the narrowest point between the veins, until they are exposed, and then scrape each part, as we have said in the extraction of arteries that are in the temples; then take an awl or a double-threaded needle, and tie it to the first limb where the blood came from, and tie it to the other end; then puncture the middle straightly, according to the length of the body, and remove the corrupted blood; then cure the wound as we have said for other wounds, so that no vein is torn that belongs to one of the tendons; because there is no harm, and if all the veins come out visibly, it is necessary to draw the tendons from all the veins; so that he does not lose his grip due to the incision of the veins, and they dry and cannot be helped.
de la routure dou syfac	of the tooth decay
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions; et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses; et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement; et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	The causes of this branch are due to the section that comes from the tooth decay, or the extension on the stomach in the part of the angles, because the intestines descend from that decay to one of the coins; and this decay is either from the tooth decay, or from the extension of it, and these two methods of many causes: either from impact, or from jumping, or from shouting, or from lifting a heavy burden, and similar things; and the signs that it is from the extension of the tooth decay, are that it has little and little, in long tension, and does not come suddenly; and it is the abscesses equal up to the front, because the tooth approaches the intestine.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs are when it comes to the cutting of the gums, that it brings about sudden pain at the beginning, and is various abscess appearances, outside the skin, and this is for the end of the intestine and the heart due to the cutting of the gums.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And sometimes the worms are found with the intestines, and they are retained inside, and cause great pain to suffer in the patient, especially when pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these cases of iron, for which it is advisable to avoid.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir; puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes; puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc; puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir; puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars; puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille; et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement; et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz; puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz; puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars; puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne; et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi; et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant; puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	And the method of the work is that you command or prick the intestine with your hand inside the wound, if it can be pushed back; then place the curved part of the knife over the collar of the intestines between your hands, and loosen the jaws; then place the curved part of the knife above the belly, and scrape all the skin of the intestines; then push the white intestine out through the wound, as far as it can come out; then scrape the white intestine that is outside the skin of the intestines, between the two white intestines that are outside the skin of the belly, and between the second white intestine and the part behind the belly, and between the second white intestine; and move the blunt end of the knife inside the intestines, and place the white intestine above your left hand, and loosen the belly over the white intestine; and command the assistant to extend the belly upwards, and remove what is behind the skin; and if you find any part that is not covered or white intestine, and if you find anything, push it into the stomach outside; then take a needle or a thick thread made of four strands of wool, and push it into the back part of the white intestine, which is after the skin of the intestines; then gather the threads together in the shape of a cross, and fasten them to the white intestine that is outside the skin of the intestines, with a strong thread of two strands; then cover the threads with the wool, and form them into two strands, so that none of the wool that is spun can enter the wound, which is not supposed to happen; and finally place the first thread according to the first thread, and then the other threads in turn, following the round shape of the belly; then cover the part outside the skin of the intestines, as we have said before; then apply a soft cloth soaked in oil to the wound, and apply the thread that we have mentioned.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And never cauterize the white swelling that we have mentioned after incision, due to fear of causing blood to flow.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece; puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	For this has happened many times, and let the wound bleed until it stops; and if it takes too long to stop, then sprinkle with hot vinegar, and put on what we have mentioned, until it stops; then treat the wound with other treatment, until it is completely healed.
de hernie carnouse	of hernia carbuncle
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this branch, I have never seen anyone dare to perform the cure by iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz; puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the ancients said that it is done as the branch which is together with the vis, in a certain way that you tie the veins, after the belly slightly open; then cover it, and treat the abscess with what works, until the veins heal; and the treatment is as we have mentioned, until it is completely healed.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres; et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent; et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert; et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere: et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois; et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac; et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre; puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines; puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	Never comes a tear or anger so, as we have said, and open the wounds; and let no one pull out any of the intestines, and if they do, it is little, and repair every hour; and in whatever way it remains too long in this point, the wound believes or syphac, until the intestine is pulled out; and this happens by the extension of the syfac which is at the tears, as we have said, because it is extended, then it is softened and inflated the wound and opened; and the cure is by cauterization, as we have already said; and in this way the wound is cured: and it is that the hairs are placed on top of their back between your hands, then cover the wound of the tear enlarged according to the quantity of three fingers; and then pull out the syfac which is outside the skin that covers it, then take the hair and place it on the wound of the syfac; and press against the front of the belly, then cut the two wounds of the syfac above the head of the hair, and cut both; then pull out the head of the hair, and do not cover the syfac or extend the eyelids or other things, as I have told you in the cure of the intestines; then cure by the treatment of wounds.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when you remove the splints, clean and dress the wound until it is healed.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The scab is tightly adhered and does not appear to be broken, and the cauteries are quiet in this place, and closer to healing.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	of the softening of the leather of the boots
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a III costures ou IIII fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Many times the leather of the boots is softened in some men, because the charred parts inside are softened and it can be seen; and when it is desired to cure it, one should first place the painful part on top of the softened leather, and then sew the two pieces together along a seam, and if you see that there is excess leather, cut it at three or four places firmly; then sew between the seams, and treat the wound as with other wounds until it is healed, and cut the thread.
dou chastrement	Forcibly hold the patient firmly
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	It is forbidden to hold the patient firmly in our law, and for this reason I do not wish to speak of it in this book; and it is necessary only for two reasons: one is that the patient must answer questions when asked, and be cured by the same method; and the other is because we often have the task of holding animals firmly, such as goats and sheep and cats and others.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	I say therefore that holding firmly is done in two ways: by attraction or by puncturing.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	In the one that we do by attraction, place the animal in hot water until the joints are softened and warm; then take it in your hand, until it is restored and you no longer feel it.
Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	For the treatment of tail: it is necessary to apply a beast, and press the skin of the intestines with your right hand, then tie the suspensor, and cop over each eye at the top, when you have well burned them; and leave no drop of the subtle facial fluid that is on the vessels; and this method of treatment is more effective than that made by attraction, because by attraction sometimes something of the intestines remains, by which the beast desires luxury; then cure the wound until it is healed.
des hermofrodites	of hermaphrodites
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	Hermaphrodite is in two ways according to the second method: one is that between the two intestines open as the shape of nature of a woman, or it has hair, and sometimes it discharges urine.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	And the other method is for women, and it is like a staff as thick as two fingers and two fingers long.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	And the treatment of the mouth and the foot is that you cut off all the infected flesh, and treat it like other wounds; in the second method, for men whose urine sprays from the skin of the penis, there is no cure.
de la tentigene	of the tenting
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	Tenting is infected flesh growing above the natural part, as long as it is too ugly to see; and some women have it as large as a hand, and that is the treatment.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	It is necessary to wipe away the excess blood from your hand or from the wounds, and clean it lightly; and not to move too much before, since there may be more bleeding, then wait for the other cure until it is healed; and in another case that is born at the mouth of the marsh, and use it, and perhaps it jumps out, and it is according to the appearance of a snake, and because of this they called the old "snake disease".
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If you clean it as we have said about the wound, and treat it until it is healed.
de erratique	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient if their nature is not well perceived, or their perturbation is small; and it is natural by birth, or accidental by disease that has come to them; or it is caused by a charm cast, or a subtle or sharp sword, and is made in the marsh, or on the sides, or elsewhere, and they do not conceive, and childbirth, and perhaps the flowers to have; and the knowledge of this is by the aspect of the womb.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	If their stoppings are near in appearance, then you should do it to your own or to the right.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	If it is a subtle facial tic, and it is close to the two eyebrows, if you hurry, and do as follows: bring together your two index fingers, and let the woman be on her back, spreading her legs; then form the two eyebrows, until the subtle facial tic is drawn out, and is over the upper eyelids; then take linen, and dip it in oil, and place it on the face, and grind the woman every day, so that she cannot move.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	And if the facial tic is hard and sharp, it is necessary to apply a soft cloth similar to the leaf of myrtle.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the wound is from a horse's kick, place it upright and cover it with a clean cloth; and have medicines steeped in blood, such as dragon's blood, incense, and an abundance of herbs; then apply a wide piece of plaster to the wound so that it cannot stick together; and thus let it dry, and then apply a tent of dry linen; and then treat with other remedies until it is healed.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	And when in the marsh comes a horse kick, cover it accordingly, unless it is an infected abscess.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	For an infected abscess in the marsh, one should not touch it with fire.
des emorroides	of hemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	Hemorrhoids are openings of veins that do not usually bleed, and when the hemorrhoids are old, they become thrombosed; and we have said in the division the similarities of those, and the signs, and I will say here those that require treatment.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	I say that hemorrhoids and thrombosed veins, when they are full of blood in the marsh, and do not appear until felt, if it is not treated with iron.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	Those that can be felt at the edge of the marsh are those that can be cured.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	It is therefore necessary to place the woman in a cold house, then strap the altar as tenailles, and the cope at its roots, then powder with medicines that stop bleeding, such as acacia and dragon's blood and incense, and similar things; then soak her feet in cold water for an hour, then place her in very cold; if blood comes out, sit her in a decoction of sumac and peel of green pomegranates and gall and similar things, and then take flour of wheat, and mix with honey and vinegar, and make an poultice on her back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	And if it stays, it is good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	If not, make him sweat by applying vacuum cups to his back and chest without causing injury; then take the linen, moisten it in plantain juice or agrimony with old wine, and apply it to the affected area.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the abscess is ready to burst, treat the affected area with hot compresses until it is healed; and that which is called "albathir" is red and resembles a sharp spike, so it should be covered as I have described the thelul; then continue treating it until it is healed.
des apostemes de la marris	of abscesses from marshlands
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	Many kinds of abscess come from marshlands, such as chancre and pus-filled abscess and herpes and estiomenes and fistulas and hemorrhoids and pus-filled abscess and more other diseases that I have mentioned in the division.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	Therefore, I must mention in this treatment the pus-filled abscess that comes from marshlands, which is not unlike other abscesses that collect blood; and if you have seen the work of iron, look to see if the abscess is engorged at the beginning of its appearance, and with heat and fever, and if it becomes red, then you should see.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	Therefore do not rush to pierce it, but make it wait until the pain is eased; and then place the injured part on a chair, and have two small stools where he leans, and support him on his back, and bring his feet together; and let his knees be spread, and put his arms out of his knees, and tie them well with a good bandage; then apply the bandage to the right side, and after that come the form; and it is necessary that when you see this instrument applied, that you check the depth of the wound, so that what enters from the instrument does not go deeper than it should, and that it does not hurt the injured part; and if the instrument is larger, it is necessary to cover the depth of the wound with cloths, so that the instrument does not hurt it; and it is necessary to put the horn of the instrument on top, and stain the instrument.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.	And when the abscess is open, and it is done by hand, if it needs to be covered at the head, cover it with a sponge leached; and when the wound is empty, it is necessary to put in the wound moistened cloths in rose oil or dry green oil; and place the tent from the wound to the front of the marsh, and place above the marsh and above the other clean moistened cloth in hot water or cooked herbs; then after two hours of poulticing, as long as it is healed; and never lift the marsh and the wound by a poultice of hot water and honey, and then hot water or roots of lily and aristolochia are cooked; then reapply the poulticing.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	And if the wound is sewn up in the marsh, it is necessary to guard against cooking with iron, but treat it as we have said in the division.
de l’enfantement	of childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	Midwifery is first to the birth that she knows the figure of natural childbirth, and the signs when you see the woman pressing down, and desire to smell the arms: then hasten the child to issue; then see that this childbirth is according to the natural figure, and is the second with him; and when you see these signs, it is necessary to gently press his belly, so that the child issues quickly; for when it descends on its head, then the second is with it, and is washed in the marsh of its superfluities by good cleansing; and this which comes otherwise does not come naturally.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	Because it never comes up from its feet, and comes forward the body or the shoulder, and the hands, or it comes up over its belly, or sometimes, and is converted by chance onto its neck, and by other bad figures; therefore it is necessary for the bonesetter to be skilled and subtle in these things, and if she makes a mistake and is deceived, I will show you all the figures how one should help.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	If the child comes up from its head naturally, and the woman gives birth with great pain, and her strength is weak, then let the bonesetter sit on a stool, or the women hold her; and apply oil or fenugreek that has been cooked, and then blow the bonesetter between her two little fingers the small spatula that is in this form:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.	And pierce the second one, and copulate with its angle until the moisture that is inside has been removed; and take the woman's belly so that the child descends, and if it does not, then you must smear the woman with fenugreek powder mixed with mustard oil; then let her inhale and expectorate the condition, and keep her mouth and nose closed for an hour: if this now causes the child to descend.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	And if both hands are dislocated, then you must gently and slowly reset them; and if they cannot enter, then place the woman on a chair, and raise her feet up high; then lift the chair onto the ground, and clean the woman, so she does not faint at the rising; and if the hands cannot enter, and the child is dead, then copulate with the hands in the position that was previously put, and extract the child, and gently reset it.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	of the issue of the child above its feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut; et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz; puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	When the child comes above its feet, it is necessary to put it up high; then slowly turn it and extend its legs slowly.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi; si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	If it jumps out of the cradle, command to grab and extend its legs, and let it sneeze with condition; if it jumps far, may God will it.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it does not come as we have said, slowly turn it and extend its legs until it is in a natural position.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	Then it will be immediately ready.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier; et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz; et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre; puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	And if it does not come out as we have described, take musk of altee, oil of wormwood, and melted gum, and grind all in a mortar; and put on the affected part of the woman inside and outside this ointment, then make her sit upright until beyond the ribs; and when she is thoroughly sweated out, apply a poultice of mustard, and remove it, and leave it for an hour; then make her sit on a chair, then make her sneeze and hold her mouth and nose, and lightly press her belly, for the child has just been born.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	of the child's head above its feet
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc; puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit; et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval; et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains; et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	When the child comes in this form, place your hands gently and gently; then place it on its back, and hang its feet down, and lie it on the bed; then gently fold its hands gently, and then grasp its hands on its belly, and remove its clothes off, until it is cleaned downwards; and if the child does not cry, then take its feet and gently move them, then gently move its belly upwards, then push your hands; and feed the child gently; and command the woman to hold it until the child is born.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	of the issue of the child who comes out widely with a hand extended
I covient engignier a ramener la main: s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler; s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment; puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit; et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main; et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	It is necessary to bring back the hand: if it cannot be brought back, lift the woman, and go; if she cannot go, then lie her down on the bed, and straighten her legs; then treat the muscle as I have described; and if she does not give birth, then sit her on a chair, then study how to bring back the hand; and hold the child according to its natural shape, and make it sneeze, and command that it take a breath until the baby is born.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	of the issue of the child on its neck, and it has extended its hands, and its face turned towards the back of its mother
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement; et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc; et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	I advise that the patient wash their hand, then gradually turn it back and forth, gently; when it is even, apply the muscle-stretching exercises of high and low, as we have mentioned, then command them to move it slowly; when you have done this, seat them on a chair, and command them to sit upright; and make them spit.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	In the same manner, for all the other fingers.
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie; et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes; puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois: adonques si istra legierement.	When it comes to doing this for all the other fingers, grasp the second finger with your thumb, until the moisture is drained; and if the child's mouth can reach its face and neck, cover the mouth, so that it is not held, and move the child; then feed the child inside, until you have placed it as it should be, and command the woman to sit upright: then it moves freely.
de l’issue des gemelz	of the issue of twins
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent III ou IIII; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	It is often the case that twins are born, and sometimes they are born three or four at a time; and this is not an uncommon occurrence, and it happens often.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom; je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude; et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	It is strange that they do not live, if they are not named; I know that they are multiplied, and are devoured by the same sac which gives them birth, which is connected to the womb; and sometimes they come out as naturally as one at a time, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait; et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	And if they are born grievously, as we have said the care should be, and if the midwife is subtle, and does it quickly and lightly as she should, then do it in such a way that it is worthwhile for their health.
de plusors enfans	of many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient; si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	There is no time when they are formed in the first, second, third, fourth, fifth, sixth, or seventh month, or more than fifteen, and all are formed in the shape of a child by the measurement of the wise doctor, and it is necessary that the midwife knows everything, because by chance similar things happen to them; so do according to what is necessary.
de l’enfant mort	of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains; si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort; si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees; et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant; puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges; puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief; si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes; et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide; et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	When you care for the woman of the dead child or womb, as I have said in the division, and it does not come out, and you are forced to use manual methods; it is necessary that you remove if the woman is of sound health, and has no accident or she is afraid of death; it is necessary that the woman be laid on her back, and her knees raised; and the midwife applies two fingers, or she is lying in bed so that she is not treated with the extraction of the child; then rub the mouth of the woman with moist oils mixed with mustard and fenugreek seeds, and linseed; then the midwife's hands with these oils and mustard; then put them lightly in the woman's vagina, then if she expels the child that is suitable for her, and if the child is born with its head between its legs, and if it is born with its head on its shoulder, or in its palate, or behind its beard, or in its cheek, or in its armpit, or on its back, then put the child to the woman's breast, and hold the child's head with your right hand, and place the cradle between your left hand's fingers, and rub it all over lightly, and do not put the child in any of these places that we have said until it comes to the empty thing; and this is the form of the child:
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz; et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	Then fish against the other tooth, where the root is thickest, so that the extraction is equal; and then move it equally from one side to the other, to help it come out, and hold the tooth on both sides as follows:
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie; et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	And if a part remains, dip some of its oil into its two holes, and blow it into that part, and pull out the other part; and if none remains, place this tooth or higher up on the jaw, and do this until it comes out completely.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote; puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	And if one hand comes before the other and cannot be pulled back by tightening, it is necessary to wrap it around the injured part until it comes out; then cover it in the joint of the foot or at the heel, and thus it is necessary to do in the other hand and on both feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue; ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui; et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment; et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer; et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues; et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	And if the child's head is large and it is stuck in the birth canal, or if the head is misaligned, it is necessary to use a tool called "almidach", which is shaped like the instruments used for this purpose in the following chapter; and thus, with great natural force, you must push the child's head back into place; then remove the bones with pliers, and if the child's head suddenly springs forth and is stuck on the perineum, it is necessary to cut through the tissues until the blood flows freely; and if the blood cannot flow, it is necessary to make an incision in the pieces that can be reached; and if the child's head is inflated in the belly or outside the ribs, it is necessary to pierce it until the blood flows.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if it is on his feet, then the attraction is light, and the advice to the mouth of the marsh is light.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main; et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre; et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris; puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer; et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses; et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	And if it is on his belly or groin, it is best to extract it with a cloth wrapped around your hand; and when the belly or groin, as long as the moisture that is there; and if the other member is also affected, and the patient remains, then boil the rag in the mouth of the marsh, and pull it out from the mouth of the marsh; then boil the one or two, and remove it; and if the mouth of the marsh is retracted due to abscess that has come, it is not necessary to force, but it is best to administer moist and greasy things; and the medicaments are emplausters, and sieve in high moisturizing and softening agents.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif; et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	If the dislocation is above the shoulder, and you can put it back in place, then follow what we have said for the living child; and if there is no way, then try to pull it back with pieces, and leave nothing of the second part.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris; et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	And when you have done this, follow what we have said for the abscesses that come in the marsh; and if blood comes out, it should be tightly bound, and other treatments should be followed.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut I autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	I saw a woman in whose womb an infant had died, then consulted the other with that one, and the others also died.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time, some abscesses appeared in the groin, and they swelled up so much that they burst, and then began to cause great pain.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I went to the healer, and I thought for a long time, and could not close the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I applied strong adhesive, and some bones stuck to it, and after some time others did too.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I was very surprised because the belly does not have any bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	I thought it was the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point; et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu; et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	I looked at the wound, and in it were some bones, so much that the woman was in worse condition; and the woman thought for a long time like this, and then there was a little blood from the wound; and I do not remember this chapter except because when the masters find an unusual thing, they know how to give help.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	bring the marsh back to its place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a II tornans as II chiés des II liiens.	For this form of pressure, we use books; and it returns to the two shoulders, and the two arms.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux; et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi; et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus; et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	Therefore, the horns should be more subtle than the restriction, and made of flat or wood; and the mouth of the fust should be two inches wide, and the margin of the trees should be one palm and a half; and between the two limbs should be two supports of this same fust, which should be firmly held on both sides, half a palm long or a little more; and these two supports are placed in the mouth of the marsh when turning the two horns.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles; et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large; et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes; puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	Another form, more subtle and lighter in appearance, should be made of flat iron or boxwood, according to the appearance of the tongs; and it should have two joints, as you see, one palm long and two wide; and when you open the jaws of the instrument, place the woman on the bed, her feet together and her legs apart, then push the two joints together into the jaws, and hold the head of the instrument between her breasts; then open your hand on the instrument, as you have done with the tongs evenly, according to the quantity that you see opening the mouth of the instrument, until the bail does what it wants.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	These instruments are all similar to each other, and there are many of them in their likeness; and when the one sees them matched, the more hurriedly the work is done, and the higher the cost for them due to their quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	If you do not disregard the instrument that you have not matched, for their need is not excuseable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis; et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	When the second instrument is held in childbirth, it is necessary that you command the pain to hold her tongue, and then the faith is expelled from condition, and your hands are held to the mouth and nose; and if she sneezes through this, well.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire; toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	If not, take the pot, and make a hole or cover it, and put herbs that can open the mouth of the marsh, such as rue, anise, chamomile, cassia, and centaury; all these herbs, or some of them, should be cooked or boiled over the fire; then put a cloth or cover in the pot, and the other in the mouth of the marsh, and let it steep until the vapors come into the marsh; then make him spit, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If he has a second attack.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction; mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	And if she remains after this treatment, and is not better, command the bath to wash her right hand in sesame oil or mussel oil, and then put it back in its natural position, and search for the second one; and when she finds it, grasp it gently and extend it slowly and correctly, so that the marsh does not tear at extraction; but move it lightly to the right and left, and then remove it; then it will come out and disappear.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes; et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire; mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon; si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	And if the tongue of the marsh is narrowed, we have said the cure of expectoration, and fumigation of herbs; and if she does not have all that we have said, then guard that you do not follow the pulling; but it is recommended that what is at the tongue of the marsh, that you tie it to the woman's chest, then smear it with the ointment tetrafarmaçon; if it will bear and return, and come back; but nevertheless, when it bears if it comes badly to the stomach and the head, and whitens the pain.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	Therefore, it is recommended to use fumigations of: none of the ancients have experienced fumigation of cresses and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The form of the instrument used to smoke the woman during retention of flowers and the second part is this:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu; et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	And it is similar to a willow, and one places the head subtly into the fire, and the smoking occurs above the flames; and the fumigation over the coals, and the lice until they are destroyed, and then start another.
de percier lou fondement	to pierce the foundation
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac: si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche; puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Some children are born who have not pierced the foundation, but it has been stopped by some subtle swelling: therefore it is necessary for the midwife to pierce that swelling at its right place, and not pierce into the soft spot, and avoid touching the perforation; then put on a moist cloth with wine and oil, then the treatment of ointment until it is healed.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it will not return, put or plug a piece of cloth, and let it lie for some time, and be sealed as the child wants to go into rooms.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	And never comes this stoppage of pus from a wound or an abscess; if it covers the wound: if it is treated, as we have said of the piece of cloth.
de la fistule dou fondement	of the fistula from the foundation
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	Fistulas that come from below the foundation are nodulated, and thicker than those that come above the foundation or in the space between the two parts, if there is one fistula or more; and when that nodulation is old, it works, and shortens moisture above white or subtle blood, and never are these fistulas cured; and they are known by the fact that there is egestion or ventosity when the patient makes egestion, and perhaps some verses.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	And if there are fistulas that pass through the bladder, and through half of the urethra; and they reach the joint of the groin, and through the buttocks.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant: et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	And thus one knows the fistula passing through the basement, and not passing: and it is that you insert your thin finger or base into the fistula when there is no twisting.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit; et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit: saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	And if it has twisting, then insert a thin tent of lead or horsehair, until you feel the tent or hair at your finger; and if you do not feel it, and there is no perforation, egestion, or ventosity as we have said: pierce it slowly; if you hurry to cure it.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula is persistent near the bladder or near the urethra, if it allows urine to pass, and cannot be healed by medicines.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu; s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement; et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	If it is perforated near the spine, and the tendon comes from the limb; if there is no twisting and the pain is internal, it is because it is stuck, and there is no cure by medicine or cauterization; and in these persistent fistulas, there is no other cure than labor, and the vanity of those who meddle with them.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre; puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	In the one that is not persistent and not ancient, in hope of healing by iron, as I have experienced, and it is that the pain is hidden between your hands on its back; and the legs are raised up to his knees, and his knees are bent towards his belly; then boil a tent of lead, or of plaster if there is twisting, until you remove the tent.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans; si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	If the pain is felt around the base, then you should insert your index finger, so that it seems to have pierced the inflammation; and if you feel between your thumb and the palm, then cut out the affected area; and do not try to heal it unless it can be cured.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc; et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit; et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil; et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	It is possible to heal some, but this is rare; and the aid that is done, is to heat the cauterizer according to the width of the fistula, as it has been said before; and push all of it into the fistula, until it reaches the base; and do this twice or three times, until you see that these charred pieces are burned, which are similar to an arrowhead; then cure the wounded tent with burdock, until those charred pieces are gone, then cure the wound with ointment and bandaging.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If they are thus healthy, then it is good.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez; et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur; si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente; et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	If not, then there is no other way to be healthy; and if the tenting does not touch, and does not pierce just where it should at the base, and between the tent and the patient there is a thick covering of cloth or silk, and you see the fistula pointing towards the covering of the cure; if the copper begins at the beginning of the fistula, and goes before the tent, and then the cauterization after, until it reaches the top of the tent; and he will be delivered from the tent, and closed; then wash away those cloths that seem like a quill of an eagle, and none remain.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if you cannot move it, and cut between you and the work, then cauterize with fire or medicine.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor; puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe; puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	For the fire cauterization assembles two things: it is to know, the burning of these charred chars, and the stopping of blood and the soaking of moisture; then cure the wounds with boiled or ground bread, until the bleeding stops, and the charred chars are removed from the wound; then cure the wound of the injured by applying dry charcoal, and these medicines are dry.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it is restored, it is healed and does not return again.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if the fistula comes from the base of the foundation, and is distant from the body, then press on the chest or foundation, and examine it.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres: ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit; puis le cure, si com nos avons dit; par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé; puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues; puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	If you feel the tent, and between them is the cloth or the syringe or the charcoal, where it is close to piercing, there should be no other means of support and hope, by administration of one of the three methods: either you cauterize it as we have said, or you cut it just above the base, or if you can put tents and cure it as before; and do not move too much in front, so that you do not cover the part that holds the foundation, and bring the discharge through the way of intention; then cure it as we have said; perhaps it will be healed, or you remove that covering and wipe it when it is cut below the foundation, or by tent or other instrument appointed; then clean that char taken from the wound, as much as you can; then study to restore the wound, and to stop the fistula in the part before the foundation: if there is a lighter thing to the pain.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	And sometimes fistulas are made in this way: and when you put the tent into the fistula, it is where it costs the foundation below the skin above, so take a tent pierced at the top according to this form:
Et i boute I fil tort en II, et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And if you pull the thread through, and put the tent along the entire thread in the fistula until it reaches the top.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement; et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II; et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent; puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	If it is not possible to pull the thread through from the foundation below, then pull the thread of that which is pierced, so that you pull your other or foundation; and take the top of the thread, and assemble the two parts together, and hold them against each other, and let it rest for one or two days; and do not hold it at all until the thread covers those things that are between two, and heal; then cure the wound until it is sealed and healed.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not perforate, then I will perforate it in all possible ways that you can, unless it is too far from the opening.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it does not matter to make the application over so far from the opening, and then treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans; et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	The form of the spiny thread that is made for the fistula is very sharp and one-sided; on the other hand, it does not matter because we do not know what we should not do, as you see here:
des emorroydes	Des worms
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors; et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz; si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines; et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot; et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere; ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement; cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere; et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	Worms are according to two ways: either they are inside the foundation, like grains of resin, and there are small and large ones, and some have blood, and some have a little bit of blood, and some have a lot of blood, and some have none at all; but those that are outside have very little moisture, and some have a little bit of sharp citrine or a little bit of blood, and they have the color of the flesh; and the treatment of those that are inside the foundation is that you command the patient to sweat in other rooms until the foundation is completely dry, and the hair appears; then you quickly pull it out, and then you grasp it at its roots; and if the hooks cannot hold them because of their moisture, then you take them with tweezers or a needle, and then you grasp them, and powder them with any hot powders that are in the cautery chapter, or you cauterize them as it is said in the chapter of cautery, and then treat them with other treatments until they are healed; and if the foundation cannot be removed, then you cleanse the wound with a harsh and sharp paste to clean what is inside the foundation, so that it can come out openly; but if the worms are on the skin, and the hair is strong from the foundation, then the treatment is light; and it is that you grasp them with your fingers or with tweezers, and then you grasp them, and treat them as we have said, until they are healed, and until it does not fear the incision by iron.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc; puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose; et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is necessary to stitch the wound in this way: take a thread, and make it into a needle, and then pull the thread from above and pierce the needle from the other side, and turn the two ends of the thread away from the needle, and if it is too wide; hold the thread firmly, then release the thread, and remove the needle, and do so with all the others, and leave one to allow for the excess blood; then put on the affected area a cloth moistened in rose oil or in cerate, and put on the affected area, and instruct the patient to rest; and then let him rest until they are healed, and when they are healed, treat them with ointment and other treatment until they are healthy.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	dryly and carefully where the foundation
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	often found dryly and carefully in the intestines, and due to constriction of nature, and when the disease is old and medicine does not help.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient; et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is necessary to scrape the surface above with a spatula or your nail, which does not let it moisten; then cure it as it should be while it is dry; and if it cannot be cured, then start the scraping more forcefully than before until it is completely clean, and then cure it as it should be.
dou fremit	dryly heat
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont; et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	Mice are a small appearance created before the heart, and it moves a lot in front; and sometimes it finds the frost, and one feels like death from heat, and it spreads throughout the body, and more so than other parts.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor; puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	And the treatment is that you take a needle from an ostrich feather, or a strong vulture feather, and place that needle on the heat, until the circle of the heat surrounds it entirely; then turn your hand to all around the heat, and cover it all in front, and extract the heat from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see, if you make a needle of rain or iron in this form, and it is thin from below and thick above:
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	Don't touch it, to keep both hands steady, and press them; and if you see, burn the heat, as it is in front or chapter of cauterization.
de la forme dou clistere	of the form of the paste
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	Never make a paste of silver or tin, or melted lead or metal sheets; and never use small or large tools, according to those that are at hand.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Therefore, those that are used in the care of children and those who are weak and in pain, are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The form of the small and large paste is above wide, or the belly is tied as follows:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I; et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre; et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	And if there is a dislocation where the belly is tied, as you see, and the wound is on one side II perforations, and on the other I; and the belly or the one who puts the medicines in a beast's bladder or parchment, and perforate all around with small perforations, and there is between each perforation I must of space, then bolt in these perforations I filament of crushed thread twisted in X or around, and gather the belly as if it were a goat; and when the medicine is inside, if the tie to the instrument before a strong thread, then seal; and this is the form of a circle:
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement; puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	And let the medicine not be too hot or too cold, and oil the head of the poultice with oil or wax or something similar, then press it lightly; then the assistant gives the patient both hands together until all the impurities are removed, then remove the poultice, and relieve the pain in the legs at the side, and if the medicine wants to come out, let it come out as much as possible; and if he sleeps all night, it is a greater help.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you apply the poultice in case of diarrhea, and the medicine wants to come out, let it come out as long as it is healthy.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	And if the bandage is on the foundation or abscess, it should be as delicate as for a child; and this is the form of a delicate bandage over where the skin is stretched:
des plaies	wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	We have already said in the division the care of wounds; now we will tell you about the care of hands and medicine, according to completion.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are different according to what they are made of, and according to the limbs or wounds that are made, and why they are made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses; ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres; et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	The things by which wounds are made are from the piercing of a dart, and the cut of a spear or a knife, or a lance or a staff or an arrow, or similar things; or those that are made according to the limbs of the body, such as a wound that bleeds on the neck, or the head, or the foot, or the belly, or the liver, and similar members; and I will tell you the care of each wound, and I will begin with simple wounds to the head, because its chapter will come later.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree; et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	When a simple wound occurs where the bone is not broken, and if it is a piercing or similar things, and the skin is completely torn and the wound is large, and you doubt slightly of an abscess: if you do this immediately cleanse the wound itself if there is little blood from the wound, and cleanse the opposite side; and avoid the evils of overeating and heavy foods.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char; et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice; et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés; et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if he does not want to cleanse, let him soften his food, and do not drink wine, and do not change his diet; and apply to the wound, if there is an abscess, rosy oil alone or sterilized with wine; and if there is no abscess, put on fresh bandages over the entire wound that has not been moved by air, powder that I will say a little later; and if the wound has been moved, apply some ointments until it is healed.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large like a sword cut and similar, and the lips cannot come together by tenting, then stitch them together as I will explain in the case of abdominal wounds, with sutures.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	If the wound is exposed to bone and can be moved but only held by a pin, then dress the wound with medicine, and restore hard char in place of skin, and instruct the patient to eat soft foods, such as tests and cooked grain, like chicken, and similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure; et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil; et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	And if you suspect or find skin putrefaction and it is not near the bone, then cut off all of the putrefied part, and pour in horse urine, then dress the wound; and if there is an artery in the wound or vein without clotting, and it cannot be stopped by medicines, then tie the artery, and if you find it displaced, then tie it with a thread; and if this does not help, then cauterize it.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if these wounds are small and simple, then the treatment is light: and you should put this powder that boils as soon as it touches the wound.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon II parties; chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc; et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And the manner of this powder is as follows: take incense one part; dragon's blood two parts; fresh sulphur three parts, and the powder finely ground, and fill the wound, and bind it tightly, until it closes well and joins all its edges; then tie it firmly, and leave it undisturbed, unless it swells; for one should not remove the medicine until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And one should never use sulphur alone when one does not have incense or dragon's blood, but that the wound be boiled.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre; mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe; puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound has moved, immediately apply this powder; but place above some ointments digested, or poultices of barley flour made with honey and vinegar, until it begins to heal; then treat with other treatments until it is healed.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz; et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	And if a fragment of bone comes with the wound, and it is small, then extract it with fine tweezers; and I will tell you about the main fractures later.
de la plaie dou col	of the neck wound
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If a wound comes to the neck and it is simple, there is no difference between this and the main fracture, but if the nerves of the neck or the artery is cut.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire; et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres; mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	If it is a fracture, there is no other method than to leave the care, and not put anything restricting, for it harms fractures and pulls them; and do not put anything sharp over the wound, for the substance of fractures is cold, and its continuation with the brain, which is the highest member; but let the medicine be gentle, like lead washed in hot sweet water, and mixed with rose oil, and the bandage washed also in hot sweet water, and other pieces of cloth in this manner, and moist cloths.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, then use bandages to cover it until it heals.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu; et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est; et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel; et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier; et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue; et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	If the wounds are deep and hairy and full of pus, prick or below the skin; and if the artery is cut, and blood flows out, then cover it, and bind it, and cauterize it if necessary; and if the spine of the neck is cut, or the veins, and the conductor is preserved, because the meat goes through it, if the vein is cut across the neck of the neck, and do not touch the neck but return it according to its natural shape; then slowly tighten it, and leave it for some time, then treat the wounds with ointments until they are healed; and if the wound has made an impression on the bone, then remove it; and if there are pieces of bone, try to remove all that you can, and what you cannot remove, leave until the wound closes and is healed; and if the wound is fresh, powder with the powder that I have said.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there is bone in the wound and there is a fistula, then the treatment as I have described in his chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	of the wound from arrow or sword.
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz; et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide; mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor; et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors; si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne; et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	If it is a wound from arrow or sword, and the wound is deep, look to see if there is any ventosity coming from the wound that the hairs are not aligned: cut then that the wound is mortal; and if it is not deep, and it is fresh at all its blood, do not put in the first hour the powder, nor tie it immediately for the blood that does not stop in the first place, and return to the heart, and cover the pain; but use attractive ointment, and tie it twice a day; and if you have no ointment, put in the wound old cotton to draw out the moisture, and make the pain sleep on the wound three days, or four, or more; then there will be no spasm, nor trembling of the heart from anything else; and when you see the good dispositions, cut that the wound is saved.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	Heal the wounds of tents and other treatments, as long as they are healed; and if they cannot be healed, and work, then cut open a fistula; if the treatment is as it should be.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant; s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez; et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions; et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	And if the wound is from an arrow or sword cut, and it is simple, or small or on the back, then treat as directed; if it is large, stitch it up; if it is small, use powder, and if it is in the bone and has broken off pieces, then remove the fragments of the wound, and the others as they should be; and if they are not removed, let the wound fester, it will ease the extraction; and for other wounds on other limbs, the judgment is as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	belly rupture
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis; de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus; et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut; por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres: les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies; et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	1. Belly rupture is great and medium and small; of the great wound, once the intestines or the nerves of the intestines escape, by which the introduction of food occurs; and the wound is more painful, and once the small wound is worse than the large one, because one must sew the intestines back in, unless they are sewn back in immediately; for the intestines swell quickly when they feel fullness, if they are sewn back in more slowly, and because the medium wound is worth less, because one must sew the intestines back to their place as with other II And there are four ways to repair a belly rupture: the two common costures are in the costure of the belly, and the costure of other body wounds and two other costures are proper to other wounds; and therefore they are more proper with the costure of the belly, and I will say one by one and explain each.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres: ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	I say that when the wound is small, and nothing of the intestines is injured, and it is easy to put back, this is done by one of the two methods: either by the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestines are swollen by the heat.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere: moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee; et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	And when it is hot, warm it in this manner: moisten a sponge or a handful of salt in cold water alone, or boil it in cold water with vinegar and pepper, and cook the intestines until the swelling is softened; and never do this by restraining, and it is better to let it cool slowly.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose; et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes; et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait; et c’est li estrumens por le fendre: si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	And when you see the swelling separate, if the intestine is moist with sharp or high and rough spines, because by this it is aligned to enter at once; and if it cannot enter, then make a small incision in the tool used to remove worms; and the first care is to stop bleeding, which we should not cut without great necessity. And this is the instrument for cutting: it is cut from inside the intestine and outside, and remove the form.
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	And when the wound is wide and the intestine has jumped out, if you can put it back in its natural form according to its own place, because this is beneficial.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief; et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre; et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	When the wound is large and located in the lower abdominal area, it is necessary to place the injured person on their back, with their legs raised higher than their head; and if the wound is in the upper abdominal area, place the head and feet higher than the affected side, so that the uninjured side is higher than the injured side; and thus manage as I said for large and moderate wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres; et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort; et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble; puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille; puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte; et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer: por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes; et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure; et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee; et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien; et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras; et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi; ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	For small wounds, apply whatever is available to cover the wound, then place a needle or more, depending on the size of the wound, leaving a space of one finger's width from the edge of the wound, and insert a needle with strong thread through both layers of skin. Then sew up the wound evenly, leaving a space of one finger's width, and insert another needle, tying it off as you did the first. Continue this process with the needles, as needed, until the entire wound is sewn up. The needles should be medium-sized, neither too thin nor too thick, as thin needles cover the entire wound, while thick needles cannot penetrate well. Therefore, the needles should be medium-sized. Do not insert the needles too far from the edge of the skin and flesh, so they do not puncture the wound before sewing. Then cover the needle holes with bandages or cloth to keep them clean, and leave them in place until the wound is healed. This method of sewing with needles is more suitable for small wounds, as it requires only one or two needles. When you have sewn up all four layers together, remove the needle from the part where you started, in the manner of sewing a shirt; and leave a space between each stitch equal to the thickness of a finger. This method is suitable for sewing wounds, and I sewed a wound that had been opened with a knife, which was over one inch wide, and exposed two inches of intestines, and was located in the belly.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	I brought back the intestine after it had been out for 24 hours, and the wound was dressed with ointment after 15 hours, and it was treated, and it healed.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle; et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines; et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	And the mother thought he would die, and it was a miracle; and I did not treat him with any medicine, for I was in a place where none could be found; and I poured wine on the wound twice a day, and washed it with honey water until it healed.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture: pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens; quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer; et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	Or I will tell you the two proper ways of stitching: take the needle and the thread from the part before the skin; when it has pierced through the flesh in a straight line, then put the head of the suture or the stitch where you have inserted the needle, and let it pierce from the other side of the part before the skin; and the understanding of this stitching is that you sew as the furriers make their pelts, and that you leave one side of the suture once, and then repeat it on the other, until the stitching is complete.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere: fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac; puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac; puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit; et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	The second way of sewing, which Galen properly calls, is such that anyone can do, who assemble the two parts together naturally, and apply one of the sharp needles to the other head, in this manner: stick a needle or sharp needle near, and make it pierce only that part alone, and leave the two heads of the suture; then turn the needle, and make it pierce from the front part inside, the two heads of the suture; then pierce both from the front part inside, in two other needles that are on the other side; and this is the most common way of sewing and the best.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune; et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies; et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	If someone says this phrase, and no one testifies to it, then you should sew the belly with two needles, or one in each; and you should place one needle on one side and the other on the other, in the manner of those who sew corsets; and it is said that when the tear is in the belly, it is sewn more painfully than any other wounds of the belly.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies: et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe; et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach; puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	The judgments of the wound are such as the judgments of other wounds: and it is that when you clean the fresh wound with all its blood, provided that the doctor has moved it, then put back the intestine and the cloth; then put powder on it, and if the doctor has moved it, then put any ointment that is present, until the wound closes; then bind it with a bandage, and smear on sulfur and myrrh; then treat the wound as you would the others, until it is healed; and if you do not have medicines, then put cotton, and move it twice a day until it is healed.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples; et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles; et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine; et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	For you have no other duty in many situations where the wounds are simple; and if you doubt that the wound does not make communication with principal members, it is necessary to moisten the wound lightly with oil of warm temperature, or rose oil, and place it inside the ankles, and remove from the bones; and if it hurts or has putrefaction in the belly, and often happens, then clysterize with black wine, and immediately if the putrefaction comes to the intestines; and pierce within, and scrape as much as possible of the large intestines, which is lighter to heal than the small.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	The intestines that are called "jeun" cannot be healed when they are raw, and this is because of the planting of the veins that are in them, and because of the subtlety of all the body, and the approach of its nature to the nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres; et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres; puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	And if the sponge jumps from the wound, and puts it back as the intestine when it is fresh; and if it is old and has become black or blue, then you must tie the limb that is black, because there are veins and arteries in it; then cover what is between the limb, and hang the two sponges hanging from the part outside the wound to the end to align the extraction when the sponge falls, and the wound closes.
de la routure dou boueil	of the breaking of the boiled
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance; et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez; je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	When the intestine is broken and the wound is small, if it can be restored to some people, for I saw that some men were gutted from the abdomen by a lance; and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and became prolapsed and turned into a fistula, and in this there was egestion and ventosity; I applied treatment according to what I knew, and did not cease to subtilize until it was healed, and the limbs seemed sound.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre; et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans; et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere: pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus; et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise; et cout la plaie.	And when I saw it being sewn up, I doubted that there were no bad things in his belly; and there was no harm, but he remained in better conditions, and drunk and fed; and some experimenters said that when one has a small wound in the intestine, one should be tied in such a manner: take a warm cloth, then assemble the lips of the wound, and when the warm cloth has opened the mouth, place it on both lips so that it holds her mouth open; then cover the wound with another cloth, and hold it so that he cannot slip, then put the other warm cloth in that manner as before, until the wound is completely closed; and over the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere: pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure; et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance; et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	If this joint is burned in the intestine, and no harm comes to the pain, and it can be tied with a thin thread that is taken from the intestine of an animal, in the following manner: take the head of this intestinal thread that is very dirty, and then tie it to the head of this thin thread with the thread of linen, then pull the thread into the needle, and sew the intestine, and sew it back together; and this method of stitching is no further than according to the way of faith and hope; and if the wound is large and wide, especially when it is in one of the large intestines, there is no remedy or salve, only because of its thinness.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	of the fistula or where it is
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	Whenever a wound or abscess is covered and becomes generally called "fistula", and specifically when it is cut open and let out.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil; et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse; aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez; et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes: c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors; ou por sa malice; ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char; ou il i a trop de bowe; ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit; ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure; ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence; ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature; ou il i a voinnes ou os: et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	And the fistula is according to its hardness and whiteness, where one does not feel pain, and it is cut open like a quill of an owl; and sometimes it clearly opens out, and sometimes deeply; sometimes small, and sometimes enough; and I have spoken of this in the division of wounds, that every wound that is not healed, and there is no pus, except by one of the EIGHT causes: that is to say, by the smallness of the blood or flesh; or because of its malice; or because there is hard pus inside and on the lips, that does not let new pus grow; or there is too much discharge; or the wounds are poisoned, and the matter is of bad quality; or the medicine is not good for the cure; or because the corruption is in the manner of pestilence; or because the property in the region is late digestion, and late healing, and flowing out by nature; or there are veins or bones: and I have already shown all these causes, and the signs, and the cures of medicines in the division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	It is necessary for me to inform you about the treatment of fistulas that are made by the work of hands.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors; car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez; et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	Fistulas can occur in all members of the body; for there are fistulas that come to large veins, and to arteries, and to nerves, or to the face, or to the intestine, or to the bladder, or to any of the costal bones, or to the spine of the back, or to any joint of the hands or feet; and if they come to the property of the principal member, and similar ones.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance; et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier; et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit; et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie; puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent; et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens; et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons; et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	All fistulas that are of this kind are of great difficulty in healing, and there is only labor and ignorance; and if there is any fistula that does not come from the joint that I have mentioned, and you have faith in the cure, and you know how to treat it, then take a tent of tin or iron, if the fistula is straight, if the wire; and if the fistula is bent, if the twine d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit; and if the fistula has many perforations and you cannot well cover it with tents, then cauterize one of the perforations, for the moisture will not pass from one perforation to another, and it cleanses; then treat it properly according to your knowledge, whether there is bone or nerve, and if it is deep and covered with pus, and ask the patient carefully about the pain he feels when you press on it, and where he feels it; and when you will know truly where it is, and whether it is far from joint, or of nerve, or of artery, or of vein, or in any of the places that I have mentioned, then cut according to what I have said, and remove the cause and the corrupted parts that are inside; and then treat it until it is healed, and if the fistula is deeply buried in the right place, then cut as much as you can, then put soft tents in medicine ague, and put them close to the mouth of the fistula, until the medicine corrodes the superfluous part that remains at the bottom; and then put ointments of clean, sound charcoal, until they are healed; and if it is not healed by this, then cauterize as we have said, and if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, then cut.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit; et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font: si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu; et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If the vein or nerves cause you pain or harm your main limbs, as we have said; and if the tooth is exposed, and there is corruption and blackness, then let the king boil it until the corruption is completely gone, then cure the things inserted inside charged with herbs until they are healthy; and if they are not healthy, and remain as before, then cut off that you are not allowed to go further: if exposed and wanting to be as far as you can, and remove all corruption, then restore the limb; and if it is thus healthy, it is good.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir; si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature; et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un; et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	If not, then it is too far gone, and there is no other remedy except to leave it; and if there is a small bone corrupted, and you can pull it out with pliers, then extract it with the appropriate tool for that, and if there are many bones, then pull them all out, and do not leave any; and if moisture makes it against you, and there is no error or fear, then use moisture and char, and deliver the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os; et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie; et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os; si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez; et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	If you cannot remove them within an hour, put something pungent on the wound to prevent putrefaction, and leave it there until the flesh is rotten around the bones, and then the bones will be more easily removed; and if it is a large bone, such as a leg or thigh, cut away the corruption until the bone is completely rotted, then close the wound; and if there is a great part of the corruption, and comes close to the bone; if it must be so, cover all around the corruption, and treat it as long as it is putrid; and I will tell you of a fistula that happened to a man in his leg, so that you may take example and help in your work.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir; mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors; et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors; et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	The young man was around 30 years old, who had pain in his leg from a cause that came from within the body, such that the matter came to the leg, and was inflamed with a large abscess, and there was no reason to open; but the healer by their folly opened too high that the abscess opened, and they drained much matter, and became a fistula, and there was much pain that everyone groaned and moisture of the body; and many more sought cure within two years, and there was no remedy in the art of hands, such that I was called, and saw his leg and the medicines with which they were healing, and what was coming through the pores to great pain; and it became red the body of the young man, and had a yellow color.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	I pitched a tent in one of these openings, and then I searched all the openings, and found that one was coming into contact with another from all parts of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens; je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai; et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder; et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu; mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	I then hesitated, and cut into one of the openings until I discovered a part of the bone, and found it rotten and perforated, and the corruption was coming to the bone from inside; I saw what appeared to be the rotten bone, and thought there was no other corruption, except that which I had seen; and I began to treat the wound with ointments for a long time, but could not heal it; then I re-examined, and discovered the continuous corruption in the bone, and saw it, and then removed it, and I was unable to heal the limb; but I could only cut around a palm's width of the bone, and treat it all over its surface, then I applied ointments; and it became healthy and healed tightly, and it did not need further treatment except for the weakness of the pain, which could not bear it, and the fear of death that I had for him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	For the evacuation of blood often occurs, but he was completely cured and born in the place of the bone, a hard char, and was of good disposition and had no harm or contradiction at all, neither to the other nor to the coming.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere: pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut; et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char; et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue; et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	And if the bone is broken in any part of the body, it should be done in this way: take a piece of linen, and wrap it around the head of the bone that opens, and command that it be extended up; and put another piece of finer linen than the first above the first, and tie it above the char that is on the bone, and extend the head, so that you can remove the corrupted char outside, and uncover the char above the place where you see it should be, that it not corrode the char; and put a poultice or a cloth outside the bone to cover the corrupted char; and it should be done so that one can see and feel the corruption, and it should be done again.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute; puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit; et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part; et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper; et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert; et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire; et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce; et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument; et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies; si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	And if the tooth is rotten, and not open, and the rot is in the middle or in one part, then remove the entire tooth; then apply a bandage from one part to the other over the rot, and sew the bandage to the long side of the rot, as we have said; and if the rot is in the joint, then cover the joint with the rot, and sew the bone or the part it contains from the other side; and if the rot is in the continuation of the two joints, then there is no other way than to cover it; and if the rot is on the fingertip or the toe, then this thing is very difficult, but nevertheless it is necessary that you investigate this rot, how it opens; and clean it in all ways that you can, but do not let the blood vessel or the nerve go against each other; and know that the instruments for covering these bones are many, according to the shape of the bones and the appearance of the teeth, and their size and subtlety, and their greatness and smallness, and their hardness; and therefore it is necessary to prepare a tool for every kind of work, and know that the work will show you the tool that you have to use, according to the knowledge of this art, and the testimony of the ways of diseases; so consider the tool that you have to use according to what it should be.
dou feu	For fire cauterization
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer; et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre; et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	The affected member will rot either due to its own nature or due to weakness; and when you have treated the corrosion with medicines, and it does not improve, it is necessary to amputate the member up to the joint where the corrosion comes from, so that the pain escapes by death or by the greater evil, which is the lack of the member; and the signs are that the member becomes black, so that it seems as if it has been burned by fire, and then turns darker, as the corrosion spreads from member to member and takes hold of the whole body; if you delay in amputating, and if the corrosion is at the head of the member, then cut it off and do not give it any space for the poison to reach the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras; et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut; et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe; et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet; et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil; et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort; et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers; puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	If it comes from the hand, if the copper is at the joint, so that the corrosion does not come to the arm; and if it comes to the arm, if the copper is at the shoulder; and if it passes the shoulder, it is death, and there is no other remedy except the quantity of its virtue; and thus do what you can when the corrosion comes or pierces: if it comes to the first joint, if the copper after the other joint; and if it comes to the bone, if the copper all the bone; and if it goes up the leg, if the copper at the knee joint; and if it comes above the knee, there is no other remedy than that the hurt will die; and the way of the copper or the cloth to hold the member is such that you tie it above and below, and on one side some ministers the one ligament below, and on the other side other ministers the other ligament above, and you disinfect the char that is between the two ligaments at the span wide, until the bone is revealed; then the copper or cloth, and put a piece of linen from each part so that the hurt does not touch the healthy skin, and it comes to the other injury and abscess.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet: il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet; et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez; et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions; et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere; et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez; et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	And if blood flows out when you are working, cauterize the limb quickly, or place some powders that stop bleeding; then return to your medicine until it is completed, then bind the wounded member with a bandage, and treat it until it is healed; and I will tell you what happened to a man in my presence: he had a wound that seemed like burning by fire, and that corrosion first appeared on his right side, taking over the whole side; and when the honorable men saw the corrosion, they covered the wound, and was healed; and after a long time, the corrosion appeared on the other side of the hand, and it came to me, and I placed things that reflected after cleansing the body, and could not stop the corrosions; and he wanted me to cut off his hand, and I would not, because I had hope of reflecting the matter; and he also doubted that if I cut off his hand, he would not die, for the virtue of the man was weak; and he despair, and returned to his land, and covered his hand, and was healed; and I have not told you anything else but because of what others do, if they have business.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe; et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz; et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»; mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»; et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz; et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	Never does an abscess form in a wound that is kept too moist for too long, and it takes so long to form that it causes a great gathering of pus; then it bursts and perforates, and the pus jumps out, and remains under the skin, like a small bag; and the skin above is also as thin as cloth, and does not corrode the bone, nor the nerve, and such diseases are called "sinus", and are not called "fistula"; but if it is so long that it reaches the bone from the front, it is called "fistula"; and the skin is so thin that you must cover it all around, and especially when it is thin, like cloth; and it does not corrode for its corruption.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi: regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite: prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel; et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus; et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant; fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor; et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez; et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet; ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain; et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin; ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens; et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez; et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	And if the skin is hardened and the corruption is not yet in place, and the skin is charred, then the following ointment should be used: look to see if the breasts are large, and the nipple is smelly, then use the Egyptian medicine that is made as follows: take equal amounts of milk, oil, and licorice, boil them together in a vessel over the fire until the medicine turns red and thickens like honey; then take as much as needed, and make it into a thick paste or thin liquid, and apply it to the breast, and hold the nipple tight; leave the medicine on for two hours, then wipe it off; do this many times until the breasts are clean and soft; and no one should be treated with this medicine if they cannot bear the pain, or if the Egyptian medicine and the water of ashes do not help, then use the ointment of milk and melted wine, where the honey has the property of cleaning and washing, and the wine makes the skin soft; and when you have done this, and you have confirmed that the breasts are clean, then use the ointment of rose oil and vinegar, and take some definite plaster, made with rose oil and wine; or use some other medicines and ointments, as I have mentioned their properties for treating wounds; and if the nipple of the breast is small, and the opening of the ointment cannot enter, then enlarge it with a sharp instrument, and put in an Egyptian tent or basilicon ointment, until it is wide enough; and if the wound is too large, then leave it alone, and let the skin or the ointment enter where it can, and if the nipple that is above is smelly, then cover it with a cloth.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char; et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe; et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain; puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois; et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste; et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez; et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	When the bowels are in the right position, do not let them hang down; and if you cannot cover the abdomen as you see fit, arrange it in such a way that the bowels move to the lowest point they can reach, for when the bowels are in the right position, do not let them hang down, and if you cannot cover the abdomen as you see fit, arrange it in this way: the bowels should move smoothly downwards, and nothing should be left behind; then apply consolidative medicines to the wound, and cover it with a linen cloth that covers the entire wound; then apply forces to the edges of the wound and make them wider than the first, as they are softly supported by the other cloth according to the size of the wound, and place it on the wound to align the bowels, and do not remove the large cloth until after several days; and whoever is on the edges of the wound should often remove it to align the bowels, and see if anything comes out of the wound, whether it is poison or a little or enough, or digested or undigested; and take precautions if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not, and when your medicine has been applied in this way for some time and you see the nature that moves over the wound, then remove the bandage and approach the health; and then remove it in the morning or the next day, and when you remove the wound, change the other cloth, and renew the poultice.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the breasts are too full and undigested after many days, cut them off so that they do not burst.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	And if the subtle poisons are cut off after a long time, do not despair of health, for health approaches.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire; et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie; et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine; pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance; puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu; et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire; et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use; et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens; si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	For there are men who take a long time to heal their wounds, and those who do the opposite; and if the breasts become undigested after many days, cut them off so that they do not burst; and if the breasts are slow to heal and are far apart, use medicines that are moist in substance but dry in effect, such as oil of roses, and the same amount of old wine mixed with equal parts of honey; then cook it and use it; and the same is done with meat that is growing, when there is no oil of roses present, or take myrrh and aloe and incense, grind them, and the powder over the honey when it is on the fire; then apply the cloth to the breast, and use it once a day, and sometimes use aristolochia root and sky-blue lily, which is also like flour and centoire; and use simple or compound medicines: grind them and make powder, and put it on the honey that I have said, and use it; and if the cure is long and not healed by this cure, then cut out the corruption and make an impression in the bone, or in the hard members, or in the limbs; if the cure of the cure of fistula, as we have said before.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	of the abscess of the nail
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois; et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute; et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	Panarice is an abscess that arises from the pouch of the nail, or the toe, or by chance in other places; and when it is opened, and no attention is taken, if the abscess bursts, and corrodes and drips blood so much that it reaches the root of the nail, and perhaps corrodes it entirely; and then comes the corrosions up to the bone, as long as there is painful putrefaction, and the patient has a large wound, and the color is red.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	When you treat it as we have said in the division, and the cure does not work, then you must remove all the excess that remains of the nail, then cauterize the wound afterwards.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne; et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	The cauterization is a great help if the bones are healthy and the joint is sound; but if the joint is close to the skin and begins to prick, and the wound, then it is necessary to remove the skin from the joint that does not touch the char, and bring the bottom up, and gently and lightly cover this char with medicines burning and corrosive to remove everything; then treat the wound until it is healed.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner; et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier; puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor; et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	And if the corrosion is in the bone, then cover it and drain, because as much as the bone rots and is, it cannot be healed; and if you see the other rotting, then cover it as before mentioned, and treat it until it is healed; and if it is fierce, and open, and it hurts greatly, then first heal it; then cover the joint with a thin layer of acid in cutting across, and make sure that the cut does not reach the skin that is outside the joint, because the hairs would feel too much pain; and if there is, then put something on top that soothes.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	The pain of a sore hand
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	The dislocations that occur in the hands of some men are all bony, and sometimes they have bones, and sometimes they have a spike, and none of them occur at the root of the joint, or in any of the fingers.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet; la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere: taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	Those who occur in none of the fingers do not move, and those who occur at the joint of the finger, sometimes move; the length of the bony one is light, like this: cut it at its root into a wide spoon-shape.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	Those who occur at the root of the joint are difficult to cure: if you have the copper.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	In the one who is born or must at the back nout, it is necessary that you first cut the round rod to the bone, then cut the bone to a suitable silk for this, then cure it until it is healthy.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The same things that come together in two ways come from birth or from the wound, or from burning fire, or from similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz; puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent; ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	If it is necessary that you cut that which is sore, so that the one who owes it to repair according to its natural forms; then put between two tents or moistened cloths in rose oil, that it does not sore; or you put between two pieces of thin leather, as much as the ones are sores, as it should be.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	If the patient applies pressure to any of his fingers with the palm, then apply the splint as it should be done.
des vils	of the fingers
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors; et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	The veins are large and swollen, filled with excess melancholy, which come in many members of the body; and more so in the legs of those who walk and work and carry, than in others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	Therefore, you should never administer any clyster of honey, and then give the salve from the basilica.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir; et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	The treatment of iron is in two ways: one is that you apply it and draw out the black blood; and the other way is that you open the vein and let all the blood flow out.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil; puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir; et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire; et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	The tail is done in this way: first, the first leg of the high hot mustard, so that the big one is not subtly thinned, then straighten the leg with the bad one below the belly; then cut the vein in the left, or the second or the third, of a wide incision, then release and pull out the black blood to your hand, from one to the other, as much as the power of the bad leg can bear; then tie it, and command that he be cleaned with foods seasoned with black pepper; and then restart the evacuation and cleaning when the veins are flat, and not in pain.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes; et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville; puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent; et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche; puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers; puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope; et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse; et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide; et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	1. The fire cautery is commanded to the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	If the vision is blurred and distorted and wrapped together, and it is not straight, as we have said, then you must torture it but do not cover it; and treat it as we have previously described.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne; et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	The form of iron that covers the eye is curved and does not cut into the vein; it is large in size, because if it were thin, it would cut into the vein, but if it is large as we have said, this is the form:
de la voinne civile	of the civil vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor; et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	This vein is found in the legs, in hot parts where there are no herbs or trees, and in dry land; and by chance it may arise in other parts than the legs, and this has to do with the pus that comes out of the skin, as it comes from within the flesh and bones, inserted between the skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	And if there are signs of the beginning of this wound, which is that a very large inflammation comes into the leg, then the leg changes, and the wound begins to protrude, like the root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe; et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue; car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie; por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors; et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	If the wound is open, it is necessary to wrap it around a piece of cloth that is 1 and a half inches wide by 2 inches long, and the nose, and leave the cloth on the leg, and every time it is not present, if the wrapping is around the cloth, and the nose; and if it is too long, then take a part of it, and wrap the remaining part, and do not cover it at its root, until it is completely out; for if you cover it, it will go back into the wound, and bring in an abscess and rotting flesh, and severe disease; therefore it is necessary that it be treated little by little from the top, and nothing remains or remains; and this wound never occurs when it is treated with 10 inches of length, or more, and some have come to me, which was 10 inches long, and when you cover it, it will burst or perforate, and pierce through to the bottom, so that everything comes out; and let the matter that is inside be drained, and administer medicines by injection for rotting every day, then treat the wound as with abscesses.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	And never again rain on this vein, and specifically when it opens into the joint of the little finger, or the big toe, and much pain comes from it, and it jumps back; then treat it as we have said before.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	lines of verse that are born between skin and flesh
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer; et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre; et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	This disease is called in our land "cow disease", because it often affects cows, and it is a small worm that is born between skin and flesh, and goes up and down the body, and is felt well in each member after member, until it reaches the skin where it went, and jumps out; and it is caused by some humors, as they come from snakes and leeches and tapeworms or intestines; and one doubts its malice, for as it goes through the body, and goes up to the head, and comes to the oil, perhaps it enters, and destroys the oil; and this has happened many times.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait: si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire; et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit; et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer; et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	When you see that the patient is curing and drawing, it cannot be otherwise than when it goes: therefore, it is necessary to hold the limb above and away from a very tightly wound bandage, then cut through and remove it, and if it comes out in front of the char, and you do not pull it out, then cauterize with fire above, until it dies; and the greatest harm it does is that it corrupts the oil, as we have said; and if you see it coming or near to the oil, then hold it away from it well, then cut through and remove it; and it is necessary to use the poultice of healing herbs for the bad humors for the diseases, and if it is raw meat for purgation.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	of the pain that comes from windiness
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	This disease is called in our land "windiness", and it is a pain that comes to certain members, and then moves from member to member; and I saw what I will tell you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais; et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre; li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais; puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	I was called to a sick woman, and I discovered one of her arms, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm; and soon afterwards, I saw it rise as if a worm were in the shoulder, more quickly than anything, just like quick silver when it cuts through leather to another; the pain departed from that arm, and went into the shoulder, and then a little afterwards it spread throughout the body, until it reached the other arm; then she told me that she turned around inside the body, as I saw.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I was greatly amazed at how the disease moved from one member to another, for I had never seen it spread in this way before.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme; et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte; et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	However, I had heard that it could move from one limb to another, but I had never seen it in this way before; and I thought that it was because the woman had a dry skin, and her veins were exposed, and because that kind of moisture appeared constrained; and it did not appear according to this reason to those who are delicate, and who have moist skins and covered veins.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer; et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	And when you see this disease and the pain it causes, if it appears as we have said, then tightly bandage the affected limb and apply a poultice until that constrained moisture is drawn out; and cauterize the limb; and if you do not see it in your eyes, then treat the cause of that moisture, such as fetid pills, and serpentine pills, and similar others.
des saiettes	of arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	Arrows are various, according to their appearances and according to the kinds of bodies they penetrate.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees; et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces; et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	The diversity of them is such that there are those that have large points, and small, and barbed, and smoothed; and those that have two angles, and those that have tongues, and those that have pieces; and the one that pierces any member as it pleases: whether in a principal member, like the head, heart, liver, lungs, rains, intestines, bladder, and similar members.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent: si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions; et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	When it pierces any part of these members, and the sign of death, which I will tell you later, shows up: then you must reset this arrow, for many die afterwards in various conditions; and when this bad sign does not show up, and the arrow is not completely removed, then remove it, and cure the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole; et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix; et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char; et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	And the signs of the head when the arrow pierces and passes through the bone, and the tongue leaps up which is above the brain, are blindness and sore throat and vertigo and blackouts, and inflammation and blackouts of the tongue, and spasms and confusion of mind, and vomiting of bile; and perhaps without strength of the nose or the ears; and perhaps speech and voice are affected; and a white discharge from the wound resembling pus, and also like boiling water, and if these signs appear to you, then hold the arrow if it is not already out.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide; et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope: saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	The symptoms of a broken bone when it breaks or shatters are that it is near the right breast, and also feels like it was stuck in something hard, not moving; and by chance the bone moves like a chicken's wing, and there is black blood, and cold sweat, and syncope: therefore, without doubt, the patient will die.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of a wound that does not heal is that without complaint of pus it jumps out of the wound, and the throat swells, and the limb changes color, and sighs high and seeks the cold air.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	If the arrowhead is lodged in the quilt underneath, it is near the small ribs; and it causes great pain and shortness of breath; and they move all the limbs of the shoulders.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the arrowhead is lodged in the stomach, by chance if it jumps from the wound, nothing of undigested meat comes out.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if the arrowhead is lodged in the abdomen, and it does not pass through the intestines, there is no hope of cure, nor in the extraction of the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	And if the arrowhead is lodged in the bladder, and the urine passes out and comes out afterwards, and the patient feels great pain: it is a mortal wound.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other limbs, such as the face, neck, shoulder, and back, and the spine of the back, and the arms, and the hands, and the legs, and similar limbs, are safe according to many positions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in the nerve or the artery, and it is not venomous, as I will tell you what happened to me, because of what you were doing differently.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis: je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	It happened to a man who was shot in the calf at the root of the thigh: I tried to remove it, and took it out on the other side of the ear grease, and he was healed without any harm.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	And in one case, an arrow was shot into the oil paper outside of the skin, and the arrow was retrieved, and it could only be reached up to the tip towards the fist, and the arrow was large like a Turkish bow, all of it iron without ears; the wound was sutured, and no bad accident came to him.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles: je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	And an arrow was shot into the neck of a Christian, and the arrow was Arabic with ears: I shaved the barbs, and carefully removed it until I removed it, and the Christian was healed.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit; et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition; je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	And an arrow was shot into a man, which was in his head or belly, and I thought he would die; and after he had passed thirty days, his condition did not change; I cut into the arrow, and inserted a probe, and removed it, and there was no bad accident.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus; et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	And if you wish to help a person who has an arrow sticking out or on their back, and the wound was closed over; and the arrow remained inside, and did not change its natural position, and found no harm in any of its natural works.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie; et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	And if you wish to help another person who had an arrow sticking out in their face, and the wound was closed over; and it remained thus to suffer great pain; and many similar cases.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	And if you remove an arrow from the man of the prince, the king, who had it stuck in his neck, and was slightly tilted to the right side; and the arrow was completely removed, I was called to cure after it had been sticking for three days.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	If the wound is very narrow.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie; et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	I carefully applied a thin tent to it, and I felt nothing; but he felt pricking and pain outside his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast; et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	I thought it was from the arrowhead, so I placed some attractive digestive ointment on the wound because the wounds did not swell; and the arrows appeared to me.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	I then applied the ointment more often, and immediately healed the wound, and the pain lasted a long time, until he felt the arrow inside his nose; and he told me.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu; puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement; et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir; adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	I applied a corrosive medicine to the wound by hand, as long as it was open, and probed it, and felt the tip of the arrow that was stuck in the limb; then I poured more of that corrosive medicine into the opening of the wound until the arrow appeared visible; and it passed well through the four months, and then decayed since the wound where I had put the nails, and one of them on one side and the other on the other, and could not exit; therefore I did not stop trying and engineering in various ways of instruments, until I got it one day with well-made nails, according to what its form will be at the end of this chapter, so that I took it and closed the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer: je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	And the doctor judged that the cartilage of the nose could not be restored: I restored it then, and it was healed by the wound, and the patient was completely cured of the pain.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre; mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	I have told you the quality of extracting some arrows, so that you may place your care above what I do not say, for books cannot explain everything; but wise masters know many things, and know what is present and lacking, to find new work, and new tools, in the understanding of strange things that happen in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres: ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part; et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	I say that arrows do not come out of the body except in two ways: either by the way they entered, or from another part; and the one that comes out by the way it entered is an arrow entered into its own sinews, and it has never happened before.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue; et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor; et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	And if she does not jump now, let her remain until the charcoal is ready and the issue is alleviated; and similarly, if she is stuck in the bone, and cannot be removed, let her remain thus for several days, and move her every day; and then she will jump, and if she does not jump, perforate all around the forest subtly, until the bones around are expanded, and then remove it.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	And if the arrow is stuck in the head bone, and goes towards one of the belly's ventricles, and some of the accidents that I have mentioned above cause pain to the patient: do not remove it immediately, but let her remain thus for several days, because if the arrow goes towards the brain, it is death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	And if the arrow is not stuck in the bone only, and does not come out by itself, and remains there for several days without causing any harm, then use the extractor.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is deeply stuck and cannot be pulled out, then apply tar around it as I have told you; then treat the limb until it is healed.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente; et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble; et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans; et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire; et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	And if the arrow is hidden in the flesh so that it cannot be seen, then apply tar all over the wound; and if you feel it, remove it with any suitable instrument; and if you cannot remove it due to the narrowness of the wound, and the depth of the arrow, and there is no bone, nerve, or vein, then let the wound bleed until it is large enough; and remove the arrow if you can, and if there are ears on the arrow that hold it in place, then carefully break the part that is stuck deeply into the muscle so that you can remove it; and carefully break or pry off the ears of the arrow until you can remove it; and be careful not to break the arrow when removing it.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	If you cannot do it once, if the pain reaches to the shoulder, then cut it, for the extraction is alleviated.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre; et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	And if the flow of blood makes it contrary to what we have said about the treatment in its chapter, then guard against the incision of the nerve and the vein, and proceed as you can draw out the arrow without risk, or quickly or firmly or strongly; and put the pain according to the form it was in when the arrow fell out, for this is the greatest help that there is, and if you cannot, then do it according to what the signs show you.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment: taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	The arrow that comes from another part, where it opens nothing of it, or the skin is swollen in a place where one can see or feel it: cut then above, as far as the barbs can be taken, and then extract it: if it has now fallen.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is retained in the bone, round your hand and insert it into the bone, expand the bone, then remove it.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer; et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust; et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	And if it cannot come out, let it remain, and then restart the extraction until it comes out; and if the arrow was inside, and you see that it has been administered gently, if you administer the instrument with a bristle, so that the tip of the arrow enters the bristle of the instrument; and then pull out, and if the arrow is caught, pull the instrument inwards to facilitate the extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	And if the arrow is lodged, it is necessary that you cut out all the flesh around where the poison is, if you can, then treat the wound as it should be done.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope; et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est; et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if the arrow pierces or sticks in the belly or bladder or side, and it is close, and you can cut across, then cover the wound; do not cover the vein and nerve, and then extract it, and then treat the wound if necessary; and the treatment until it is healed.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The shape of the needles used to extract arrows is similar to the beak of an owl, and here is the shape:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	And there are many ways: large, medium, and small, according to the amount of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	The shape of the arrowhead is also like the beak of a bird, to put at the tip of the arrow, as in this case:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	The shape of the barbs for putting and for holding is thus:
des voinnes dou cors communes	Veins common to the body
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir: II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»; et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans; et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»; et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis; et les II guindeges qui sont ou col; et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»; et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	There are XXXI veins that are common to the body, of which there are XVI main ones, namely: two in the ears, called "ear veins"; and two arteries in the temples; and two veins in the armpits, called "aspires"; and the vein in the forehead; and the vein at the back of the nose; and the two jugular veins; and the two veins on the neck; and the two veins above the mouth, and these are the veins called "augeherich"; and the two veins outside the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras: l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»; et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	The common veins that are usually drawn are five in each arm: one is the cephalic, and it is on the right side, and it is called "the great vein"; and the middle one is called "the basilic", and it is composed of the cephalic and the basilic, and it is called "the vein of the heart"; and the basilic is on the left side, and it is called "the belly vein", and it is above the fossa, and it is the one that is usually drawn, which opens clearly above the pouch.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains; et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei; et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	And the subclavian vein is the vein that is between the auricular and the annular, and it is on the right side; and in the leg and where the foot is, there are three veins: one is outside the corbeure of the pouch of the left side costeit, and the second one is at the ankle of the right side costeit; and the vein that is called "the jugular", which is at the ankle of the other costei; and in the other leg are three veins.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine; et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief: quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche; puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues; puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee; et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	The first line translates to: "For the fire cauterization, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz; et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis: et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement; et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche; puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit; puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton; et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	For the first two arteries located in the temples, it is best to pierce them with a needle, and then cauterize them with an old, hot iron, and also apply a custom-made mixture of lime and tears to those places; and the quality of this treatment is as I said: that the hairs stand up so that both veins are clearly visible; and then the patient feels pain in the back of the neck, and then the head tilts; then lift the skin over the vein at the top of your index finger, and pierce the lancette outside, and lift the vein to the top, and cover it as you did with the other two veins, and treat the blood according to your need; then remove the pain, and place your index finger on the vein for an hour, then place cotton on it; then wrap it up and leave it until it is healed; we have spoken about this and its treatment and extraction, which begins the book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor; et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere; puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	The healing of the vein in the forehead is as valuable as the healing of cephalic diseases and facial ancient maladies, such as migraine and rheumatism; and the qualities are such that the pain is strange, twisting the head until the vein appears; then take the instrument called «fosseur», which has this form:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues; puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	And place the point above the vein, and hold it with your hand or something else, and let the blood issue according to the quantity you see; then relieve the pain by twisting the neck, and tie the vein until it is healed and never again from one wide flame.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	Always, it is not advisable that the flame be too hot; and the direction of the flame should be away from the bone, because the bone is close, and by chance it may break the flame when it is thin.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice; et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant; puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	The direction of the two veins that are in the two armpits helps them, and to the elbow, and to the wrist, and to the back in the oil, and for diseases of the face; and the quality of their direction is such that the pain is strained by twisting any limb, as before; then the flame, and let the direction of the flame be a little farther from the flame, a little longer, and a little wider, because there is no harm.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if the flames are thin, perhaps it will break; then apply blood clot, as much as you have skill, and then tie with thread, and tie it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree; et c’est li forme dou flaime:	The blood from the vein is good against the fever, and against sudden illness, and diseases of the face, such as migraine and toothache that comes in the face, and always when it is old; and the quality of the blood is that the pains strain their neck, then strain their neck with your right hand, and take the thin flame long, and put it on the lip in the space between the two nostrils, because the vein does not open well in front, and the sinus begins to bleed now; and do not move too much in front, and apply blood clot according to your need, then tie it for a night, because it is soon restored; and this is the form of the flame:
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit; et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est; puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	The salve of the second ingredients helps to narrow the veins, and at the beginning of the inflammation, and in many diseases, and in impetigo, and in corrosion, and in herpes, and in esting; and the quality of the salve is such that the pains strain their neck on one side and the other, as we have said; and so the masters are above the chief of the pain, and the pain sits on one seat, then clean the vein with a long needle a little wide, then draw out the blood temperately, or as much as the matter requires; then do the other side, then release the limbs gently, and hold the veins steadily, so that the pains do not strangle; and leave it until morning, so that the wound is healed.
de la sainie des leivres	of the health of the liver
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The health of the lips above helps to cool in the mouth, and prevents tooth decay, and chapped lips, and pain around the mouth.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit; puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires: cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	And the quality of the health is to make the pain disappear in front of you, and strain your neck as I have said; then turn the lip, and look at the two veins, one on the right lip and the other on the left, and they are known by the fact that they are black, and by the fact that around them there are small black veins: therefore match both, and if you do not know them, and if you are in doubt, match the largest of each part, and do the same with the two veins that are above and below, for it is the same method.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	of the tongue's dislocation
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche; et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire: saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	The dislocation of the veins that are dislocated from the tongue helps after the dislocation of the cephalic, and it is by tightening the throat, and for diseases of the eye, and for diseases of the mouth; and the quality of the sainier is that the diseases lie between your hands in front of the sun, and you elevate the tongue, and look at each side one black vein: heal both, and do not move too much, for from there are the arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres: ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»; et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	The veins of the side that are commonly healed are healed in two ways: either by pinching all at once with a wide flame, or by thinly slicing, and it is called "aneurism"; and they are wide and thin according to the width and tightness of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The form of a firebrand is very famous, and is as wide as you see.
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble; et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	And it is useful for opening veins that are deeply cut and contain much blood and trouble; and this is the form of a firebrand made of oil.
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	And it is more delicately pointed, and is used to lance veins that are thinly cut, where there is thin blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre; et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	The incision of the basilica, which is one of these veins, helps in diseases that are outside the neck, and where the collarbone, and where the chest, and where the belly; and it is necessary for the incisor to incise carefully, and to avoid the artery that is outside.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit; et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	If the artery is cut, and blood comes out, it should be cooled, as I said; and not be touched with the fire, but cut off as with a knife.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre; ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement; et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	And if the basilic vein does not open clearly, it is necessary to dislocate and change another; or you want any rain of it, or you clean in its place the vein with the arm: it opens clearly; and it is handled with fire as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz; puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil; et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	And if you see the vein of the sinew, it is necessary to dislocate the arm as much as you touch the vein; then sign the vein with a needle, and then bind the arm, and handle the vein with fire as we have said; and beware that you do not cut into the artery when you see the vein swell, for it is the artery: avoid it then.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere: haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient; se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see blood coming out as high as a child's urine, and the wound is red and thin, then it is from an artery: hurry then, and put your hand longwise, then remove your hand without pain, which has happened many times; hold the arm still, and let it be so, and do not move the hairs until they are healed; and be in fear, and do not move it until it is healthy.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	And if the wound is not bleeding, and you feel pain, and the medicine is not present, then cut open the artery if it is open, for the blood flows out; and stop the wound.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor; se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc; et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	Take a splinter of bread, and grind it, and take one half of it and apply it to the other side; if it does not stain, that is good; if it does, then cure it as we have said, with powders that stop bleeding; and the stoppages are not greasy in many positions for the small wound of the sore, and the position of the little arm.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit; et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner; et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	The vein in the middle helps to treat blood from above, as it is composed of the basilica and the cephalic, as we have said; and the sauna must be done for all the vein that is out, and if it does not go too far in front, and he finds the vein, and he inflates and the grease is either greasy or cannot heal; and this vein often opens, and if it does not open in any men due to its subtlety, then you must use the sauna of the instrument anesil; and shield the vein from your power.
Et se il a voinne entre les II ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if he has a vein between the two nerves, make it longer.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz; et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	The vein of the cephalic helps, as it draws blood from the head, and helps with the eyes; and it is best to puncture at the olive or nutmeg vein, for it is the safest of all veins, as it does not have any nerve or artery.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence; et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	However, it is best to ask for the lightest vein, and do not hurt anything if it is not found the first time, and start again; and by chance, some men's veins swell at first, but it does not hurt.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of the health is according to your thought.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir; et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique; et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent; et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	The first thing you must know about healthcare is that it is not intended for anything other than maintaining health and preventing diseases from coming; and healthcare should be done in one of the three veins that are either cut: that is to say, cephalic, femoral, and basilic; and if you should practice healthcare at the beginning of the day, in the spring and autumn, after eating, when the sign of repletion appears; and if you should practice healthcare on the first or third day, after two hours or three days.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens; et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	The sane person who is administered for diseases does not have a determined hour, but rather at certain times of the day and in all hours; and it is not necessary to give sanctuary to children under the age of fourteen, nor to a pregnant woman except during the first three months after conception.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez LX ans.	Nor should one administer sanctuary to the old who have passed sixty years of age.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz; ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques; et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors; puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir; puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit; et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses; et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans; et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on; puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	And when one wishes to administer sanctuary in any way that is, it is necessary for him to cleanse the intestines of a light clyster if he has much feces retained, so that the veins do not attract the superfluous noxious matters to the principal members; and one should not administer sanctuary to those who are too salty from meats, or who are drunk, as much as they may be, or hydriopics; and if one wishes to administer sanctuary after colic passion, vomiting, diarrhea, and frequent traveling, pregnancy, nursing, and whatever other virtue of the arm or body; then subtly the humors, as long as they are not too thick, by foods and drinks and medicines, if one has them; then between or bath, if nothing prevents, to subtilize the sanctuary, and to administer it in the vein during the third hour, as we have said; and guard that day from work, from pain, from pleasure, and from similar things; and be tied and joined, and let the sanctuary be higher than that of whom one administers, and let the flesh of the arm be rubbed twice or three times, then strain the limb above a slow movement, for when it is too strong or weak, it cannot correct the vein; and then let him rub the limb with his hand until the veins swell, and feel if they do; then moisten the sanctuary with the flame of a small amount of oil, then put its due amount on his right hand above the vein where he wishes to administer, that the vein does not fail to strike.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus; et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	There are veins that flee as if they were strings at the slaughterhouse, and there are some that are plain from their softness, such that when one puts them over the flame, they retract from the flame, and cannot open the vein, and thus are those; and if the slaughterer opens the vein, then the wound is too tight, because it is necessary that the slaughterman be aware of these things.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if the vein opens the first time, it is good; but if not, then one should try again a little lower or above, until the veins are no longer puffed up.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras: par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait; et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement; et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	And if the joint is swollen and the pain subsides, leave it alone for one or two days, and do not bind the arm: perhaps an abscess will form; do not enter water, then restart the healing if it suits him; and if the wound is small, or if you doubt that there is as much blood as you saw, apply a sharp knife directly to the wound; and the work should be done firmly, as long as the joint is swollen; for this often happens when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile; et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc; et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	If you see the joint swollen, do not restart the healing, and put a little oil on it, for it reduces the flow of blood, and it is better than any other ointment in this wound; and thus administer the oil in every healing that you heal the wounds, to stop the flow of blood; and this also makes a triple and bowed shape, when it is put on the wound; and if it is too thick, separate it and spread it out.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre; et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie; et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	And if there are large abscesses that often occur, even when it is not yet healed, only at this time or when the opening of the vein is small, you must hurry and place a soft, moist sponge on the limb, and tie it with a cloth for an hour; and it is necessary to do this after the issue of the blood from the vein, and if it remains on the limb for several days without any discoloration or greenness, then you must not remove it; and if you see, place something of aloes or myrrh mixed in a solution of camomile, monasterium, or similar.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And often there is an abscess and appearance of the base of the church: place your hand over it, and if you feel the bone compressed by your hand, that is the bad appearance.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai I emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore do not place anything on it that we have said, for inadvertently you may cut the artery; but apply a dry bandage to harden the bone, then treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And treat each wound according to the quantity of its virtue and the color of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	For if the wound is black, let it bleed until it becomes red; and if you see it swollen, let it bleed until it becomes thinned; and if it is too hot, let it cool.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges; et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant; et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	And it is appropriate for those who are weak and have a wound, and for those who have a profession of arrow extraction, to make a larger wound, and let the flames be wide; and for those who are weak, do the opposite, and let them be healed slowly and often, and they should be healed by cutting across, not by pinching; and this method of healing is safe from the separation of arrows and the prolapse of nerves, and it is better than healing by a long or wide cut.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	And for those who have a wound on the body, it is appropriate to give bread moistened in the juice of green grapes; if they are hot, take out the arrow three or four times; and if they are of cold complexion, change the bread moistened in honey syrup, or aromatic honey syrup with spices, such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cloves, and sweet-smelling syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	And if he pales at the sight of blood after much bleeding, then it is necessary to give him a broth of charred herbs and a subtle fragrant syrup, and use other things that we have mentioned in the division or chapter on syncope for the evacuation of blood.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he wishes to faint or bleed again, and bleed elsewhere, when he is weakened by much bleeding, it is necessary that he bleed a little and a little, according to the quantity of its continuous virtue.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine VII houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And if he wishes to faint or bleed again after the first bleeding, and he has a strong pulse, then he should bleed seven hours after the first bleeding, or after the ninth hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And if one wishes to heal on the other side, one must heal the second day or the third.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson; puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens; et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus; ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz; mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	For it has much blood within the body that is already heated, and causes fever; so one must draw out a great quantity, and widen the vein until it bleeds freely; then one must treat all the conditions of healing, and place one's hand on the pulse as it heals, so that death does not come in place of fever, and this has happened many times when the healer is negligent; and it does not matter much if one sees the arm blackening, and drawing out blood the second time, and the vein is closed, that one presses firmly; but if it is spongy, one must extend the arm quickly, for this would be harmful; but let it bleed until it heals the second time; or you are not at the tip of the flame, so that the blood frozen in the vein does not come out, and put a small piece of cloth on it to stop the bleeding.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the swelling is evident, let it be and do not press it, until the abscess is calmed.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if necessary to draw out the blood the second time, if the healthy vein is in the same limb, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein is healthy in the limb because it is composed.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges; puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc; et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez; et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit; et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	And the method of the vein is that the hairs are pricked with a sharp, hot needle until the blood flows red; then it is gently moved so that the vein appears well, then draw out the blood through the cross, not too wide or too long; and let the punctures be large, and draw out the blood well near the joint of the hand, and if no blood can be drawn, put the hand in hot water, and let the blood flow into the hot water until you have enough; and if it is still not possible, do not repeatedly put the hand in hot water because more harm than good is done; and the drawing out of this vein is safer than all other veins, as there are no arteries or nerves.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere: estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie; et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	The salve of the wound on the right hand is good for all diseases of the liver, and it is done in this way: strain the hand, and boil it in hot water until the blood flows out, if one sees it; and if the salve goes against the wound, and if you apply it to the whole hand, it will not hurt anything; and do not move it too much, for the nerves are all exposed to the bone, and then put the hand in hot water, if it is not frozen in the wound, and it cannot come out.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have treated the arrow as much as is necessary for you, put oil and thread on the wound to sew it quickly, and do this for each wound.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The salve for the right hand is useful for the disease of the mouse, and do everything as I have told you on the left side.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	The salve of the sophene is useful for all diseases that are not in the body, such as marsh diseases, and retention of flows, and disease of the rains, and of the coxes and of old legs, and similar diseases.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains; saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	And the qualities of its salve are that the diseases are quickly drawn out in hot water, and rubbed on the vein until it perishes, and tied above the joint; and the vein is at the knee, and through the joint many rains go; therefore, this salve is useful for a wide rain, or at the knee, which is more useful.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you find the healthy ones above the flesh, and the unhealthy ones are separated, and the healthy ones are treated as if they were sick; and let the flames be on them.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if the flesh cannot be released, then put the flesh in the fire, and let it boil well.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz; ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	And if the healthy ones must be cooked first, then start the second one above a little bit, because the first is salty; do not doubt the tendon, as we have said, and so make the other side of the meat equally.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The first vein of the arm is at the elbow, and its treatment is equal to the pain of the back, when it comes to an abscess.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant; et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	And the quality of his health is such that the hairs between or in the bath, and it is strange above the ankle four times in twisting, because otherwise it does not open the vein; and if it opens, then heal it in all ways that you can, and across; and it is better that you cover it, for the legs are clean, and it is very painful to others.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners; et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	And if you do not straighten it, then he will have no pain from any that opens or does not open the vein, and towards the small toe, and keep away from the nerves; and draw out so much blood as you see, and then release the ligament, and put it on cotton and hold it in place; now it is healed.
des sainies de ventouse	of suction wounds
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc II manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Suction wounds are made of horns, or brass, or glass; and suction is performed in two ways: either by pricking and drawing blood, or without pricking.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu; et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col; et II autres en II costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton; et li ventouse des II espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies; et les ventouses emmi les II bras; et les ventouses des II jambes; et les ventouses des II chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne; et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	And this suction without pricking is performed in two ways: either at full heat, or without heat; and suction performed by pricking and drawing blood is done in 14 places on the body, of which one is at the top of the head; and the others are under the neck; and the other two on the sides of the neck; and the suction outside the mouth; and the suction on the shoulders; and the suction on the hips; and the suction on the arms; and the suction on the legs; and the suction on the ankles; and the suction does not treat blood, but only the small veins that are scattered throughout the body, and therefore it does not weaken anyone, as is done with bleeding from a vein; and it should not be administered in any disease due to repletion, until the whole body is drained.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens; car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief; et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz; et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc; et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	And if necessary for diseases, it is recommended to ventose, or by habit, to ventrify every hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and in each tense; for there are those who, when they have the need to ventose, have heavy breathing; and there are those who experience repletion and thirst in their face, and in their head, and in their throat; and there are those who feel a drop of blood in their mouth, and have swallowed the tongue, and reach for blood; and there are those who dream, and see through blood and nausea and death and similar things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés III houres dou jor.	When we see these signs, and especially when it is around the full moon, we order them to fast for three hours after midday.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors; et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement; et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	The fasting of the head helps to relieve the pain of the head … which comes from them, and it should only be done after the evacuation of all the blood; and this fasting is in place of the fasting of the cephalic, and it should only be used by those who are of cold complexion or who have diarrhea, because this does great harm; and for this reason it should not be used by the watchman or those who have other cold diseases.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who often become unconscious, it is necessary to place the vacuum a little lower due to the uncertainty of unconsciousness.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion; et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	The vacuum on the neck is in place of the head and the chin, and therefore it is necessary to apply it at the narrowest point, and to the front of the throat, and to all, and to replacement; and it is necessary to place it only slightly, for if it holds too tightly, it causes unconsciousness or stomach pain and heart.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	The vacuum on the two ribs of the neck is useful for head pain, and obtunds it, and emigraines, and strangulation, and pain at the roots of the teeth, and it is in place of the relief of the chin; and it is necessary to command the sick person to put his hand when placing it, that he does not press the artery, and does not cause bleeding.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des II levres.	The ventilations of the mouth should be avoided due to diseases of the mouth, and corruption of the gums, and similar diseases that are in the mouth; and it is in the place of the saints of the two lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	The ventilations of the shoulders are caused by diseases that come from heat and filling.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes; et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	The ventilations of the elbows are as important as three veins of the arm, because they draw blood from these large veins; and command the healthy one that he does not prick too much in front, for the legs are bare of flesh, and know how to draw out nerves and arteries.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The suction cup that is placed on the back is useful for removing pimples from the foundation, and for diseases of the outside, and it is necessary that the suction cup be large and made of metal, so that it can properly draw out; and perhaps, if it is too delicate, it will break; and then great wounds are caused.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des II sophenes, et des II chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	The leg suction cups are useful for drawing out blood from all over the body, and they relieve old pains of the rain, and of the marrow, and of the bladder, and they remove the flours; and they are in place of the two knees, and the two ankles, and in any way they weaken the body after long use, and they cause pain in many positions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	The method of applying the cupping glass is that you first apply it empty and quickly suck, then press firmly and move evenly, continuing this action until you see the flesh turn red and swell, and the blood veins appear; then stop, remove the cups, and take care of the body's position, for there are some who have tender skin and clear pores: it is necessary to strike once only, and it is necessary to make wide wounds and a few deep ones; and suck lightly.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir II fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	And if the skin is thick, then it is necessary to strike twice: the first time to thin the path of the thick blood.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And if it is very sharp, you must strike the third time; and when we want to pull out the arrow a little at a time, we should only do it once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif: se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite; et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	And if we want to draw out much blood, we should do it often; and if the wound is sharp, we should strike it from the front, and the end should be that the keloid is perceived deeply, and it is suitable for those who have thick skin and are hard, and who have strong pores, that you apply the points of the oil vacuums aperitive and dissolving: if it is in this state, of violet oil, or sweet almond oil, or squash seed oil; and if it is in winter, of pennyroyal, lily, camomile, or another similar one.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the excess is large and cold, take oil of marjoram, or balsamic oil, or oil of anise, and similar things.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	And if the person to be treated has wide and large pores, then one should not put any oil on it, but it should be washed after steam venting with high rosewater, or high cold water, or mustard water, or cucumber water, or porcelain water, or similar things.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And those who have much moisture, if they rise from ash or high mint water, and sumac, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans; et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	Those who have excessive superfluity rise from old wine, or vinegar of sweat, or decoction of anise or chamomile, or other similar things; and they should not be made to sweat immediately before the bath, but after the bath for an hour or two; and they should not sleep immediately after sweating, and it is good that they warm themselves when they should sweat and when they are sweated.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez; si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses; et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	If those who are sweating are also feverish, and if they are too hot and inflamed; then it is good that they take cold things, such as large apples and endives and leeks at the side, and similar things; and they should drink pomegranate juice, and char of Castleton, and moist meats.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons; et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier; et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz; et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	And those with a cold constitution should take honey syrup, aromatic wine between old and new, and a little juice, and little pinches of pepper and pigeons; and on the day they are to be ventured, they should drink more than usual; and it is recommended to give some men occasionally three drops or musk before or after the venture, to strengthen the main members; and the powder should not be given to everyone, but only to those who are brave.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre; et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu; et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	The suction cups that are applied to the body are those that are applied over the liver, and over the spleen, and gout, and over the belly and the buttocks, and the legs and the hip, because these members do not suffer much from being pierced in those places, and no one does it except to draw blood from member to member, as we put suction cups over the breasts when the newborn is born; to remove the viscosity that is in the member, as we apply suction cups over the belly and over the buttocks to soothe the member; and it removes the pain, when there is an abscess or stone, so it removes the abscess or the stone by its attractive power perhaps, and thus it does when it is applied over the liver and over the spleen when there is retained viscosity, and these suction cups are administered empty for sweetness alone; and sometimes they are administered together with fire, and sometimes plain hot water, as in diseases of the throat, and in such a way that one fills the suction cup with hot boiling water, or hot water where there has been cooked harmful herbs.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The form of the suction applied at fire is as follows:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre; et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent; car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	And it has two wide and half-palm-wide openings and a central small hole, like to put a needle, and it is of brass, and lead before so that it does not burn the skin when putting it on the limb; and it has in the middle a thin rod of brass or iron, for placing a candle, and they are big and small according to the diseases and age of those who take them; for the suction devices of children are different from the old, and the thin ones are different from the fat ones.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre: empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide; et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse; et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	And one should put this suction cup on the limb: take the wax or liniment, and place it inside the suction cup at the end of the rod that is inside the suction cup, so that the wax does not burn the hair; then place it on the limb, and do it as we have said, so that when one wants, if the vapor comes, and remove the suction cup; and take the liniment as before, and repeat often, if you have need.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement; et c’est li forme:	In the suction cup that is used in the disease of pleurisy, at all sharp, there is no rod or stopper, and it is not administered except when it is full of sharp, and is placed on the limb alone; and this is the form:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus; et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans; et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren; et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres; et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues; et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	Sansues are not removed except in members where one cannot place bandages due to their small size, such as lips and gums, and similar things; and in similar members, remove the clothing, such as two or ears, and others similar; and the quality of using them is that when you remove sansues that are in mild waters without pressure, take them; and put them in mild water until they become familiar, and have nothing in their bellies; and then cleanse the member with blood and bandages, then put the sansues on the member as much as it is red, and when they are smooth and ripe, and if it is a place where one can place bandages, place them, for this is very helpful.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint; et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés; et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez; ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant; et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	If not, first lift the limb gently, then firmly, well, and then wipe it; if the wound is too large after the fur of the hairs, then dampen a linen cloth in cold water, and place it on, until the wound is cleansed; if the wound multiplies, then apply vitriol broken glass, or salves, and similar things, until it is cleansed; or you place half of crushed beans on the wound, and leave them until they sprout on the limb, then it will stop now; if you have more, then take other bandages.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent; et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	If the snakes do not want to take hold, rub the flesh of blood fresh, or you put a needle so that the snake bites, and then put them on, and as soon as they feel the blood, they will stick; and when you see that they bite, powder with a little aloe and broken silk, or ash, so they will now stick.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	Here begins the book of fractures
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and it restores fractures and dislocations.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent; et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin; et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie; et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	Be careful, dear son, that the foolish men see this chapter, as they have never seen any of the old books, nor read any letters; and for this reason the science is hidden in our land, because I found no good one; and I know nothing, except by the science of the old books, which I have studied so much that I have treated the science, and by experiment, and by the custom of my life; and I have described to you in this chapter what is contained, and have abbreviated it at the end, and have shown clearly the forms of the instruments that will be brought, as I have done in these two chapters before.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	Therefore, we should say or prologue of this book the sums of the language and the chapters where the wise ones put their understanding, and dwell on the truth, so that those who are uninformed may find and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars; ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	I say that when fracture or dislocation or twist or sprain comes to any part, it is necessary that you quickly clean the wound on both sides, if nothing else, so as not to weaken the body, or children, or the elderly; and if the tension is not very tight, or too rough; and use sharp instruments, that is to say sharp needles, and iron and chicken broth, and do not drink wine, and use no heavy meats, and do not fill oneself too much with food that fills the veins with blood, so that you have no doubt of abscess or spread of matter to the member; if the wounds return to their previous government as they have used it.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken bone begins to heal, it is necessary that one rub the thick grease of meats that make large grinding, or if it has viscosity, like wheat cooked in vinegar, and rice, and tests, and pie, and chicken breast, and eggs, and fish, and large wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For grinding also causes pain and more quickly the breakage.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans; mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	And know that bones broken in the old and decrepit cannot be well restored or welded according to their nature due to the corruption of the members, neither those who are too tender, such as the bones of small children; but do not worry, reset above the broken bone with large strong ones that harden and join the member together, until it enforces so as it was before; and do not let them all at once, and for this reason it is necessary to rub with thick meats, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And the breakers are diverse in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the break of the head is different from the break of the foot, or of the leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all ways of breaking.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there are breaks that go through the arm, and others in soaking, like the tip of a quill for writing.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if it is broken with a wound, and broken all through a small cut.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu; et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main; et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure; mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	And each way has its own method, and its proper tool in restoration, according to what memory comes in its place; and the break of the bone is known by the fact that the bone is twisted, and open wide from the outside, and it is to be pressed with the hand; and when there is no twistiness, nor is it to the touch, and the pain is not much, if there is no break; but it can well have twistiness, or cut, or small break.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	If it does not suit you to move it with your hand, but put on the remedies that come after this, and then gently hold it still.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne; et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez; puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	And if the broken part that was torn away, and the two parts are disjointed, you should now put them evenly, as if incising an abscess, and if it is hot and comes, do not let any pain, until the incision is calmed; then gently and carefully put them together, and if the restoration of this is lighter than the restorations of that where there are pieces, then hold still, as it should be after this.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main; et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor; et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	If the bone is broken into pieces, if it is a hand or foot, or at your hand if it is small members, or to two strings, or to one string and at your hand; and put the member according to its natural shape, so that when the parts of the broken member are joined, you join them together with care, and do not cause further injury or pain; and properly set the two bones according to the best forms.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	If it feels well in your hand if it seems to you that it is not quite right: if it heals beautifully, and do not strain it too much, or press it as those who bring it by their work cause swelling and contraction of the member, as we have seen many times.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere; et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	And when the member is broken, strictly guard against moving it, whether awake or asleep, turning or in any other way; and ensure that the member is so secure that it causes no pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor; et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez; et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	For when it feels no pain, it is not broken, and you should put it in the correct position so that it does not feel any pain; and guard against it being placed incorrectly, as deformation can come when it is restored; and the quality of the broken member depends on what I tell you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	The qualities of the broken member are different in size, greatness, and shape.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz; et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche; puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure; et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet; puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus; puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	For there are small members, such as the arm and the leg, which should be wrapped with thin linen cloths; and those that are large, such as the thigh and calf: they should be wrapped with a broad and strong cloth, for the broad cloths embrace the whole member evenly, and hold it equally in all parts, so that there is no gap; then wrap lightly around three or four times according to the length of the member, and hold your hand a little on each part of the cloth, then go above the wound and hold it less, than the wound gradually move away from the wound; and soften the cloth little by little, until you grasp a large part of the sound flesh, then take another cloth and return around the other side of the broken member; then return to the part away from the wound, and hold it evenly, neither too hard nor too forcefully, as we have said in the first part above; then place between the wrapped cloths a linen or cloth strip, until they are all equal, then tie everything together from above with a bandage, and then put your well-made bandages on top, if there is no abscess or swelling.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors; puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	And if there is an abscess or boil, put something soothing on the boil, and what removes the abscess, and leave it like that for some time; then place them under your feet, and be of equal size, one-half of a wide candle properly cleaned, or of wood from which the chips are made, or of palm rains, and be according to this figure:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres; et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor; puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure; plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol; car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	But the splint that you put on the fracture should be slightly larger and wider than the others; and it should also be as long as it is needed for the limb of small size or large; then place them under the splints as you have done in the first chapter, then tie them together with a thread evenly, as in the first chapter on the fracture site; the tighter they are, the less; and it should be that the threads are of average thickness, neither too thick nor too thin, and of flax; for if the threads are too thick, as I have seen in the works of those who make their threads of linen twine, and this is great error, because the bandage cannot be evenly placed if it is too thin, and it should only have about one-half inch space between each splint.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the wounds are closed by the splints of iron after straightening them in their place, then put out of them a cloth, or other clean rag, so that it does not become infected.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is with the splint, and the bandages are broken, I will tell you the treatment afterwards.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And it is not necessary to straighten all the broken limbs on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant; et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	For when the limbs are large, it is not necessary to put splints on them until after five or seven days, or more depending on your safety from abscess; and here is the way of the ancient plasters to restore fracture, dislocation, and torsion: and you should take flour that is kept on the walls of the mill, and knead it with abundant water, and put this mixture, not too clear nor too thick, and use it, and this is the common way of the plaster restoring fracture to many positions, and especially to women and small children, for it is neither too hard nor too soft.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana V З.; alechil VIIII З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Another method of healing fractures, dislocations, and sprains: take aloe wood and ladani and enule and asafetida and Arabic gum and mugwort, each 10 grams; myrrh and aloes, each 5 grams; alechil, 8 grams; and make a powder, and mix it with a little honey; if the patient's constitution is hot, use this plaster, for it is of good composition, and it will quickly heal broken bones, and it is beneficial to many people.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.; acaice VI З.; bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Another method of healing sprains: take mugwort and valerian, each 10 grams; myrrh and aloes, each 8 grams; acacia, 6 grams; and Armenian bole, 10 grams; pound them well and mix with vinegar or a little honey, and administer.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	Another method to treat joints and bones that are dislocated from their places, and to alleviate the pain, and to use the bone to heal the wound and the fracture: take a new, soft linen cloth, and moisten it in warm oil, and place it on the affected area.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	This plaster does not cure permanently, but it is good for soothing boils and properly treating pains.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another method to cure broken bones: take dried fig leaves and earthworms, grind them together, and make a plaster.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	Another way of treating fractures of bones and to alleviate the pain from an abscess.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Take the root of mallow, camomile, flowers of violets, flour of wheat, of each one part; and grind, and mix with wine, and if the limbs are hot, mix with fresh coriander juice or vinegar, and use.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	Another way of treating fractures that is stronger than the first, when an abscess is coming to the restoration of the limb.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Take the root of mallow, and seeds of linen, balm, mint, and willow bark, and flowers of violets and camomile, of each one part; and grind, and mix with salt water, or sweet water, or with wine, according to the heat of the limb, and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Hippocrates said in his book that one should not put on a broken limb to restore it with wax and oil, and nothing else, and said that it should be between two, neither too soft nor too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems that Galen said that one should put on a broken limb to restore it with dry things slightly warm, such as myrrh and aloes and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another way to apply a plaster that is good for injury and pain: take mugwort and horsehair, or feathers of an owl, and vinegar, and equal parts, and grind them, and make a plaster and the wound.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor; puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut; et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then relieve the joint after a while, and be careful if the pain does not subside, or if the bone of its limb is misaligned; then do not relieve it by force again. If pain comes to the limb, or itching, without rest or inflammation, quickly relieve it, and remove the poultice now; and take a light cloth, and wet sponge with fresh sea water, and dip in hot, and lift the limb until the itching ceases, and soothe the pain; then let the member rest for an hour, then put on dry linen, moistened with hot oil or rose oil, and tie with a bandage until you are sure of no abscess; and relieve the inflammation of the limb, and soothe the pain, then begin to apply the subtle poultice again, and a little bit of the previous poultice, and do not strain it as much as before; and subtly until it is healed.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that the abscess is filled with pus and redness and pain and swelling, and you have the skill of plastering and of healing, then restart it as you did first equally.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII; et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus; adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir; arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure; par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	And if it does not come to the limb at all as we have said, then do not delay in removing it for three days or four or five or seven; and never leave it for twenty days, according to what we see, until the breaker is aware, and approaches the adjustment of the char above; therefore, it is restrained more than before, and increases its flesh, as I have said before; and if you see that the limb is drier than is necessary, then boil with sharp hot water every time you remove it, and this should be done every day, and loosen a little the binding; therefore, by this work, you prevent the suppuration in the limb, and heal it as soon as possible, what the foolish ones do, which torments the limb: it is bad, and if it is not done carefully, and only correctly.
des diverses manieres de brisure	of various breaking methods
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees; car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	There are various breaking methods, and different figures, and the causes are distinguished; for there are breaks that are made by percussion of the spear, and the collarbone breaks the entire bone just below the face which is outside the bone, as if it were a wedge or a fist; and because of this method of breakage is called «haichure».
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces II brisures grans ou petite.	Or the spear pierces the bone from above through the side, and this method of breakage is called «absolute»; and it is the wound of these two breaks, either large or small.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is percussion embedded, or a cut from the edge of a spear, or falling on a stone, or similar things.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if he has a broken bone, which approaches the thread that is outside the bone, or above the bone, and this wound is large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»; et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	And if the wound that is set in the bone as subtle as a small thorn, and the fracture is small, and because of this, it is called this fracture "hairline"; and if the wound that is made or by striking with an arrow, or falling, or similar things, and makes the piece of the bone enter below, and the threads are like those of a cauldron when they are pounded; then the arrow enters inside.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant; et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	And it happens more often in those who have or are prone to moist bones, such as children; and they have all these kinds of fractures where small pieces are dislocated like these; and I will speak about this in its place.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And we know all kinds of fractures by the withdrawal above them, and the inspection of tents, and the corrupted char that is above.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The similarity of hair is known because when one has revealed the bone, and one rubs it above, if there is an open fracture black.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of the fracture, be careful of accidental harm, and if you see no bad accident, such as vomiting of bile, and loss of understanding, and extension, and paleness, and fever ague, and the eyes issuing forth and reddening, and other similar things in many dispositions, it cannot be healed without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see any apparent injury, and you hope for recovery, then begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the fractured bone comes first to you, and it is in the gum, then you must remove the bone before the fourteenth day so that you can.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is in the state, then you must remove the bone before the seventh day, provided that the skin around the bone has not been corrupted, and the injuries that we have mentioned occur.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset; et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	And if the broken bone comes close to the skin that covers the brain, then it is necessary to remove the part that is torn in this way: and it is that you pinch the head of the painful wound, and uncover the bone in all ways that you can, and above the shape of the wound as softly as you can, and if blood comes out when revealing the bone, or an abscess forms, then help with what is necessary, and it is that you fill the wound with soft cloths soaked in red oil; and let the wound rest until the abscess is calmed down, and make sure that the blood does not come out; then begin around the bone to remove, and it is done according to the two methods of work: one method is that you cut narrowly in front, and this is the form.
Et puis i boute I autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then I make another cut larger than the first one.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	And in the second method, you have several different cuts, some thin and others wide, and they are sharp and made of iron in one piece; and work lightly, so you do not wound the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou I cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des III manieres de tareres:	And if the tooth is outside and hard, it is necessary that you drill around it, also using drills with circles, but not so much that it goes through the tooth beyond the root, and it should have above the point a margin or circle, which does not let the point pass beyond the tooth; and you should have several, so that each one comes in its own place of the length of the tooth, so that you have drills for all teeth; and this is the form of the three methods of drills:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes I tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	To prick through the bone, it is that you put the needle through the bone, and turn to your right until you know that the bone is pierced; then return the needle a little later, and do so all around, then cover the incision the space of the bone between the teeth, and do this more subtly than you can, and lightly, as we have said, until you remove the bone to your hand, or to any of the instruments that you have such as forceps, pincers; and guard that you do not touch the brain or the tongue.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire; et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	And when you have the bone pierced and treated, it is advisable that you remove the remaining sharp edges of the bone to all other instruments similar to a needle, but it must be more thin and more subtle than the other needle; and if there remain any small bones or scales, remove them lightly with the instruments; then treat the wound with tents and ointments that we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And the other way of working is as the Greeks say, which is much safer; and it is very strong, and that is its word.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	First, you must remove a part of the bone where the fracture is open and exposed, so that when you have removed that part, you can place the lens-shaped piece of this incision:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz; s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	And do not cut from one part, and the piece of this incision is in two pieces, so that the cutter is towards the bone; then strike with a small hammer from above, so that you lightly cut the bone all around, and be careful of the thread that is outside; if it is against the bone, then lightly cut the bone, because one cuts well without harm, and without fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the bone's fracture does not pierce through the skin, and the bone is only cut from above, and there are small pieces, then you should smooth that roughness, and remove the scales with the subtle razor that you must have in various quantities, to manage each limb in the most convenient way, according to the work and the shape of the fracture.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If you have large razors beforehand, and then more subtle ones, and do not stop doing this until it is well done.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	In each of the other haircutting and fracture subtlety, you should manage it according to its advantage; and this is a thing that is not replaced by anyone who has put their study in this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie; puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement; et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication; et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	If the wound is exposed, it is necessary to apply a linen cloth according to the size of the wound, soak it in rose oil, and place it on the wound; then take another cloth doubled two or three times, soak it in vinegar and rose oil, and place it on top of the first cloth; do this more gently than you can, so as not to irritate the wound, then administer other remedies from above, and do not pull out the cloth until the wound has healed completely; leave it in place for one or two days, until the abscess is calm, then remove it, and administer medicines such as lis roots, flour, frankincense powder, aristolochia, and similar things; make a powder from these things and place it on the wound, and administer liquid medicines without biting; keep the wound clean, do not leave any tinder, because when tinder gathers on the brain, it causes the brain to rot and causes great harm.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	If no accidents occur, then if the patient experiences pain as we have said, it is uncertain with doubt.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac; puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if no further harm comes except for the medicine that has been applied, which has its virtue, then you must apply a part of honey, and three parts of rose oil and one cloth, and place it on the wound; then cure the wound in the manner of curing until it is healed.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les II parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont II os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	Sometimes the two bones above are broken, or one at a time, because they are two bones; and that one is cartilaginous and does not break, unless it is bent or twisted, and then it heals.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil; et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	And if one of the two parts is broken, it is necessary that you break your small nail or needle through the wound, and place the broken part inside your index finger, and in the pouch by default, until the bone regains its natural shape; and do this lightly, and guard that the pain does not feel through your work.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the broken part is in the upper part of the bone, and cannot reach the finger, it is necessary that you place it on the head of a pin or a little thick one.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues; se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	And if the broken part is of two parts, repair the other one, and hasten to restore the first joint, if you can; if not, after the seventh or eighth day, when the swelling of the wound has subsided, then break through the head of the bone with linen cloths, if the broken part is in one piece.
Ou tu boutes I autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	Where you insert one or the other, if there is a break; and if the tents are so large that they fill the nostrils.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	And they said no restorer that one should pierce the tents in the morning, and kill each day.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	It does not seem to me that this is good, but it should be pierced in the preparation of a plaster of egg and powdered mold; then leave the tent until the bone is firm, and the cartilages hardened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a I souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And never once open or nostrils with goose feathers in place of tents, and if there is a soft cloth around, and if the breaker holds, and blows the pains through; now do what you see.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en I poc de dyaquilon.	And if abscesses come to the nose while you are working, put a piece of cotton or cloth soaked in rose oil or a little hydrogen peroxide on it.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis; et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu; et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if abscesses do not come to the nose, apply a paste made of mustard flour and powdered incense, mixed with an egg yolk, then put light cloths on it and do not tie the nose tightly; if the broken part of the nose is small and broken into small pieces, use suitable instruments to remove them, then cut away the wound, and treat the other injuries as appropriate, and apply suitable emplastrums and ointments as appropriate; and if there is no wound inside the nose, treat it with tents and apply hot compresses until it is healed.
de la routure de la mandibule	of the jaw fracture
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jaw is fractured without any wound, and the break is not completely separated, and it is not broken into two pieces, but rather splintered within, if one knows how to recognize this lightly.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	If the break is in the right part, you should press your index finger into the mouth of the patient; and if the break is in the left jaw, press your index finger with your right hand, and splinter the break lightly within, and bring it to the other hand by default, and make even.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en II, si covient que tu aministres extension de II pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the break in the jaw is divided into two parts, then it is necessary to administer traction of two parts until they are even.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus I drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	If the teeth move or break, then strain them with a gold, silver, or silk thread, and place them on the broken jawbone, and place a double cloth over it; and place a large well-made board or a piece of leather, long and wide according to the jawbone, and attach it with a stitch that you can, and command the patient to rest, and feed him light food.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en III semainnes.	If you see that the shape changes, then release it to the beast, and then put back what is changed; and apply a poultice on it, of flour from the mill with plenty of egg or mustard flour, after you have removed the broken jawbone; and place the poultice over the emplaustre, lightly, and if the emplaustre adheres, and the position of the patient does not change, leave it until it is healed; often healed in three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if an abscess comes, then treat it as we have said many times.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is a break and wound together, wrap no piece of the bone in bandage; rather, apply substances conducive to healing with utmost care.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, then enlarge it according to your need.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus I des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And once you have healed all these pieces, and there is none left, then clean the wound, if it is wide, and apply substances conducive to healing until it is healed.
de la forcele	of the flesh
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc III manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en II, et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	The forceps breaks several times in front and behind the shoulder, and the break occurs in three ways: either it is broken and disfigured in two, and there are pieces, and it is the lightest to restore; or there is a break with a wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies II ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And if the work is regarding the break with a wound, you should have two assistants, one to hold the broken forceps; and the other to extend the collar to the affected part; then set the break evenly between your hands, so that it forms as it should, without any appearance or movement.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And if you need to extend further, place a round, flat ball of cloth or linen, and as large as needed, on the shoulder with the wound; and stretch and lift the forceps, and hold the ball in your hand, so that you can set the break evenly.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule I oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot pull the shoulder of the arm out of its socket, because it comes from above, then it is necessary that the hairs on the back of the shoulder be combed upwards, and the elbow is held in a medium position, and the assistant pushes down on the shoulder until the bone of the shoulder is raised.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	And then bring the fracture to your two hands, and if you find broken pieces, it is necessary that you cut through them; and take light pieces, and if the bones cannot be joined for any reason, then use one of the instruments you have; but put the tool away from the shoulder to guard against infection.
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os; et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	Seems like a spoon, and is not tightly closed, and should be as wide as it needs to be, according to the size of the bone and the skill of the work; and have two prongs, if you see, and one wide and the other narrow, as the tear in the wound that you made when you treated the bones; and when you are sure of an abscess, if the wound is large, or you doubt an abscess, if the tear is small, use the wound with cloths and tents, according to its size.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille I drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if an abscess comes, soak the cloth in rose oil and vinegar and wine, and put it on.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier; puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant; et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint; et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors; puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	For the breaking of bones, whether it is due to wounds or sawing, you should place a plaster made of flour from the mill and an equal amount of egg above the bone, and put light dressings on top, and place a sphere outside the fracture, if you have such skill; then take a very large bandage of one palm in width, then double the cloth over the dressing and the plaster; then take a subtle splint of three fingers wide and long, and wrap it around that bandage, so that the head of the bandage is hanging down; and place the splint on the fracture, and turn the bandage back over the collarbone, and outside the fracture, and outside the fracture, and splint each part, and when you see that the bandage holds the fracture evenly, and you see clearly that the splint does not move above the broken bone, reward it every day, and when the fracture is healed, restrain it; and place the fracture on his back, and put a small bandage outside the fracture, to lift the injury upwards; if it aligns the shoulder by the alignment of the shoulder, or you tie the arm to the collarbone, and do not loosen it unless bad accidents do not happen, for about 20 days; then restart the plaster, if you see that there is such a need, and strain and leave it so long as it is restored; it is restored in the most cases within 28 days, and less to some people.
de la brisure de l’espaule	of the shoulder fracture
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en xxv, Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	It rarely happens that the shoulder is broken or out of its joint, and it cannot be put back except by touch; if the splint according to the figure of the fracture, and the arm is put back according to its natural form, in all ways you can; then put powder from the mill with abundant water on the wound, and light dressings, and put a double cloth over it; then put a wide and thin splint, a little bit wider than the shoulder, and if the splint is not in any part of the shoulder, use strips of linen so that the splint is evenly supported; and then hold it tight with a big bandage firmly, so that the splint does not move from its place, and check the wound every day; and every time it breaks, hold it again, and if it is out of its place, and bandage it again, and leave the bad hairs on the side; and the shoulder is restored in 20 days or 25, And when these numbers are completed, let go, and be careful, for this is not bone that can be put back firmly.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a piece of the bone is broken off before the joint, and not removed from the wound, then cut it out, and the bone, and do as we have said in the breaking of the fingers to relieve abscess pain.
de la brisure dou pis	of the broken finger
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer.	The fingers are never broken in the middle, but this happens rarely; but they often break at the end.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	And when it is broken in the middle, it retracts from the wound, and the patient feels great pain, and loss of function, and all, and perhaps vomits blood, and the teeth are exposed in the broken bone, and the patient feels well.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met I cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des II costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en I drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is such that the painful parts are gently placed above their backs, and the metal is placed between the shoulder blades, then press the shoulder blades, and gather the ribs of the two ribcages in your hands, and subtly put them even in all the ways you can, until the shape of the bone is as it should be; then place bandages and soaks above the thin salt sling, or other light one, and wrap it in a cloth, and tie it to the broken bone so it does not move; and return the limb gently to its back, and gradually tighten it, and warm each hour with a warm compress, and if it relaxes, if it tightens; and if it is necessary to release, for corrosion or for itching that comes to the bone, or pain or abscess, then hurry, and release it, and remove the bandage, and address what has come from methods of healing; then reapply the bandage, and tighten it until it is healed.
de la brisure des costes	of rib fractures
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	It is important that the rib fracturer comes only from above, in the back, and at the top of the chest, and does not push too hard because they are sharp; and the patient feels it well during examination.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And the treatment is that you set the fracture evenly, as it should be.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	Then apply the plaster and splint, if you know how to do so.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	If the rib fracture is displaced inward, it causes great pain and tenderness, as if of pleurisy, because the ribs press on the lung; and the patient must be carefully examined, and there is much blood and pus, and this is a serious illness, and the ancients put great effort into it.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if among those who say that it is necessary to administer foods that swell the belly, to push the broken bone back into place.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not make this mistake, unless there is charring where it has not come.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if it has come, then the healthy one.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And they said that none of those who put suction cups on the limb for drainage is correct; however, doubt and there is in what the suction cup does not attract the excess from the limb due to its weakness.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And they said that none of those who should cover the limb with a woolen cloth in warm oil and then place bandages between the ribs to equalize the lung around it, then treat the cure of pleurisy, food, and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the pain is great that they cannot bear it through the bone which does not pierce the skin, and there is doubt, then it is necessary to cut across the broken rib on the side, and it is necessary to place a splint for the wound; and then one must drill the bone, and gently pull it out, and then suture the two lips of the wound, if it is large, and treat them with plasters, until they are healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if an abscess comes to the foot, then place moist cloths on oiled rose petals, and put on the limb; and treat it while the limb is in a position that is convenient for the abscess, and let it lie beside or on top of the side where it should be, until it is healed.
de la brisure dou col	of the broken neck bone
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	Never comes the fracturer of the neck bones, and there is little that it rains; and so at the spine of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	And when this happens to anyone, and you want to know if they will be healthy or not, if you take heed if their hands are softened and swollen and dead, and cannot move or extend, and when you touch them with a needle, if they do not feel.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	Know that it is often fatal in many positions, and if they move and feel well when you hold them and do not, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and the pain is cured, if you put care.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	And if a similar thing comes to the spine of the back, and you want to know if it is healthy or not, if you feel that the feet are soft, and if there are accidents that are in the hands, and above the back, there is a sudden ventosity and egestion without volition; and when it is placed on its belly, there is sudden egestion without volition.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	And when it is placed on its back and wants to sit up, it cannot.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	It is deadly: do not labor in its care.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this accident does not come to it, it is the lighter thing.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the care is that you reward if there is an abscess that is open, place on the spine rose oil or goose grease, as long as it is calmed; then place on one of the healing plasters and drying, and tie with a bandage, and command the patient to rest; and do not sleep on that part where you feel the pain, as long as it is healed.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if any bone is broken, it is necessary to cover it with a clean cloth; then remove the bone, then gather the two edges of the wound, if it is large, into a seam, then treat the wound with ointment pouring hot char, as long as it is healed; and if the patient's bone is broken, which is called the "broken bone", if you have a bag of your right hand, put it evenly on the other hand to your power, then place the plaster and the bandage on top, if you have the skill; then tighten, and if there is a broken bone, do it again, and remove the bone, and treat the wound until it is healed.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	of the fracture of the hip bone
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	It rarely happens that the hip bone is broken, and if it does, it is not often accompanied by much pain in the head; and making it long, and declining to the buttocks, and coming to the injury, and pointing, and swelling as it is broken.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And the restoration is such that you extend your hand over it, as far as you can reach the broken part; and cut away the broken pieces and the misaligned parts; and if the break is only at the top, then set it straight until it is in its natural shape.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the fracture is long, or it declines inwards, then lay the patient on their back, until the restoration of this fracture is complete.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	And when you have set it straight, apply the poultice, then place a splint of wood or cloth, and hold the fractured part, so that it does not move; and apply the limb to the sides, until it is even.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And instruct the patient to sleep on their sound side or back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	And if an abscess comes, do not touch it until it is calmed, and follow what we have said before; then return to the restoration, and hold it as it should be, if there is no bad accident; and this is the way.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	of the fracture of the shoulder
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des II manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren I fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	The shoulder joint is located between the neck and the top of the shoulder, and if it is fractured, one should restore it according to one of the two methods: one of which is that you take a flat piece of even wood, in this form:
Et lie as II chiés II liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus I siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	And tie the two fractured ends together and raise them high, and saw the painful part above the seat; then pour the broken arm over the flat piece of wood, as far as it can reach, and have a hook of wood in its place, then put something heavy or the assistant extends it below; then put the splint of the fracture together with its hands together, until the fractured one returns as it should be.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a II ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout I liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And the other way is that one should prick the pain above its shoulder, and hold the hand on its neck, then command two ministers that one ties what is above the broken part of their hands, and the others tie below all the limbs, and stretch each to its part.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	And if you see that the extraction is too far, hold the limb away from the broken part, above and below the broken part, and stretch each of the ministers to its part.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the broken part is near the top of the shoulder, it is necessary to tie the middle rope away from the shoulder blade, and the other towards the ribs, away from the broken part; and similarly if the broken part is towards the ribs, it is necessary to tie the rope lightly, without force, until the broken part is even with the shoulder and ribs; then set the fracture as it should be, and tie it, if there are no signs of infection.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a VII jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	And if an abscess comes, do not hold it back for more than seven days, and put on it a poultice of milk and rose oil, until the abscess is calmed; then hold it, and the way to hold it is that you put the plaster on the swelling, then bring the arm up over the shoulder, and put your hand on the shoulder or on the chest; and put the bandage, and hold it over the shoulder, and over the arm, so that the arm is in place, without anything preventing it, or if the bone is not moved.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele I doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure III dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	And if you doubt that the bone does not move, use splints, and place a wider and stronger splint on the fracture, and have two inches of space between each splint, and let each splint be so large that it passes three fingers on each side; then strain on the splints, as I said at the beginning of this chapter, more strongly and less when moving away.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	And if you see the setting of the splints and the straining, as we have said, in the hour that you restore the broken member, and you doubt the abscess is not ready, let it lie for seven days, as we have said; then check every three days the wound, that it does not itch or swell, or the inflammation does not come to the limb because it is too tight.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	If the dislocation, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	And if no such accidents occur within three hours or more, and the patient sleeps with his back, and his hands on his stomach; and places the remedy on the affected part evenly, and looks at every hour of the day or night, that the shape of the limb does not move, or the ligaments are not softened; then the dislocation is healed by the power of medicine, and give him the food we have previously mentioned, in a similar way that the food is at the first subtle; and when he begins to recover, it should be thick.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	And it is customary that the shoulder and leg dislocations should be reset in 40 days after all; and then one must remove and administer warm water and medicines of oil for the limb to heal.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	If the structure is deformed and twisted, it may take 2 months or more to reset.
de la brisure du bras	of the broken arm
Li bras est compos de II os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the "forearm" bones, one of which is small and is the one that forms the wrist; and the other is large and is the one that is outside, towards the small bone; by chance, the large forearm bone may break alone, or the small one, and sometimes both together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	When small fractures are broken, the restoration is light and healing; and when large fractures are broken, the healing is poor, and more painful than when they were broken together.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	If the small fracture is broken alone, then it should be slightly extended and aligned.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	And if the large fracture, then it should be more strongly extended; and extend it over the cushion, and tilt the palm of the hand higher than the other fingers, and the small fingers lower than the others, and let the hairs cross each other above themselves, and the cushion in front of them higher, so that the hairs do not suffer any labor; then extend the ministers one arm to the part outside of their hand, or to the elbow, and other ministers to the other above.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And then place the mirrors evenly, according to its best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if it breaks into pieces, put each one in its place, and if there is no suitable bone to hold it together, you cannot restore it in its place, so do as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if with the breaker there is a wound, I have spoken about it to the surgeon; take care of it.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	And if there are abscesses in the beginning of the restoration, apply a poultice made of red rose oil and white wax, which is not too hard or too soft; and bind the poultice gently until the abscesses are soothed.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	Then remove the cast, and apply the plaster of powder from the mill with abundant honey, then place the splints, and set the splint of the fractured part further outside, and a little wider than the others; and it should have six splints or more in various positions: whether the fractured part is in one of the bones, or in two; and it should be set higher above the fracture than other parts, and always less removed, as I said at the beginning of this chapter; and let the cloths that are above the fracture be soft and moist, and not too hard or sharp; and let the thread, with which it is bound, be of linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	Reward the limb and the joint after some time.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	And if any accident occurs to the limb, such as itching that comes to the limb, then you should raise the limb in hot water, until those itching are relieved; and let the limb rest without being too tightly bound.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	Then continue the reduction, and if the joint is dissolved and the bones are crushed, or similar things, then address it.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses I poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if the tendons cannot come to the limb because it is too tightly bound, then you should slightly loosen it and let it rest for some time, until the tendons are corrected, and then reduce it.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	If none of these things we have said come to harm, it will not last for more than twenty days.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	Then, if necessary, apply your hands to his neck, and make his neck even, and guard against movement and flexion, and sleep on his back; and let it be known that this fracture is restored in thirty days or thirty-five, and possibly in twenty days, according to the compositions and constitutions of the virtues.
de la brisure de la main	of the fracture of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	Let it be known that at the back of the hand and in us there are few fractures, and only rain falls many times.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en I drapeil de lin.	And when the plantar bone of the hand is broken or crushed, it is necessary that the hairs be cut straight and evenly; then place your hand on the extended table, and extend the surgeon's bones that are broken, and place them evenly in the mirror, as long as they are well joined; then apply the plaster and bandages, if there are no abscesses, then put a splint according to the size of the limb; and let it be wrapped in a linen cloth.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	And if the broken bone is in the outer part of the plantar side of the foot, make a sphere of cloth, and instruct the patient to bite on it at his broken foot; then wrap it with a long cloth, and place the splint as large as the foot of the hand, and hold it as it should be.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the fracture is on the outer side, it is necessary to place one splint above and another below in the palm, so that the hand is open and straight, then wrap it completely around the hand, and stabilize the joint between the two.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en I tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	And if the fracture comes to any of the other two, if it is in the palm, place it evenly, as it should be; and stabilize with the sole, and if you see that you must place a straight small splint to raise the fractured part and not move; and if the fracture is on the other side, such as in the index or one of the others, place it evenly, and the joint with the healthy one that follows; or you tie them all together, which is best, or you place a splint above, as in the palm; and take care in restoration and arrangement of abscess, and take care of what comes to it, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	of the broken ribs
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie I liien desus la briseure, et I autre desoz.	The ribs of the ribcage are often broken, and one can see when they turn in front and behind; and the restoration is as one lies on the side of the fractured rib, and the other off.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And the hairs grow over its face, then each minister extends their rope evenly to their part; and this is when the break is inserted into the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	And if the break is close to the root of the ribcage, then one rope should be placed towards the nail, and the other ropes off the fractured rib.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	And thus if it is near the knee, and then the ligaments above the knee are also affected, and there is extension downwards; then place the bone evenly in both hands, according to its natural shape, and then apply the plaster, and the bandage, unless an abscess does not form.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	If there is an abscess, let it heal first, then return to your work and treatment; the bandage is made in this manner.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	It is necessary to wrap the broken bone in two or three layers of cloth, and let the excess hang down, then turn the leg until the toes reach the root of the heel, and tie a long piece of cloth between the thigh and the leg, below the knee on the outside, and bring the end of the cloth up; then turn back up the leg and the thigh, and tie the broken bone with three bandages; then place the soft fabric between the leg and the thigh to equalize the pressure, then begin to bind in three or four turns above the fracture; and as you go higher than the fracture, and lessen the pressure; then feel the two pieces of cloth that you have tied between the leg and the thigh, and the three bandages on top, then return to the outside at the top of the cloth, until you reach the knee; and the pressure, if it does not move from its place, then leave it so, then if there is no abscess or swelling, etc.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	If it is dislocated, and if you can, release it, and direct what comes out as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of the bone that you can grasp, then it should be left alone, if possible; and if not, then you must cut the limb, and extract the bone; and treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	Never break the bone in such a way that you would put these splints on it, as in the dislocation and the arm; however, in the restoration of such a case does not hurt the patient.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en L jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And let it be known that the bone is restored at different times, depending on the diversity of the constitutions.
de la ruelle dou genoil	of the artery of the neck
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	There are often many breaks in the artery of the neck, but it does not burst.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	If it bursts, it is only a small cut or tear, and it bleeds at all wounds, both visible and invisible, and it feels very painful.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is done by putting back what is torn apart, as much as possible; then apply the plaster, and if you have skill, place a round bandage, and hold it in place as it should be, then treat all the other injuries as we have mentioned in other broken things, such as abscesses and similar things; for each accident, put what is necessary until it is healed.
de la brisure de la jambe	of the broken leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	It is said that in the leg there are two bones, one of which is called "mustelz" by the right, and the other is called "foscile"; and it is as fragile as it comes to the arm, and for this reason the restoration is like that of the balanced arm, and the work is all there. And if both bones are broken together, then the leg returns to its whole form.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the delicate bone is broken, it returns in front.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz.	And if the large bone is broken, it causes great pain, and one can see it well; and it returns outside.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	Therefore, apply gentle extension, and make it even, and tie the fractures equally; but always, it is necessary to check if the break is ugly, and there are many pieces, that the extension be less and lighter; and treat according to your virtue.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren II faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en II leus I bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent I bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have completed your work, take two strips of linen that gird the leg on one side and the other, and are long enough from the knee to the ankle; then wrap them above and below, and tie in the middle as well, and at this point it will not allow the leg to bend to the right or left, and thus it is good; and no one administers the long strips of linen, and if it is, and properly placed, and move the leg every day to see if there is an abscess or other accident; if the cure as long as it is healthy.
de la brisure des os dou piet	of the fracture of the bones of the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle, there is no fracture, but the bones of the foot never break and they are few, and there is no other fracture in any position.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a II chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	And if there is a fracture of the bones of the foot, and you see these bones overlapping each other, if they are so misaligned that they stick out like a foot walking, then put your foot on top of theirs where the bones are lifted, then press them until they return to their original position; then apply the plaster and dressing above, and put a small roll of cloth under the belly of the foot, then straighten the foot evenly, then wrap bandages around it and other things that you know how to do.
Et quant III jors ou IIII seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when three or four days have passed, if the joint is dislocated, for you will find the bones even, whether they are broken or displaced.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a II ou III, ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en I drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	And if there are any of the two broken, set them as we have said for both bones of the hand; then put a splint along the length of the broken bone, and a bit wider, then put the bandage that I have mentioned, and strain it evenly; and if there are two or three, or more, broken, put a splint according to their quantity, wrapped in a piece of linen, and strain the bandage from below the pied; and let it be above the head of the bandage behind the belly of the bone, so that it tinges well.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And it is necessary that you do not forget the other things that I have said about other fractures, as we have said; and treat each accident according to what is appropriate.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	of the fracture of the bone of the thumb
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the bones of the woman are broken, if the wound is large, then spread it out, then incline it to the back part, and hold it from behind; then fill the wound with cotton, and put in as much as possible; then raise the woman, and lift up the back slowly, and gradually remove the cotton, until it comes to the entrance of the wound, and the bone returns with the cotton; and when she wants to urinate, remove the cotton, and when she has done so, return it, and do this for seven days or around: if the fracture is restored, and if you see, take a bladder of berries, and tie a cat to it, and blow all the bladder into the wound; then inflate the bladder with air until the bladder is inflated inside: nature will restore the fracture; then fill it with cotton, and leave it in this way for some time, until it is healed.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	And when the bone of the little finger of the hand is broken, or of the woman, if it is reset as we have said in the bone of the shoulder; and these fractures are not hidden from him who puts his study and practice to them, and pays attention to my book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	For the fracture means in many positions the right way of restoration: understand therefore.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse III jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	In the wing, when it is broken, take a goose quill and insert it into the wing; then wrap bandages around it, and leave it for three days or so inside, and it will heal quickly.
de brisure avec plaie	of fracture with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is necessary for the one who has fracture with wound, even if it is large, such as the bones of the ribs or shoulder or similar, that they be cleaned immediately, so that the cleanings that we have said bear witness.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound is clean, and the dressing of vinegar, if you have no other thing, then begin to restore the fractured bone in the same hour, or the next day, if there are no signs of inflammation.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if signs of inflammation come, then leave the restoration until the next day, until the inflammation is soothed, and do not touch it the next day or the fourth, for you will cause bad accidents.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the broken jaw appears on the opposite side of the jaw, then you must gently place it in your hands and extend it slightly.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a VII dois ou VIII de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne III ou IIII, selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if the extension is not properly equipped to be placed in your hands, then use an iron instrument that is seven or eight spans long, and its width should be according to the size of the wound; and it is necessary for the mire to take three or four, according to what it has in each case of a broken bone; and let it be round and a little thick, so that it does not painfully press on the member at your work, and let it be sharp in front, and thick in the middle, like this:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	And it is called "palainche," because the patient must have the broken bone placed above the top of the apparent bone; and it is hammered once, as much as it returns, and they are even against each other.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And if the fracture is fine, and the instruments cannot well take the bone, it is necessary that you cut the top of the bone until the instruments have ability.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you cannot bring the bone back, as we have said, then use a suitable tool, such as a saw or scissors, to your power; then grind what remains in the bone with roughness and small scratches.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	And when the bone is returned, and the pain is great afterward, wait until it is back in its natural place.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	If it is in its natural place, then dress the wound with sterile black wine vinegar, and if it has been burned, do not put anything on top of the wound or any oil where it has been burned, so that there is no moisture and corruption; then administer these things as soon as you have restored the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and cover the entire dressing according to the size of the wound, and be careful that the wound does not become constricted with the breakage; many times the fool has done this, and brought on infection or death or rot at any time; and let the inflammation be less and more soothing than other breaks.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	If the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that no harmful accident has occurred, as we have said, and you relieve pain to the limb, then do not put anything on it; but wrap around it, in place of ointments, hard cloths, and tie them.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And when you see after one or two days that the wound is beginning to close, remove what you have put on it all, and apply an ointment healing wounds, such as Triple Antibiotic Ointment and similar.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre II fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And it is necessary that you move the limb twice a day, in the morning and in the evening, as long as it is sound and healthy.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And it is necessary that the limbs be properly aligned in such a way that the bow can move lightly.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if the joint continues to move excessively, and it cannot be set but keeps dislocating, there are small pieces of bone, for which it is necessary that you suture the wound with a tent, and remove all these unnecessary pieces that cause that pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	And if the sinus comes to the limb, or another manner of corruption, then it is necessary that you treat it according to what it says in its chapter before.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	And when the bone is broken and open on the limb, as the bones of the thigh or shoulder, and other similar large limbs, do not remove it immediately, for many times the patient dies, but leave it until it can heal; perhaps it will fall off after twenty days or thirty, then treat the wound if you can; and if you cannot, then leave it.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	The hasty blows that come during the cauterization
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	Often after the health of the fractured bone, immediately near the joint, and the unpleasant thing is to see the appearance of the limb; and perhaps it cannot do its natural workings.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Therefore, if it is fresh, then administer stiffening medicines such as aloes, incense, and myrrh, and sarcocoll, acacia, and similar things, either one or all together, and mix them with stiffening wine or with a lot of oil or with garlic; and place them on the nail in a cloth, and keep it tightly, and do not let it be in handkerchiefs afterwards; then remove it, and start another, until the dislocation is out; or hold a piece of plaster well made; for the property of the plaster is that it removes all swelling from the limbs; and if the dislocation has become hard like stone, and it is necessary to remove it, if the skin above, and make the superfluous part apparent; or you reset it with any saw until it is out, and care for it until it is healed.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	a weak limb after the garland
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the fracture of the bone is healed, and the limb remains weak and thin afterward, this happens for many reasons: one is because it was tied too tightly, and was not loosened as it should have been; or because there were too many bindings, and could not come to the proper alignment of the limb; or because of too much swelling; or because of too great movements, not in its hour; or because it has little blood in its body, then it is weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the cure is that you make the pain less, and make the body tense, until the swelling is not multiplied in it; and give baths, and give joy and ease; then put poultices on the limb, so that the poultice attracts to the great swelling, and the inflammation often from high fever, until the swelling goes to the limb; and return to its natural shape.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	A misaligned limb after healing
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai I emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	When the limbs are twisted after restoration, and the bones are broken open, and the form of the limb is deformed, but it does not affect its natural appearance: then one should not believe those who say that one must break the limb entirely, and many have done this in our land; and these practices are blamed, and great harm comes from them, and perhaps death; however, if the fractures and deformities are fresh, it is necessary to apply hot water or softening herbs cooked, such as willow bark, roots, and melilot, and similar things; and the mollifying poultice, such as diluted vinegar well made, and you take the willow bark powder, and mix it with goose grease or sesame oil, and make a poultice on it; or you take figs, and grind them with flour of coltsfoot, and similar medicines that soothe the pain.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	And never is the dislocation due to continuous and prolonged rubbing with wet hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And move the limb every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if the tortuosity is awake and hardened, like a stone, and it needs to be removed with iron, if it should cover just above the bone, make a thin, subtle incision; and put cushioning and rest in the care.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book of dislocations
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation comes to none, it must now be returned to its proper place.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors; toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	However, if it is delayed, the joint swells, and if it is reset, it may be moved back to its proper place; for it does not matter if it is moved back when it is swollen: many times it brings on spasms and other pains; therefore, once it has passed, if the infection is soothed, then leave it until the infection is gone; then rise the limb with hot and oil, then gently reset it, and treat each member as it comes back to its proper place.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	I have ordered the chapters on the dislocations of the shoulder from head to foot.
des mandibules	of the mandibles
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc II manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	It is rare that the mandibles are dislocated and the dislocations of the mandibles occur in two ways: either they are slightly displaced from their place and a little softened; or they are completely dislocated, hanging downwards, and the saliva from the mouth so that it cannot hold it, nor can it close its mouth, and wraps its tongue with speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is small, it returns in many positions.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie; et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	If she is whole and complete, it is necessary that you reset it quickly, and not delay; and in such a manner that the ministers tie the head of the painful part, and push the wound slightly out of the one of her hands into the root of the dislocation of the jaw within the mouth, if the dislocation is of two parts; and the other hand is outside, to hold equal; and command the pain to soften, his jaws, and move them from all sides.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And the wound moves evenly, until it returns to its place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les II mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And if it returns gradually, especially if both jaws together, then raise them with high heat and oil, until they are lightly reset; do not delay the resetting, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens; et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules; et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	When they are returned evenly, and the jaw with the bad tooth is well closed to soften, then put on moist cloths made of rose oil and wax, then lightly tie it with soft bonds; and let the bad teeth sleep on their backs, and their heads between two blankets, so that they do not move to the left or right, nor make any effort to chew, but take light food until the pains are gone, and the jaws are healed; then change what they want lightly, and do not work much to open the mouth for eating and drinking, until the jaw is well healed and healthy.
Et se les II mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	If the two mandibles cannot be reset to their original position within an hour and are not converted to their proper alignment, then it is likely fevers and sweating, and perhaps diarrhea, and perhaps vomiting pure bile.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en VIIII jors.	And when you see this, then it is a sign of danger; and many times those who have it die within four days.
de la forcelle	of the forearm
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The forearm cannot be dislocated from the side of its own length and below, and it is not reset once dislocated, and well one can feel it.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint; et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez; et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	And the restoration is such that the dislocated part gently slides back onto its own length, and extends its arms; then press the joint firmly against your palm, and it will return; then put on the plaster and bandage, and hold it in place; if the patient who is on the side does not dislocate, and if it does not dislocate again, then reset it to its own length as we have said; then put on the plaster and bandage, and hold it in place, and command the patient to rest until it is healed; and thus the same is restored to the shoulder, when it is separated from its own length.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	of shoulder dislocation
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc; et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	There are three ways in which the shoulder can dislocate: the first is that it dislocates at the part of the acromion below; the second is at the part of the pis; and sometimes it dislocates at the part above, and this happens rarely; and it does not dislocate behind for the shoulder, and it does not dislocate inside for the arms; and many times it dislocates below towards the acromion, especially to those who have little strength, because for these it is difficult; to those who have enough strength, it dislocates easily, and returns easily.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And sometimes it happens to some men that they have a fracture or a blow, and the shoulder becomes inflamed with an abscess, and they think it is dislocated by the bone.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	Therefore, you must first examine it to be sure; and then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste; et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens; et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier; et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	It is known that the dislocation is when it is down towards the shoulder, and it sets apart the sick shoulder from the healthy one, and you will find between them clear differences; and you will find at the top of the shoulder a depression, and below the shoulder the top of the shoulder, as if it were an elbow; and the limb cannot move its hand to its neck, nor move any movements; and similarly, if it is dislocated above, if it is not hidden, for you will clearly see it at the back; and this kind of dislocation is only to be reset, when it is new, or if the limb is painful.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	And the manner is that the ministrants lift the hand of the injured one upward, then place their fingers below the joint, and pull the joint upwards to the shoulder; and the ministrants lift the hand, and extend it upward, so they put it back; it will come quickly.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree; puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide; et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere: et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar; et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	And if it does not come as we have said beforehand, then it is necessary that the injured one's arm be soaked in hot water; and the ministrants should apply a softening and soothing poultice, such as a decoction of althea and fenugreek and melilot in hot water, and it should be applied; then the injured arm should be placed on its back, and a piece of cloth evenly, neither too soft nor too hard, should be placed below the joint, then place the foot of the injured one on top of the cloth, and lift the shoulder gently, and pull the hand of the injured one; and other ministrants should wet the head of the injured arm, so that it does not move downwards; this shoulder is now all right, and if you see that the dislocation is being reset according to this method: and you should make sure that the person who is stronger than the injured one is on the side facing the chest, and push the shoulder of the injured arm away from the joint, and lift the joint upwards, so that the injured arm hangs in the air; and other ministrants should take the hand of the injured one down towards the belly.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And if the pain is too light, it can move with anything heavy, and the dislocation returns now.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile; puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment; et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	And it can be reset in another way: and it is like this that one takes a long stick of earth, of which the patient should also be as the pistil, and not too heavy or rough; then it should be placed outside the pain, but with cloths soft on top, and the pain should be stretched along the long side of the body; then its hand should be extended from the other part firmly, and the joint will return to its place quickly; and if it does not want to return for all these things that we have said, do this cure: take a stick of two arms wide and four fingers thick, which has the head round to enter through the opening outside the shoulder, in this form.
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus I eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	Then tie above the head with soft cloth, which was not the cause of the dislocation, then remove it from the dislocated place; extend your arm over the long one, and tie the assistance over the long one, and the hand at the top of the hand, then put your arm over the wide end of an arrow, and extend your hands down, and let the body hang on the other side: the joint is now healed.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is healed in any way, it is necessary to remove the shoulder from the dislocation with an equal-sized ball of wool, then apply the poultice with flour from the mill, with incense and a little honey, over the whole shoulder and around, then remove the poultice from the dislocation evenly, and return the limb to the poultice, and embrace the hand at its neck, and let the hands remain thus.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés V jors ou VII, et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And it is necessary that he change it little, until the member is comforted, for it will heal faster; and then change it again after five or seven days, and move it; and if it is stiff and it is not softened, it is healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint is very strong due to moisture that has come, or for other reasons, it is necessary that you administer cautery at three points, as it is placed before or in the chapter on cautery.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés VII jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And if you do all of this, and it dislocates again after seven days, and the joint does not stay in place, and cannot raise the arm above, then cut the muscles at the head of the shoulder are torn or stretched or softened; and cut that the joint has never been fixed in its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The dislocation that is by the ankle and the knees, or behind, is made by impulse and stretching of hands, and it is administered with another ointment; and care until they are healed.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after healing the limb becomes swollen and moves slowly, then use the ointment many times until that swelling is alleviated, and returns to its original state.
de la dislocation dou coute	of the shoulder dislocation
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	If the joint of the shoulder is dislocated at points, and repeatedly dislocates; and it has been dislocated from all parts, and even in front and behind, and the dislocation is not repaired, for one can see and feel it well; and it dislocates according to each shape.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	And when you join the dislocated shoulder with the healthy one, see the pulse clearly.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	For the joint is torn, and cannot move the arm, nor touch its shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And it is necessary to reset it as soon as the swelling comes, for if the swelling comes, it would be painful to reset; and perhaps it cannot be reset completely, especially when it is at the back; it is better than other dislocations, but it causes greater pain, and perhaps it leads to death.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes II mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And the restoration is, when it can be reset, that you extend your hand to both of their hands; and their arms are spread out, and their hands are moved along the shoulder, in and out, and push the joint back together, or at the root of their palm, until it returns to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is in front, it returns when he doubles his hand to his hand, and holds the root of the palm which is dislocated.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large; et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne; et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	And if he does not want to return to the place, apply strong extension; and if two people extend the arm, and two people hold it, so that it does not move during the extension; then turn the arm from both sides, then when you have loosened a double long and wide cloth; and when you see the joint at the hand, if any oil is used to soften the joint, then press the joint together, until it returns; and when it is in place, put a dry plaster with some honey on it, and press it together, and put the arm against the painful side, and leave it for some time, then remove it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	And if the joint is firm in its place, then release the bone, and leave it; and if you see that the joint does not hold well, then reapply the bandage and the bone, and leave it thus for some time, until it is firmly set; then release it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain; et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	And if he feels pain after the return of the joint, and it moves, then bathe and rub him well, and press until it is soothed; or place a piece of fat mutton lamb on the joint, leave it for a day and a night, then remove the bandage, and let him have a bath; and when he urinates, rub the joint immediately, then place the fat lamb back, and then let him have a bath; and do this twice or three times until it is healed; and if you see, then place moist warm chaff with butter on, and strain it over; if it returns to its usual state.
li dislocation de la main	the dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	The joint of the hand is dislocated, and the return is lighter than other joints. Therefore, it must be quickly returned to its place immediately after it is dislocated, as long as the muscles are swollen, or if there is an abscess nearby.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	And the return is done by placing the hand on a table, extending the fingers of the hand, and placing the palm over the appearance of the joint, and pressing until it returns fully. Then, you should check if it is properly aligned; then place the hairs of the hand on a table for extension and return.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	And if the dislocation is in the back of the hand, then place the patient's hand on the table, and the doctor places their hand over the appearance of the joint.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If it returns now, it is well. If not, apply healing plasters and let it rest until you can begin again.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte; et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	And if it cannot be suffered, and you cannot put it in place after some time, the joint will remain twisted; and do not use any force on the patient until the hand is washed, and nothing can be pulled out: then cut the nerve or artery; if there is no other means but to pull by cauterization through the skin, and perhaps nothing else works.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse V jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hand is in place, put the plaster that we have mentioned above, then strain and leave it for 4 days, then remove and leave it thus.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it cannot move well, and there is no swelling, boil some vinegar, and rub it until it is healed.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	of the dislocation of both hands
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre; adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins; et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	Never dislocate both hands at once, never at the back of the palm or the belly; then keep the hand straight, and reset the dislocation to your fists until it returns, then support the back of the hand, and bend it towards the part where it is dislocated; and leave it for 2 days, and then put it equal that day; and bind it as we have said, and remove the bandage each day, and move it, and reattach it; and do this often, until it is tight, and do the same if it is dislocated on the belly of the hand, and do as you have done before, until it is healed; and do the same when it is dislocated in other parts.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	backwards dislocation of the shoulder
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the shoulder or neck joint is dislocated, and there are many dislocations, there is no cure, for the patient dies from the pain.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»: li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	And the signs are that the movements suddenly occur without volition, and they cannot hold it, and often all the limbs are softened, or the two elbows or the two arms or one, and often the shoulder moves to the back; this is called «gilbositez»: the cure is that you warm the gilbositez if it came from childhood: if there is no cure or healing at all.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit; mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	And those that come from falling or from impacts or similar things, they said in the old ways of treatments by great words, which did not have much benefit; but I have abbreviated them according to my intention, and I have formed instruments in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit; et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis; et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece; puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles; et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons; et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	I say that in the gallbladder which comes from the left side, there is no engine or health; and also the one that comes directly in the second rib, and one cannot cure other than that proper one which comes from the back, as I said; and it is that the hairs should be stretched out over his face evenly, and have some ointment away from him, so that he does not bleed; then make the bandage at the head in earth form, and the other at the feet, and tie one ligature outside the hairs of the wound, and the other on the buttocks, and on the groin, and on the knees; and the assistant should tie the ligatures, one at the head and the others at the feet, among the two bandages; and they should be well tied, the bandage as we have said, and the thumbs put over the spine evenly, until it heals.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee; et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	And if it does not return by this treatment, take a three-legged stool and place the patient's back against it, and the painful area should be on the side, and bring the head of the stool down on the back, then place the middle of the stool on the spine; and put the patient's feet on the other end of the stool, and press well until it returns to its place; and if you see, do the same with the torso.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc; et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet; et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	And you should tie two ropes to the head of the painful arm of one arm, and on both sides of the feet, and between each rope, on the outside and inside, a length of cloth; and in each rope, one knot to correct the twist, and the ropes firmly on the ground so they do not move; and between the two ropes, a rope turning around, following the direction of the limbs, and in the two turns, two small ropes of cloth of length, to return the twisted limb; and then tie the ligament that is among the tendons to the other arm at the shoulder, and the other ligament to the feet, and each minister returns their rope to the whole limb, and the masters put the spine evenly as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	When it is even, apply a drying ointment with abundant oil, then cleanse and then place the patient's shoulder on a plank of three inches in length, to relieve the joint of the gilbosite and the part of the spine that is healthy, then bind it with a bandage as we have said, and use subtle manipulation until it is healed; and if anything happens at the end of the healing, then administer medicines to soothe and soften, with the ointment that we have mentioned before; and never give one piece of plaster, and never does it appear in the back spine of the back, and one should not assume that this is dislocation; and this is the bone that opens, because one should not have any presumption: perhaps it would bring death.
des dislocations de la hainche	of hip dislocations
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc IIII parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	The only dislocations that occur in the hip and shoulder joints are dislocations only, not like other joints; and the hip joint is dislocated into four parts: inside and outside, and front and back; and more inside, and slightly misaligned in front and back.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu; et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	And the knowledge of the dislocation inside is such that when the injured leg is joined with the healthy one, it is longer and more open than the healthy ones, and it cannot double its knee to the fire; and it is the legs that are swollen with abscesses, because the cause of the belly comes from there.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of one who comes after this is that these accidents are contrary to those previously mentioned.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the signs of one who has this in front are that he stands well on his leg according to completion; however, he does not double over with pain in the groin, and if they want to make him walk, he cannot do so before, and retains his urine, and swells the ankle, and when he walks, he passes over the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of one who has this behind are that he cannot spread his groin, nor double over, and that leg is more twisted than the other, and the ankle is softened, and the shoulder is dislocated from the sides.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	The symptoms of this type of dislocation are that you should wait if the dislocation is recent, and it will remain according to its position, there is no cure; and there is no need for haste.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des IIII manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	And in this case where the dislocation is fresh, and it is of four kinds of dislocation, you should hurry to return the joint, and extend and flex it, and move it to the right and left; perhaps if it returns, and there is no need for other treatment.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil; et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien; et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	And if it does not return in this manner, then you should apply strong pressure, and extend the leg firmly at two joints, or at one that is tied above the ankle; and some other treatments extend their hand above in a certain way so that they bite their hands from their elbows, then squeeze them with a belt above the hip; and others press the head of the bone; and they extend above and below all at once, until the pain is lifted from the ground at once, and remains suspended.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as IIII semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This method of extension is common for four similar cases, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is good.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele; puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	If not, then you must treat its similar case. When the dislocation is in the shoulder, it is necessary to support the painful side of the shoulder, then place the arm above the root of the armpit, and the limb that is outside the armpit, then extend the arm above the armpit and the armpit; then take other assistants to grasp the thick arm of the shoulder, and extend it in the proper form: it will return to its place now; and this method of dislocation is lighter than others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres; puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc; puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	And if you cannot hold it in this manner that we have said, then it is necessary to tie the two hairs of the shoulder together with a strong rope above the two heels, and above the two knees, and let the shoulder bone be extended two fingers more than the others; then let it hang from the top of a stick, and let it be two arms long from the ground; then command the minister to grasp the neck of the chicken, and let another minister hang with the shoulder, who can grasp the neck properly, for the joint is now approaching.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi; puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme; et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	And when the dislocation is in the back, then cut the hairs as we have said in the one with gout, and stretch the rope properly above the shoulder bone and also on the foot; then put two ties, one at the head and the other at the foot, then tie the rope between the chicken's legs in the correct form; and wrap moist cloths around it, so that it does not dry out, then stretch each minister towards it, and the master places the dislocation evenly in his hand.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	If it returns, it is good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If not, place it on a flat surface, and press it as we have said in the gibbosity, and grind the hairs against the sound side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And when the dislocation is in front, it is necessary to extend the injured leg firmly, and as I have said; and place the fingers on the pain above the bent part, then press with the other hand, and extend it down towards the groin.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches; et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table; et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve; et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And if the dislocation is in the back, it is not necessary to extend the injured leg downwards, nor to lift it up, but it should be as it was dislocated backwards, as we have said in the prone position on both sides; and it should be on its face, and the ligament extended as before, and one must press on the joint at the table; and it will be right when the hairs extend their legs, and they will be even; then adjust the knees, and put the plaster, and the bandage of a cloth, so that the hip does not move; and let it rest for three or four days, then release, and put the plaster on; and if you see that they are even, remove the bandage, as before, and leave it for three days; then release, and make the member walk well, until the members are comfortable.
de la dislocation dou genoil	of the shoulder dislocation
Li genous est desaluez selonc III manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	The shoulder is dislocated in three ways: that is to say, inside and outside, and backwards; and it does not dislocate forwards.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez; et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez; puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement; et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And the signs are that you command the patient to bend their leg at the knee, and if they cannot do so at the knee, then it is dislocated; and the restoration of all is that you make the patient sit straight, and extend their leg if possible, and place your back against their face, and place their foot on yours; then take their shoulder to your palms, and bring it between your fingers, then bend the two sides of the shoulder firmly; and other ministers extend their foot, until the shoulder returns to its place, and the signs are that they can lightly bend their leg at the knee; and apply the plaster to the knee and thigh, and massage them firmly for three or four hours, then release it; and do not work on the patient again until their limb is strong.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	If the member is not dislocated, administer strong extension, as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until it is healed.
de la dislocation dou talon	of the dislocation of the ankle
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The ankles are never sprained, and never fully dislocated, both inside and outside.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee: li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	And the signs are that the bone is dislocated, and it feels tender in the part where it is dislocated: the remedies are light, and one should gently extend it to their hands when it is sprained only.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville; puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut; et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient; et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide; puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet; puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent; puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	And when it is fully dislocated, you should sit the pain straight, and hold it with the minister's hands outside the leg, above the ankle; then pull the bone to your right hand, and then to the left twice, then extend it upwards, and hit the bone hard upwards; do this twice, as we have said, by pushing and pulling the bone; if it returns, it is good; if not, if you start again with the work, because it returns; and if it cannot return like this, then let the pain lie on its back above the ground, and firmly step on the ground between its knees, and wrap cloths around it so that it does not move the bone; then hold the minister's knee, and other ministers extend the bone to your hands or to the other, so that they tie the collar of the bone; then extend all the ministers equally, and the steps should be held between the knees of the pain to retain the pain while extending it; then put the minister's hands even with the dislocation at their hands, and other ministers hold the leg clean on the outside, and the dislocation will return quickly.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois; puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors; et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	And when she does not go away, put the plaster on and soak it above, and let the swelling form, and tie the leg to the foot, and hold the nerves that are above the ankle behind, so that the joints are not too stretched; then leave it for two or three days, and if the joints dislocate again, apply the plaster again; then release it on the third or fourth day, and let it walk for four days; and if it goes before this term, it is not certain that it will not dislocate again.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if abscesses come, it is necessary that you ease them, as we have said elsewhere, until they are healed.
des dois	of two
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the two are dislocated, if they are not too far apart, it is a simple matter to extend them with work.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne; et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the dislocation is in any way out of place, it is necessary to sit the misaligned bone straight on a flat or level table, and put your foot on what opens up these jointures, then press firmly with your foot until it returns; when it is even, and there is no opening, put some oil on the sole of your foot, then stretch it firmly for three hours, then release; let it rest until it is healed.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	of wounds and dislocations together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert: si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis; et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit; et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne; et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis; et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples; et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	When wounds come with dislocations, and one wants to restore them, often times the pain is fatal: if you are not presumptuous in the cure, and do not know the art well, and have not used it for a long time, and if you are not merciful and slow, and not harsh; at the beginning of things, calm the swelling abscess, and leave the pain in the hands of God, if you see no hope of health; and when you see hope, now reset the member to its place, as long as the swelling goes away; and when the member is in place, administer calming remedies for the swelling, and cure the wound, as it should be, with drying agents; and if with the dislocation there is a fracture, and small bones are shattered, remove them, and do what we have said about simple diseases; and beware of entering into the path of fear, according to what I have said, for this is better for you according to your Creator, and for the knowledge of your armor and body.
Amen	Amen
