O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	Oh, most noble sons, I have completed this book which is the aftermath of the science of medicine, and have filled it with its contents, and have made the end by its explanations and by its declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came to me in a vision that I should complete it with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, that is to say "surgery".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of hands is fortified in our region and is held together by all things, it has perished along with the science and decayed, and nothing remains but the small descriptions in books of the ancients that the hands have moved.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this comes the error and the vanity, and the minds are closed and the knowledge is distant.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation;	It seems to me that I can revive it together with the order of this treatment according to the way of exposure and declaration and abbreviation.
et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	And I will bring together the forms of cauterizing irons and other tools of the work with the explanation and preparation of it, as it is necessary.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And because of this reason that no good masters of hands are found in our time, the art of medicine is prolonged.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And it is necessary for one who undertakes this to master the science of anatomy, as Galen says, until he knows the judgment of the limbs, and their forms and conjunctions and separations of all, and has knowledge of the bones and nerves and muscles and the number of joints, and the movement and veins moving and resting, and the origin of their issue.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc;	And because, as Hippocrates says, "the nail is not much good, and with the work is little.
et meismement en l’art de main.	And even in the art of manual dexterity.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes;	We tell you in the introduction of this book that those who are not acquainted with the things mentioned above, if they attempt to do it, may make a mistake and harm people.
ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	so that I have often wanted many times more of those who engage in this science and if they abandon themselves to science and experiment.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa I apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col;	For I saw a foolish person who lanced an abscess of scrofula from the breast of a woman, and lanced the arteries of the breast;
por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	so that so much blood issued out that the woman died in her hands.
Et vis I autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans;	And I saw another foolish person who removed a stone from an old man's eye, and the stone was large;
si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens III jors.	so that he took with it a piece of the bladder, and died the next three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	I had already been called for the extraction, and saw the position of the misalignment and the size of the stone, and if it was cut well, it would die.
Et vis I autre mire qui prist en cure I duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie;	And another miracle that took place in our care, the Duke of our land who had his leg broken, and with the broken piece he had a wound.
et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi I termine;	and the miracle-worker kept the broken piece above the wound, keeping it steady with great care, and did not let the wound be left open, and thus he brought it to an end.
et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie;	and he ordered that it not be displaced.
et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	and thus it remained until the leg was completely healed and the foot and came back to life.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe;	I was called to come to him, and he urged me to come to dislocate the leg;
et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	And when I felt it dislocated, it was in a place and did not feel any pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner;	But all ways of the corruption were already confirmed or the member, and it could not be healed.
et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	And the corruption did not cease to move through the member until the member was completely lost.
Et vis I autre mire qui effondra I apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And I saw another method that would crush the abscess and become infected, and then inflame due to the evil of its lord.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For a pustule, when it is free of melancholic humor, does not require that one touch it with iron if it is not in a limb where one can remove everything that is corrupted.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en II divisions:	Therefore, very dear son, I advise you to know that the work of hands is divided into two divisions:
c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions;	that is to say, where it has been performed in many positions;
et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	and I will show in each part of this book where there is fear and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos.	For it is better that you keep this to yourself, so that the foolish do not speak ill of you.
Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez;	If you take up your weapons firmly and steadily, and use the best method, then by God's grace you will come to safety and be healed.
et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit;	and leave behind contagious diseases of poor health;
et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	and take up your weapons from the one that makes you doubt, and be in peace so that you may come from this world to the other of glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens:	Galen says in some of his admonitions:
«Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	Do not take on sick patients unless you are called a foolish doctor.
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	I have divided this treatment into three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez;	The first chapters are about fire cautery and medical cautery for the sick, and the chapters are ordered from the head to the feet.
et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	and the forms of instruments, and the irons of cautery, and of everything that is necessary in the work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses;	The second chapters are about cutting and piercing, and of wounds and incisions, and of arrow extraction, and similar things.
et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	and the chapters are ordered and the forms of instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses;	The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things;
et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	and is ordered by the head of the bed, and the forms of instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	As we remember from the work, it is necessary that I describe the quality of each assistant and their harmful or helpful nature.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus;	I say that the qualities of aid, and the lack thereof, are the longest speech and most subtle science and the secrets kept.
et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu;	and many wise men spoke of this, and agreed to it;
et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	and I do not speak much about it, because I keep the length.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que II complexions:	I say that fire cauterization helps universally in all matters where there is matter, whether the matter is:
c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	This is to know hot humid nature without matter, and dry nature without matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide;	In hot and dry nature together with matter, they devised none and said that the fire cauterization is great help;
et li autre dirent le contraire:	and the other said the opposite:
que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	that cauterization does not help disease that comes from heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour;	For the nature of fire is so hot, and should not be cured by heat from disease by heat, nor dryness;
et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	and those who said the opposite that cauterization does great help to hot and dry disease that comes in the bodies of men.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	When you compare the body of the man and his moisture to the composition of fire, you stir the body flat.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this word.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have never found it once by experiment.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens;	And in all cases, do not interfere except for those who have experienced it and know the chapter on cautery from long use, and the diversity of human constitutions, and their dispositions and causes of illnesses, and the symptoms and the space of time.
des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	We have no fear of other constitutions, even in cold and moist diseases.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all the hairs gathered together and aligned with the cauterization.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, children, that fire cauterization is a secret of healing and greater good than cauterizing medicine.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For the fire is simple, and it only comes to the member that is cooked, and does not harm other members unless named.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation;	The heating medicines come from one member to another by removing them, and bring diseases of relief to the sick member.
et par aventure ocit lou malaide.	And perhaps it may cause harm.
Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	The fever does not hurt for its heat and for the goodness of its substance, if there is no excess.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses;	And I have found this through experience and by the length of service and study that I have put into the art, and it has been above the truth of things.
et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant;	And because I excuse the length of the word, for I do not like to give you the secret that is hidden or fire, and the quality of the work, how it breaks diseases of the body, as the philosopher says in demonstrating.
or le recevez en vos pensees.	or receive it in your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, son, that they should be done at what time the cautery is to be applied, and then they should be prayed for.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere;	And I say that cauterization is suitable in all times, because the harms coming from it are removed by the help of cauterization.
et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And even when it is cauterized, it is for necessary pain, rather than waiting for the tension that could cause greater harm to the limb.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire;	Do not think like a foolish child, as they do.
car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue;	for the disease that is healed by cauterization has no recurrence.
et il le dient ensi;	and he says so.
mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	But he is not as they think, because cauterization is only a medicine that moves the complexion, and dries the humors that cause pain, and it is more effective than other medicine for its swiftness of value, and for the virtue of its work and its authority.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut;	And it is possible that the disease comes at any time according to the humor of the patient and the part of the disease and its nature.
et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie;	And they are assembled in him the excesses by the acquisition of meats and similar things, unless if you administer cauteries to the part where there is excess and moisture, as cauteries for dense pain, and similar things, and the pain does not return.
mais ce avient poc.	But this happens rarely.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir;	And many people do not understand why cauteries are called the back of medicine, and this is so.
mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	but they do not believe that cauterization works after medicine, but rather misunderstandings, and it is cauterization of the rear of medicine because when we administer methods of healing in any disease and they do not work, then we administer the cautery, and it is better.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Therefore, it is clear that cauteries are the last resort of medicine, not according to the intention of those who misunderstand.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance;	The ancients said that gold cautery instruments are more beneficial than iron, and they did not say what else except for the quality of gold and its high substance.
et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes;	and they said that the wounds of cauterization do not make putrefaction, but it is not to see because I have experienced it, and I have found that it is to see in some people.
et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	And gold cautery is better than iron, as they say.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez;	And whenever you heat a gold instrument, do not touch it when it is hot due to the color of gold, and let it cool first.
et s’on le chaufe trop;	And if it is heated too much;
si font au feu;	then they do at the fire.
et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	and then there is enough prevention.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	For this reason we use the fire cautery that we have already prepared for our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	Or you have ordered this chapter about the shoulder joint from the foot, because it is lighter to find.
dou cautere olivaire	oil cauter
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	This cauterization is good for moisture and cold on the head, and it is done for two reasons: because of a disease called "soda", and because of many humors that descend from the joint to the eyes, and to the ears, and due to many dreams and tooth pain, and throat pain, and even for all diseases that come from cold, such as paralysis, soda, apoplexy, and similar diseases.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief III nuis ou IIII, selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir;	The form of this cautery is that the hairs should be removed by soluble medicine changing the chief III or IV, according to the virtues and age and custom of the hair, which it can bear.
et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	Then, repeat the process of the bad joint.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis;	And then make it sit crossed between your hands, and put its hands on top of its feet;
aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses II eulz;	After, place the root of your palm above the root of its nose between its two eyes;
et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	And let your fingers come to me, if it bleeds from the wound then heat the cauterizing agent called "olivare", of which this is the shape:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant;	And put it on the limb at the sign of ink, and make by descending and stretching your hand little by little in returning;
puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os I sol petit;	Then lift your hand gently, and reward the limb if you see the small bone of the shoulder;
et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit;	and if you do not see it, restart the cauterization until you see the bone as I have told you.
aprés pren I poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse III jors;	then take a little piece of silk, and place it softly inside, and put it on the limb, and let it stay for three hours.
aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre;	then place a soft cloth on top.
et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	and let it stay until the burn is healed.
aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat the wound with the ointment called "tetrafarmaçon" until it is healed.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge;	And the ancients said that the longer the wound remains open, the more it purges.
et por ce si aide mues.	and for this reason, use this method.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And none of these said that one should cool the cauterization so much that a part of the bone is burned, and then one should remove what is burned from the bone, and it should be healed.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme I vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors;	And the other method is to apply the cauterizing iron as lightly as possible, and push it in as far as you can lower the bone as wide as a vermilion that women put in their hair because the humors are pushed out by moisture.
et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte;	and one should leave the wound open for a long time.
aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	Afterwards, one should cure and bandage it.
Et ces II manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor;	And these two methods of cauterizing do not seem to be good for everyone, except in some men where there is a view of fear.
et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier;	And it seems to me that I should leave it.
car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres;	because the joints are weakened by continuous natural solutions, as we testify in other members;
et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	and even when the joint with the injury is weak by nature, and the first appearance of cauterization is more suitable and gentle for me, and from this use I work accordingly in an appropriate manner for healing.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	of the ancient pain of the main
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres;	When in general the joint comes with chronic pain that lasts a long time, one should use herbs and pills called "cochie", and cleansing of the head and eyes and plasters.
et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	and if one does the cauterization that we have already mentioned, and it does not help.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit;	Take a warm cloth for the patient who is suffering from a severe illness, and that it not too hot.
adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Then apply the fire cauterization as we have mentioned above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai I cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»;	After applying the cauterization on each of the horn-like protrusions of the bone, as we have mentioned before, and apply the cauterization called "vasserelz".
et est I leus en coi on met ventouses;	And place them in the places where suction cups are used.
et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os:	And raise your hand so that you do not press too hard on the bone:
li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors;	The hairs feel much greater pain in this cauterization than in others, and I will speak about that later.
et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	and it is necessary that the cauterizers of the horns be more skilled than those who cauterize the median part of the head, and this is the form:
dou cautere dou chief	for the fire cauterization
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie:	When in one part of the head sudden pain comes, and the disease is spread to the eye, and the patient is purged by medicines that are not changed, and the other cures that I have mentioned in the division of diseases have been done, and yet nothing helps:
adonques li fai cauteres selonc II manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	then the cauterizers do it in two ways, that is to say by medicine and by fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope I poc as II chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir;	The cauterizers by medicine are such that you grasp a hot iron, and remove the scab and place it on the eye of the patient, and then make the temple in such a way that you can replace the iron outside the skin;
et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi XII houres;	And when it is reset, if the bone and the joint are well aligned and left like this for twelve hours;
et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi II jors ou III;	then the dislocation is released and treated with the decoction of garlic, and leave the wound like this for two or three days;
puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	then apply a poultice soaked in butter until the pain subsides.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	After the treatment with ointment, as long as they are healed;
et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	and if you see that some burning medicines that I have written or advised to treat with, are causing harm.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	The iron cautery is done in this way.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Heat the iron cauterizer of which this is the form:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait I poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance;	And it is called "closed" because the head is made in the shape of a cloak or has a small hook at one end, and in the middle has a small appearance;
et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse;	And place it on the painful joint, and hold your hand and gently press the bone slightly, until half of the broken bone is back in place.
et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And relieve your hand so that the artery does not burn, which is below, and there is an abundance of blood flowing.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par III jors;	After putting cotton in a cloth, and place it on the joint for three days;
puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	then put moistened cotton in butter, and then cure the joint with ointment until it is healed.
et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	And if you wish to cauterize this wound with the cauterizing iron called "cultellare", at all points, and be careful not to cover the artery in this wound which is not ancient.
de emigraine	of the wound
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans;	When you treat emigration headaches as we have mentioned in the divisions of diseases, and it does not improve, and you see that the cauteries before mentioned do not suffice with the medicine and the heat does not relieve it somewhat, then it is necessary to remove the cautery called "cultellare" until it is white.
et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os;	and if the limb is in pain along a line of half an inch long, and you take your hand once, and strain so that you do not cover the artery and that it does not come close to the bone.
et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez;	and watch the jaw that moves when it is moved, and the nerves should not regard anything except the move and that spasms do not cause pain, and watch for the discharge of blood from the artery when it is cut, or when it is cut with great fear and immediately to that one who does not know, and which is not studied and experienced.
et laisse l’uevre em mi voie;	and leave the work in its place;
mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	but I will tell you how to stop blood flow when the artery is cut, and I will show you where it appears in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee;	And if you see that this cautery is not sufficient for the disease, and the patient is suffering, cauterize it in the same way as we have said, and treat the wound until it is healed;
et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait II coutelz;	and if you see that the cauterizing agent that we have said or in the chapter of the extraction of the artery, with the cauterizing agent that has two prongs;
et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	And this method of fire cauterization is better than the other and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	of the pain of the ears from cold
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When the ear has pain from cold, and medicines have been applied and other treatments that we have said in the division, and the pain does not move, then heat this cautery called "pointed", of which is the form:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les II se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche;	After pricking all around the ear wound, or wherever the pain is felt on both sides, and then remove it a little distance from the root of the ear, as soon as you have found the bone of the jaw.
et ait X poins entor chescune oreille;	and make ten pricks around each ear.
aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	after curing the bone as long as it is healthy.
de la torture de la bouche	of the torture of the mouth
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie;	This pain must be treated by cauterization is no more than those that move from the flux, as we have said in the division of diseases.
et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	and do not use cauterization like those that come from pus and mucus of wounds.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de III cauteres:	When you cure this appearance of torture that moves from a stream of urine and spitting, and it does not cease, then it is necessary to cauterize the pain with three cauteries:
l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des II levres;	one at the root of the ear, and the other a little later the temple, and the third in the corner of the mouth;
et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce;	and put the cauterie in the part that opens healthy, and make the cauterie at the head of the ear above a little out of the horn of the head, and another in the temple as long as a pin;
et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse;	and leave the cauterie so high that half of the face is burned;
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	and this is the form of the fire cauterization:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros;	And it is similar to the cauterizing iron that we have placed before, but it is a bit more delicate and it is necessary that the knife be a bit larger;
aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After healing the limb as I have said before, until it is healed.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai IIII cauteres:	When apoplexy is old and you treat it as we have said, and it does not improve, and the pain does not have fever, then make four cauterizations:
II sus les II cornes dou chief, et I emmi le chief, et I ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac;	Two above the two corners of the head, and one under the head, and one on the part called "vassals" as we have said before, and the back cauterization through the mouth of the stomach;
et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	And treat them as we have said before.
de litargie	of laziness
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil;	For this disease, one should give the patient large doses of mandrake and mineral-altering drugs to the brain.
aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres;	After removing all of the head of the patient, and placing the mustard plaster on the back of the neck, as written or prescribed for the plasters.
et c’est li maniere dou cautere:	And this is the method of the fire cauterization:
si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	If you do as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est;	If he is thus healed, then it is good.
et s’il ne l’est, se li fai III cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere I doi de gros;	And if he is not thus healed, then perform three fire cauterizations on the head, descending from the forehead to the neck, and leave a space of one inch between each cauterization.
et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai I cautere en mileu;	and the cure as with others, and if you have seen it stuck, and the pains are great, then apply the fire cauterization in the middle.
et se mestiers est, II autres sus les II cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	and if the job is, the other two on the two horns, and the cure until it is healed.
et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	and let the cauterizing agent be called "olivare", as I have said before.
de la froidor dou chief	of the cold of the chief
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit;	It is necessary that the head be cleaned with leeks and garlic, as we have said before.
aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et I derrier et III sus l’espinee dou col;	after removing the pus from the head, then apply the cauterization on the head and on each horn, and behind and three times on the spine of the neck.
et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai IIII cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos;	and if you have more skill, and the back is wet and the hairs are suffering, and the disease is far, then apply four cautery burns on the spine of the back.
et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main;	and leave it until the most gentle one is done, and relieve your hand.
aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	after the treatment until they are healed, and those cautery called "olivare" that we have already mentioned.
de l’epilempsie	of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	Epileptics should not use cauterization except for those that are fleaming, and it is first necessary to modify the brain from years and other treatments that we have said in the division when the pain is great and suffering from penetration of medicine.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes;	And if it is a child who cannot suffer, then give them gargle and chewing, often changing the brain with good meats.
aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai I cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et I cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne;	after the child's head is in the middle, and apply one cautery as we have mentioned before, and the cauteries on the vessel, and on each horn.
et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if the pain and suffering is outside and inside, if you apply cautery as I said to those who have paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine and neck, and let the cautery be olive oil according to the method that I have said.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai I cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the pain is sharp, then apply the delicate cauterization as follows:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When due to melancholy, the excess or corrupted moisture is great, then use the cauterization of parts as we have said to those who have paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if due to melancholy, the excess or corrupted moisture is declining towards melancholy, and the pain is caused by wetness, then give something to drink that the mind may be cleansed, according to what it is before in the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide;	After removing the main cause of the pain;
aprés fai I torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com I cercle, si le met emmi le chief;	After making a well-made bandage, like a circle, and put it on the head;
et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars;	and if the pain increases, and let it be held tightly from all sides;
aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien;	After applying the liniment, and use ointment made of fresh butter;
et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir;	and the heat of fire should be applied gently, so that he can bear it without suffering.
aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier;	after removing the circle by inserting the head, and let it cool down;
et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and do this to each joint once a week with different governance until they are healed.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	Where you have seen the fire cauterization done by making many pricks all over the cautery.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument;	This method of cauterization moistens the brain and increases it.
et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	and then place a soft cloth on it with butter and chicken fat.
de l’awe des eulz	of the eye's
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When the eye comes first to the eyes by the signs that I have mentioned in the division, then begin and give the patient the remedy that I have mentioned, keeping the head dry and washing it or bathing it several times a day while fasting.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai II cauteres sus les II temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as II eulz ensamble, ou en I se li dessendemens est en I;	After that, he commands to turn his head, and then perform the cauterization by inserting the head, and make two cauterizations on the two temples, simultaneously with both eyes together, or if one eye is turned down, then one.
et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple;	And cover all the cauterized areas and veins that are not under the skin, and they should be the cauterizer long along the length of the temple.
et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	And watch for the extraction of arrows, and if you see too much blood coming out, then soak it with cloth as you have.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras;	And I will teach you in the extraction of veins and the incision of the cautery how you would soak it.
et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les II os derrier.	And never cauterize or heat anything outside the two lower bones.
dou cors des larmes	The path of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors;	When the tears of the eyes are old and accustomed and are above the veins, or on top of the arteries that are in the appearance of the main part forward.
et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz:	and we see that it is excessive cold flu-like symptoms, therefore the fire cautery that I mentioned at the beginning of this chapter should be applied to those.
I cautere emmi le chief, et II cauteres sus les II temples, et II cauteres ou haiterel desoz les II os;	I apply the fire cautery to the forehead, and II cauterize above the two temples, and II cauterize where the jawbone meets the two jaws.
et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout I petit cautere.	and if there is more, then cauterize it thoroughly above the ear with every small fire cautery.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	through the tears by through the eyes
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide III nuis cochies;	When you medicate according to what we have said in the division, and it does not help, then give him to drink three decoctions of badger's teeth.
aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire;	After the king's head, and the fire cautery or the middle of the fire cautery olive.
et fai II cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les II sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous;	And make two cautery burns with the cautery that is called "clavilis" above the two horns, a little below the ears.
et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	And guard the artery so it does not close.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the form of the cauterization called «clavilis»:
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	When the paper of the oil is softened by disease and moisture, then cauterize with this cauterization called «olivare».
de coi ci est li forme:	For this form:
Et se tu vues si fai II cauteres sus les II sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont;	And if you see that make two cautery burns above the two horns as long as the horns are.
et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And do not leave the hand except until the third part of the paper is burned, according to the manner that I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	the hair that does not touch the oil
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc II manieres:	Never does it happen that the hairs of the head are converted to the pardon, and prick the eye, and then make two cautery burns in the following manner:
c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	This is to know of fire, or burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals;	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even;
et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain;	When they grow and are even, then put the patient in a safe place;
aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz;	after seeing above the eyes a drawing that is as such as the face of the moon, and is the beginning of the sign below the hairs;
puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	then put cotton moistened in egg yolk and musk powder on the oil, then heat the cautery of which this is the form:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit;	After cauterizing the area you have marked a few times but not too much, where the wound is located.
et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil;	and the signs of health in the work are that you see the paper recede, and the hairs stand upright like oil.
adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi III jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	Therefore, lightly place your hand, and leave it in this way for three hours, then put cotton moistened in oil until the burn is healed.
aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the treatment of onion, until it is healed.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers;	And if after this the hairs come back, and the paper is softened, then begin the cauterization on the same area again, as you did first.
et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if the hairs are missing, then cauterize until the paper is raised to its natural level, and is even, and do not prick at the base of the hair.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte;	The cauterizing medicine is that you command the patient to let the hairs grow long and even, then make a piece of parchment in the shape of a mint leaf.
puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien;	Then take French soap and live chalk, each one, and grind them together well.
et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz;	And make it into a paste, so that it does not cool, then spread it on the shape you have made like a mint leaf, and put it on the paper of the eyes.
et se li maladie tient en I oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en I, et se en ambedous ausi;	and if the disease holds in one joint only, then one must open it in one place, and similarly in another.
et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef;	and put a piece of moistened cotton cloth inside the joint.
et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse I poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	and the one with the bad joint should be in a healthy position and place the second finger on the medicine, and press the tip and move it every time the pain of the medicine is felt, for it feels painful as if from fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done this for a long time, then take the medicine at your own discretion.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision;	And when the pain has passed, lift the limb from its position, and reward yourself if you see the paper lifted as it was raised by constraint of fire or by incision.
et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	If it is so, then it is good.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point;	If not, then reset the joint above or below where the medicine has not worked, until your work is equal and your eyes are steady.
puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then put on moistened cotton above the wound until the curved arrows are cut off, then heal the wounded part called "diaphragm" and others, until they are healed.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	And if you are in need of knowing, be well-versed in your work by great care that it does not cut into the medicine with those.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant;	And if the paper becomes soft after, and the hairs are pricked in the oil, then start the medicine above the joint that has become soft from the paper properly, as you did before.
aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	after the treatment until they are healed;
et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	and this is the form of the fuller's mallet:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens;	And since the bones of men are different in size and smallness, and according to what your constraints are;
et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	and not be replaced the right way for those who have studied this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	of the treatment of fistulas by cauterization
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat fistulas as we have described in the division of diseases, and your treatments do not work, then it is necessary for you to cauterize them in this way.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain;	instruct the patient to put his head in your clean;
et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief;	and wash the instruments on his head between your hands in such a way that it does not move, nor remove his head;
aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil;	after put cotton wool on the side of the eye or in the juice of parsley over the oil;
aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz:	After heating the cauterizing tool.
et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere;	And secure it at the tip of the tongue, as if it were a pen of lead, and the cauterizing tool.
se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente;	If you see, it is pointed from one tip to the other, and if you see, it is also like a tent.
mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	But in any case, this that is secured is better for your work.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche;	After pressing the fistula if it is open, and in taking the pus, and drying it.
et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe;	And if it is closed, if you open it, and take out the foreign bodies.
aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie;	After putting the cautery on the skin well, and holding your hand on the cautery at the part above the bone, so that your hand does not make a mistake.
et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	And put the cautery in the fat of the oil, and corrupt it.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	If you come to the beginning of the cautery just to the bone, it would be good.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors;	If not, if you must restart the cautery again, and if you have skill, let it stay for three days.
aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers;	Afterwards, put on a cotton pad in butter, and the ointment of the desiccating wound until it is healed, and if 40 days pass and it is not healed, then put on corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed.
et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	and the king according to what he would come into his chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	And there is a method of cauterizing a fistula that none of the ancients said.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu;	To fistula, and fix the limb.
aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	After putting in the fisture, insert the subtle probe of this shape:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc;	and they make with the quantity of one finger's breadth;
et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil;	and hold the hand or probe firmly, and the hairs do not move, that the plugs do not stick to their oil.
et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe:	and it is appropriate to put on top of the oil, soft cotton wool in abundance or less.
li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	the plug if the limb of the fistula, and the healthy by miraculous healing.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	And if the sinus is healed by the cauterization that we have said, it is good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	If not, then you must administer a puncture to the nose, and return the sinus to the nasal cavity according to what is proper for that limb.
des crevaices en levres	of fissures in the lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Many times there are fissures in the lips that are called "hair", and simultaneously in the lips of children.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe I petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these fissures as we have said in divisions, and the treatment does not help, then heat a small cauterizing iron according to this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font;	And put him in those cracks until he comes just short of the font.
aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	After curing the limb of cautery until it is healed.
de l’aposteme de la goule	of the abscess in the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule;	When an abscess comes at the root of the tongue or in the eye, or in the palate, or at the roots of the teeth, after it is pierced and drained and swells and becomes a fistula.
et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie:	And you treat it as we have said in divisions, and it does not improve.
adonques covient il que tu aies I cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule;	Therefore, it is necessary that you use cauterization according to the quantity of the fistula.
aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu;	After boiling or puncturing the fistula, and hold your hand until the hot iron comes to the end of the limb.
et fai ensi une fois ou II, aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And do thus once or twice, after the care that we have said in cures, until they are healed.
et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin;	And if they are cured thus, it is good.
et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	And if not, then you must discover the limb and remove the rotten bone, according to what you find in its chapter.
dou movement des dens	movements of the teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain;	When the teeth are softened by moisture and the dens move, and you treat them with medicines but it does not work, then put the head of the bad tooth in your healthy one.
aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent;	After heating the cautery with which its form will come out later in some manner, put a cane on the tooth.
et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent;	and place the fire cautery deeply, and hold your hand steady so the hairs feel the heat coming to their root.
aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit;	then remove your hand and restart the fire cautery as you wish;
aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	then fill the hairs with salt and let them soak for an hour and then rinse.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in a similar manner, the tooth that was moving is stabilized, and the gum softened, held back, and the moisture corrupted dried.
de la dolor des dens	of the pain of the teeth
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc II manieres:	When pain from the tooth comes from cold, or there is cold or wind, and medical treatments do not help, then it is necessary to use fire cautery in two ways:
et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	and fire cautery with butter and fire cautery with fire.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain;	Fire cauterization is such that you hold butter with a spoonful of fat or water.
aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez;	Then take cotton and wrap it around the tip of a needle, dip it in the melted butter, and place it on the painful tooth firmly and hold until it is cooled.
et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus I fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	And then do it often enough until its effect reaches the root of the tooth, and if you see that dipping wool and cotton in melted butter does not help, then place a hot iron on the aching tooth and hold until the pain goes away.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide;	Fire cauterization is such that you hold a red-hot iron or needle, and it should be large enough that the heat does not reach the mouth of the patient.
aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez;	After heating the cautery, from which the form will come later, and place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cauterizer is cooled.
fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	Do this often, for the pain will be as great on that very day or the next.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer;	And it is necessary that the hairs fill their mouth with good butter in the urgency of this cauterizer, and then wipe it off.
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And this is the form of the cauterizer:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir;	And make the cauterizer as you wish, and according to what you have.
et c’est li forme de la caine:	And this is the form of the needle:
des scrophules	of scrofula
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie;	When the scrofula is of a mucous and cold nature, and is not obedient to digestion by medicines, then heat the hair cauterization with which comes after, and have two openings for the fumes to escape to the other side of the cauterization;
et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume;	and place the cauterization on top of the abscess once, or as often as necessary, until it reaches the bottom of the abscess;
et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors;	and if the abscess is small, place cauterization according to the quantity of the abscess, and leave it for three days;
et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee;	and place on top of it a soft cloth dipped in butter until the burn is healed.
aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	After healing from burns and wounds, the limb is to be treated until it is healthy.
Li forme de la cainne:	The form of the skull:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives;	When moisture overflows the channels of the body, and especially when it comes from a cold constitution, then it is necessary that the pains be relieved first by soluble medicines.
aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	After the cauterization at the root of the throat, and be careful not to bring the heat too close to the throat, and do not burn too much but just a little.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant;	After the other cauterization at the joint of the neck to the top of the spine, and let the cauterizations that are called "clavi" because of the shape we have in front.
et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	And treat the limb as we have previously mentioned until it is healed.
de la toust	of the tooth
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai .II cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis;	When all and the disease of pormon are from cold moisture, and the pains have no fever or inflammation, and the disease is ancient, then apply two cautery burns on the forehead in their sight.
et I autre cautere emmi le pis entre II mameles;	and another cautery burn between the breasts.
et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	and let the cautery burns be called "clavile" according to the form that has been mentioned before.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles;	And if you see, apply cautery by holding the entire cautery that is called "points" because of the form it has in the disease of the ears.
et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	and they are to be applied at least thirty times, or more frequently.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	After treatment, the patient according to what has been said before, and let the burns heal in three stages according to this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais III a cop.	And because the burns are lighter, because you make three times as much.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit;	Afterwards, prick the hairs on their back and on their ribs.
aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre;	Afterwards, hold the curved part of the bone with your right hand.
et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners douqueil ci est li forme:	and if the joint is misaligned inside, then heat the cautery that has two prongs at the end, in the shape of:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble IIII cauteres;	and cauterize the bone until it pierces through the ribs, and then bring four burners together.
et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a III ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres;	because the cautery is made with the cautery that has three prongs, because the shape of cauterization is these four burners.
et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a III ners:	and are the nerves according to the subtlety of a tent and it is the form of the fire cautery that has three needles:
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce I nerf por coi il i a VIII cauteres.	And never are they placed on this one nerve because it has eight burning irons.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil;	After putting the cautery on, place the needles perpendicularly and hold them with silk;
aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After letting the patient rest, do not move the limbs for a long time until it is well comforted.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	And if it is dislocated above, this thing happens rarely, then make fire above the thick edge of the cauterizer, or many of the cauterizers in pinching.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	For the joint is closed, and it is bound with moisture and is free from pain.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	When cold and much moisture come into the stomach until it is at its condition, and they multiply the diarrhea in him, and are usual methods of cures and he does not improve, then it is necessary that the pain be soothed above his back, and he extends his legs and his hands.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture;	After this, make three cauteries with the spoon, one at the worst place for the quantity of a drop, and all the cautery with the claviere, and two cauteries before the two ribs until the figure of the cautery is at three angles, and has equal space between them so they are not joined together as they go through;
et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	and let the burning instruments be such that they do not burn more than the two parts of the face, and let the shape of the cauterizing instruments be according to this form without jerking:
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme;	and if you see cauterizing with a large burning instrument in the stomach according to this form;
et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche;	and the one who has fear of this burning instrument, cauterize by pricking and holding steady above the stomach, but not according to the quantity that you see in the chest.
puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	then cauterize with the entire burning instrument called "point".
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the care of the cure that we have had before, as long as they are healthy.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez;	When the liver has pain from heat and moisture and excessive swelling, as long as it is forced out of its natural condition by excesses;
et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil;	and the pains are treated as we have said in the divisions, and it does not help them much, so it is necessary that the pains be removed from their base.
et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient;	and the sign of three cautery according to this form and this figure and this quantity on the liver, under the hypochondres, where the neck of the ox comes.
et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi;	and there should be space between each cautery the thickness of a finger.
et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere;	and let the cautery be long as the body, and do not press much with your hand on the whole cautery.
et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez;	and let it be red as much only as half of the cure, and let the pains be straight up on its feet.
et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais;	and if he cannot, then lie down and stretch out his legs, and relieve his arms.
et c’est li forme:	and this is the form:
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors;	And if you wish, then cauterize these wounds with a surgical tool, if you are skilled and wise in the art, and be careful not to burn too much of the body, for you would make it drier all over.
et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	and that it does not come to boiling, for the wounds are very delicate there, and the salves to see.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile:	When he has an abscess in the liver, and you know whether it is in the flesh of the liver or in the tissue:
s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort;	If he is in a cart, he does not feel much pain from the misalignment.
et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	And if he is on a bed, he feels great pain.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste;	And when this treatment is done, it is necessary that the misaligned joint be straightened above his head;
et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	and then bend the limb where the abscess is, and then heat the cauterizing iron which is shaped like a thistle, of which this is the form:
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers;	And cauterize with the iron until the curing is complete, and it comes just short of touching the skin, until the pain is completely gone;
aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez;	After the treatment according to the treatment of bandages until they are healed;
et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	and it should only be used by those who have long studied in the art of medicine, and by whose hands these diseases have never been corrupted.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	Therefore, it can be boldly overcome, and in all ways, it seems to me that it is worth leaving it alone.
dou cautere de pleuresin	The fire cautery of the chest
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere:	The ancients said that one should do the following with fire cautery of aristolochia roots:
pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois;	Take a long aristolochia root, the longest you can find, and let it dry, and let it be as thick and long as your finger;
et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize I cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et II petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe;	and grind it in oil, and take it to the fire, and cauterize the fire cautery between the eyebrow and the eye, and II small cauteries a little bit below where the hair is not;
et II cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc;	and two cautery needles between the fifth rib and the sixth, in declining backward a little.
et I cautere emmi le pis, et I autre sus l’estomac, et I entre II espaules, et II as II costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre II espaules;	and one cautery needle at the lowest point, and the other above the stomach, and one between the two shoulders, and two on the ribs just in front of the cautery between the shoulders.
et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	and do not press your hand, but open it as if smelling something.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme;	And they said that no man used fire cautery like the razor, and they sharpened it and put it between the ribs until it came to the abscess.
et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	and it jumped out of the pain, as we have said in the abscess of the liver.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	But in this work, there is fear or the pain kills now, or a fistula comes which cannot be healed.
de la mice	of the mouse
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent III manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the disease of the mouse as we have said in the divisions of treatments, and it does not improve, then they resort to three methods of cauterization that are good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant;	When one method is such that you make three cauteries, or four, lining up according to the length of the mouse, according to the shape of the liver cauterization that we have mentioned before;
et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos;	and do not press your hand too much on the whole cauterization, and let the hairs be on its back;
et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule;	and another method of cauterization is such that you heat the cauterization that has two needles, as we have shown in the shoulder dislocation;
et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	and lift the chest that is in the place of the mouse, or where the hairs of the pain come from the left, and let the elevations that you lift the chest according to its curve, according to the length of the body, and the cauterization be according to the width of the body.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII.	After boiling the two needles until the threads are perceived from the other side, then draw out the cauterizing iron, and thus you will have four.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	And if you see that it is all cauterized with three needles.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After treatment when the patient has gotten pus by long tension, and it is worthwhile to do the other treatments mentioned before.
de ydropisie	For hydropy, instruct the patient to let the h
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	Cauterization is not useful for hydrops, except in the manner called "ascites".
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis;	When you treat it according to the methods that we have mentioned in divisions, and your treatment does not help, then it is necessary that you make four cauterizations around the wound, and one above the stomach, and one above the liver, and one above the kidneys, and one behind the back above the spine, and one at the worst place.
et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	and let the cauterizations be close to the surface of the skin.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere;	After leaving the cauterizer overnight for healing, do not let the care of the wound after the cauterization be neglected.
et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les II ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	And healing will proceed swiftly, and both intentions will be achieved with God's help.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit;	The shape of the cauterizer for the belly is shown in the drawing that we have before us.
et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	And this one for the back is oval-shaped, as it is shown above.
de l’enfleure des piez	of the inflammation of the feet
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire;	When the feet are swollen to the one who is hydropathic, and they are plain of awake citron, it is necessary that you cauterize above the back between the auricular and the annular.
et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	Lightly touch the skin with the cauterizing tool, moving towards the wound.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	And do not enter too deeply, thus avoiding the yellowish part, and let the cauteries be done according to this form:
Aprés fai sus II jambes II cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire;	After performing two cautery treatments on each leg at the tip of the sharp needle;
et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe;	Either the cautery is long, one from behind and the other from in front, within the leg;
et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse;	and leave the cautery above for a longer time to heal, which is in its place.
aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After the other treatments that we have mentioned.
de la menoison	of the menstruation
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures;	When the solution of the stomach comes from cold and moisture, as long as the retentive and digestive powers that are in the stomach and in the intestines are blocked, and cannot be treated by other means of treatment.
et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai I grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule;	and you see the patient suffering greatly and of great virtue, then make a large cauterization across the stomach according to what he has spoken before about the cauterization of the stomach, in the cauterization circles.
et IIII cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout I cautere clavile subtil, et II cauteres sus les hainches.	and IV cauterizations around the belly subtly at all the cauterization clavile subtle, and II cauterizations above the buttocks.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et I cautere sus chaicun yle, et II petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see the moisture abundant and the pain suffering, then perform the fire cautery above the knuckle, and I cautery above each rib, and two small cauteries below the stomach, for the cure is profitable when it has good aid.
de la cure des emorroydes	of the treatment of worms
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres:	When the tumors are at their base or one or more, and are old and are large humors cold and moist corrupted, and are treated as we have said in divisions, and it does not improve, then make cauterizations.
III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois;	Above the spine of the back, which is all before unprotected a little and a little in triangular, and with the fire cauterization outside the belly two doses.
et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile;	And if you think that his stomach is cooled, and the meat does not cook, and one sees the face swells, then the face is given a great cauterization above the stomach, as it is previously said, and the other above the liver, and the other above the lungs with all the cauterization.
et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	And let the cauterization remain long.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After treatment, the limb as long as it is healthy.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the cartilage that is called "thelul
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit;	When you cut the skin, if it is burned like a razor, and then put it all burned above the skin that was cut.
et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort;	and let your hand move towards the base of the wound as the cautery approaches, to prevent it from burning.
fai ceu une fois ou II, et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit;	Do this once or twice, and if there is much althelul, then cauterize each one as we have said.
aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez;	after the healing of the wounds, as long as they are healthy.
et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	and if you cauterize with a large cautery above the alchatim, it will have greater help.
de plaie mal curee	of a badly treated wound
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the wound cannot be treated by a surgeon or opened, as we will tell you in its place, then comes a disease that cannot be healed except by cauterization.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	When any comes fistula, and it is alerted and given purgatives and corrupted moisture, then you must provide for the whole of a thin tent, and guard that you cleanse the tent as much as it has of preparation.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing;	After the cautery seems sharp like a razor, and the probe is inserted into the fistula according to the amount that enters, and then restart the cautery until the corrupted tissue is removed, once, or twice, or three times, depending on the amount of tissue that needs to be removed.
et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	and guard against fire the veins that are within, and great veins.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans;	if the fistula goes to the center of the bladder and intestine, then guard against these, and do not make any other cuts except in the place where it is needed, and think that it is not healed.
aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement;	after healing the wound as long as it is healthy, and if the wound is not clean, and the matter is removed along with the scab, then clean that the wound is completely healed.
et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font;	and if the matter is not removed, clean that the wound is infected, and corrode the bone at the source.
et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	And thus, as one of those that we will say in its place.
de la maladie des reins	of the disease of the kidneys
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit;	When pain from cold and great moisture comes to rain, and does not take the form of a woman, then it is necessary that you make the fire cauterization on both sides of the rain with the clavile cauterizer that we have already mentioned.
et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra III cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	And if we cauterize it in the middle, it will have three cauterizations in a row, and they will be greater help.
de la vessie	of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et I a destre et I a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce;	When the bladder is small and weak from cold and moisture, and the hairs retain the urine, then make the fire cauterization in the part before the bladder, where the hairs begin to grow, and on both sides, and let each cauterization be as long as a pin.
et li fais I cautere defuers le dos, ou II se tu en as besoing;	and if you have a back cauterization, or if you have a fear of it.
et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	and the cauterizer should be shaped according to what has been mentioned before.
de la marris	of the marsh
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde;	When the wound is cold and moist, and does not allow for conception, and the flowers are corrupted and their termination is late;
et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor:	and when they come, it causes great pain:
adonques covient il c’on li faice III cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et II cauteres defuers le dos;	therefore it is necessary to make three cauterizations around the wound, as we have said of the cauterization of the bladder, and two cauterizations behind the back;
et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	and the cauterizer should be shaped as mentioned before.
de la hainche	of the waist
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble;	When the thick, viscous moisture descends to the buttocks of the hip, and for this reason it moves out of its place, and the signs are that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together.
et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a I cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle;	and is found in the lower parts of the thigh, so it is necessary to cauterize the injury above the buttocks at the hip, similar to a circle, and sign before the limb around the buttock as it returns, so that the buttock is within the circle;
et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	and if the cauterization is such as those used to cauterize the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai III cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs;	And if this cauterization is not present, make three cauterizations of large olive oil, and let the cauterizations be similar to all the wounds;
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and the healer as long as they are healthy.
de la dolor de la hainche	of the pain in the loins
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene:	When pain comes in the side of the waist, and it is from cold and moisture, and the misalignments are cured by what we have said in the division and the cure does not work, and the disease is ancient:
adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	then it is necessary that you purge the misalignments of large humors from foul pills or other good-like pills.
Aprés li fai cautere;	After he does cauterization;
et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres:	and the manner of cauterization is according to the second method:
c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	that is to say, together with burning medicines and fire cauterization.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz:	Fire cauterization is done in many ways, such as:
que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire;	that you cauterize on the back of the hipbone III triangular cauterizations in this form, and it has good depth and great, and there is between each cauterization a space the size of a thumb, and let the cauterization be olive oil.
aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	Never cauterize in the middle of the backbone, because it has four in this form:
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche;	And if you see, if you cauterize with the cauterization of the circle that we have said before in the dislocation of the hipbone;
mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	However, make it in such a way that the circle contains the entire chest, and all the spines are straight.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	And this is the way it is done in sciatica, when the pain remains in the hip, and does not reach the thigh or leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc;	And if it comes to the thigh and leg, make two cauterizations where the hairs are, and one cautery above the ankle four fingers, on the right side a little bit.
et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur;	and let the cauteries be sharp, and straighten the spine.
et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	and if the hairs feel that the pain extends to two fingers or near the knee, cauterize where it feels the pain three or four times with the cauterizing iron called "points".
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus;	And if the profession is, then make more of it;
et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if the pain is on the side of the thigh towards the groin, then cauterize with a pointed or circular cautery, and be careful in all your cauterizations that you do not leave the cautery for too long, burning nerves and large arteries, and do not cause greater harm and contraction.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	And I myself have seen many who have cauterized above the ankle of the foot, and left it too long that the leg was completely bent, and the foot also, and all the bones were perforated and corrupted.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	After a stomach purge resulting in death.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	And if the pain is in both parts together, apply cauterization to one and the other, in this manner.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce;	And the wise say in the cauterization of the loins, because of this method, make such a needle and it should be at the top as large as a naval of a digit, or somewhat less, and it should be placed between the ribs and one prick after another at a distance equal to the quantity of a new pence;
et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait;	and let there be pliers over two parts, and they should also be like pliers, and there should be one good iron tongs.
et c’est li forme:	and this is the form:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit;	and let it be heated until it is completely red and smells like metal, and then put it on the board of the back of the misaligned shoulder, and turn it over to the healthy side.
et lou cauterize une fois I cautere reont et lou laisse III jors;	and the cauterization should be done once the burning iron is removed and left for three days.
et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens;	and then apply a poultice of butter, and leave the wound open for a long time.
aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	after the treatment of ointment until it is healed.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent;	Albucasis says that we use this cauterization little due to its frightful appearance, and few see those who use it;
et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	and all the time this is a good cauterization, which can bear suffering, and where it becomes effective.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi;	The cauterizing instruments of medicine are such that you make an instrument with cuts on the edge of the door, and it is either of brass or iron at one end, and in the high part it has II us, and between each quantity of the size of a finger;
et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	and they are open underneath and above, and they join together according to this form:
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche;	After placing the board on the patient's back lying on their side, and quickly placing your hand on the board of the back;
aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	then pour between the two circles of the hot water which is heated by the fire I pot, and let it stand for an hour with the heat, and suffer the hairs the heat and the burning of it.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu;	For it truly has the same effect as fire;
et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit;	and when the burning has passed, hold the instrument with your hand and lift the back gently, and let it stand for three hours, and put on butter until the black part of the scar is removed.
et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait;	and let it lie for three days so that putrefaction may pass;
et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	and this would be the final help after the treatment of burns until they are healed.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument;	And if the pain has extended to the thigh or leg, use the same tool that you used in the groin to increase it.
et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	and this is the method of the hot bath, and I have written about it in the treatment of medicine.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	Take quicklime and live chalk, as much of one as the other, and crush them together, and put them in a new earthenware pot.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir;	or if he has a small puncture except for the point of a razor that can be closed;
et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main;	and put that one in the other, and well pounded, with alum and chalk and sweet oil until there are two of them above the powders that you will have well prepared in your hand;
et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	and let it remain in this way until the water and blood descend, then take all of it, and pour it over the salt and over the alkali as before.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres.	And if it is very watery, it should be administered in the form of drops or cauteries for other members.
Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	Because it does this great work like fire, and if other medicines are cauterized in the same way as this, such as terisia and myrrh and salt with soap, all these things mixed together.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	Galen tells us of a cure where some people were cured of the pain in the back and sciatica, and the louse was much, and he said that no other cure was made, and that they were cured once when this cure was made, and he bathed as it teaches afterwards.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie;	And in this way tell the patient to apply a fresh and dry leaf of lime tree, and grind it well with a little grease, and put on the back and thighs and legs where the pain is, and tie it.
et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	and he leaves it for three hours, by which time the pain has subsided.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	Then make him enter a warm bath until the heart is slightly warmed, and then make him enter a bed, and the pain will disappear entirely and he will be healed.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	And advise that no one should use such cauteries or medicines unless after the evacuation of blood.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout;	And Dioscorides says that when the vein is cauterized with the heat of a goat's horn, it helps greatly.
et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	and it must be done in this way with the cauteries.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	Take another and beat the old oil, and put it on the fossa that is between the thumb and the other one called foscile.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains;	After taking dry goat's horn, and putting it in the fire until it becomes charcoal, and then placing it on a cloth, and leaving it until it is cool.
et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee;	and repeat this process, and do not stop until you think it is near the ribs, and that the pain has ceased.
et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	And this method of cauterization is called "goat's-foot cauterization".
de la dolor dou dos	of the great pain of two
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, whether from falling or from impact or from too great evacuation, or from similar matter spread coldly, none of these situations is worth cauterizing, because it is better for those who have recently been infused with cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne V cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir;	It is necessary to apply foul-smelling pills or similar things on the affected area, three lines wide, where the pain is located, and in each line five cauterizations or more according to its virtue and quantity that the wound can bear.
et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»;	And it should be made with cauterizations according to the cauterization called "spiked".
et se tu vues, fai III cauteres ou IIII au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	And if you see, make three or four cauterizations according to the cauterization called "claw-like" in this form.
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor;	Often this disease comes to small children, and the signs of onset are that they have stiffness in their neck when moving, and fear.
et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	and you tread on the last spinous process of the back and in us the appearance that comes above the other spinous processes.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see it and you see it healed, if you cauterize it with this fire cautery in this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	If the fire cautery grasps every part of the spinous process.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	And if you see, if you cauterize around the spinous process with this fire cautery holding II lines or III, and they are close to each other.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	After healing the limb as we have said, according to how it is healthy, and be careful not to apply the cauterization in a place that is swollen with nerves.
de la dolor des jointes	of the pain of the joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere:	When joint pain from moisture that is spread to each limb of the body, and when pain comes in feet, which they properly call «podagra», and when it is a cold cause and cures of medicines cannot cure it, then it is treated by cauterization in this way:
fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	make the most of cauterizations around the joint of the foot, and the cauterizing iron should be in this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	And if there is a reason to hold the face down with the sharp instrument, then apply the entire cauterization process that is called "point".
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire;	And if the pains come from the knees and other joints, and they often do, then apply the fire cautery over each joint three or four times on each part, with olive oil throughout.
et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you have more skill, then do more, but do not hold your hand too far unless the pain is already well-managed.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	And if the pains descend to the jaw and back, then administer the cauterization that we have mentioned in this chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes;	And if the pains are in the hands, then apply it around the knuckle two lines deep;
et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main;	and if there is still no pain, then apply it over each joint and on the hair of the hand;
et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	and if the pains come from the elbows or shoulders, then cauterize each part, and apply good management to the pain and appropriate medicines.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	For if you provide good care and purge the humor, it will be healed with the help of God.
de la routure dou syfac	of the toothache
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor;	When a fracture occurs in anger, and the bowels descend to the groin, and this is newly, so it is necessary that when you see it to heal, that it does not move that day;
et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre;	and that he uses things that lower the abdomen, so that the bowels do not descend from his abdomen;
aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors;	after the fracture is seated on his back between your hands, and he commands that he tinges his shoulder until the bowels are repaired, and he pulls it to his sides, and signs of this are similar to half a circle above the chest;
puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Then heat the cauterizing iron of this form:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	so long as it is white and sheds senselessness.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu;	Then reset the dislocated joint;
et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier;	and the assistant wipes his hand over it so they do not return.
et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains;	And work well on the thighs with the hairs, and put disinfectant on him on the muscle and on the skin above the thighs, and the other on the lowest part that cleans his hands.
puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os;	Then place the cauterizing iron on the sign at all your hand, and hold it straight and hold it until you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, then continue another until you come just to the bone.
et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere;	and you must guard carefully that the pus does not escape while you are performing the cauterization.
que tu ne le brulasses;	that you do not burn it.
et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	and that by this means the hairs do not die, or any other harm.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	And if you do not come to the bone with the fire cautery, your work is worthless.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure;	And it is necessary that the cautery for children be delicate according to their size, and for large people also large according to their size;
aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	after three days, care for the wound of the cautery with butter until the scar is formed.
aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee;	after the care of other remedies until it is healed, and grind the hairs 40 days on their back until the wound is well healed.
et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	and it is necessary that its [the patient's] restraints be loosened long enough, so that the bile does not spill when he attempts to go into the chambers.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors;	And after forty days, when he wishes to get up, let him be given a well-made bandage, and for another forty days.
et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire;	and let him have good rest, that he works little and avoids too much overeating and drinking, and too much loud noise.
et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	And when he does this teaching, if he is entirely healthy.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And I will say after the treatment of cutting into his chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	of the tearing of the belly
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur;	When wounds come in other bellies and are known, and you see that they do not grow any more, let him have the fire cauterization according to its quantity, and let it be applied to the third part of the wound.
aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit;	After the treatment according to what we have said;
et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	and none of the ancients have said that it should be cauterized with the fire cautery at three angles according to this form:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	but the first sign is to bend and make a line across the width of the rip, and another one after, and keep your hand on all the cauterizing iron.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But the first cauteries are lighter and quieter.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	of ancient pain in any limb
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	When pain comes to any limb, whether to fall or to pierce, and this pain lasts long, and the medical cure is not effective, then it must be cauterized with the cauterizing iron called "poins", and the cauteries should follow the length of the limb and its smallness and weakness and strength and location of twists and pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien;	if it is healthy after the first cauterization, it is good;
se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	if not, begin another cauterization above the first one, for it is usually the case that it should be done to the member that is nearest, because it is necessary to do the cauterizations until the hairs are healed.
de meselerie	of mutilation
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	Mutilations are never treated with cauterization by great help, and even the disease that comes from the putrefaction of pus and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief:	If you see that it is not being cauterized, take care if the disease is at the beginning, and if it has been treated according to what we have said in the division, and does not spread or remain, and you doubt that the corruption will not spread throughout the wound, then make five cauterizations above the head:
I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous;	I place the head to the north, and the other towards the forehead at the end of the temples.
et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel;	and II above the two horns, and I behind the hitterel.
et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir;	and let your hand be so that the cautery comes close to the bone, and as much as the scabs come out so that the vapors of the large humors can escape.
et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	and cauterize over the small one according to what it is in front.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse;	And if the injury is scattered everywhere;
et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et I cautere en som lou neis, et II cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et VI cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et I grant sus la crupie et I autre delez, et II sus les II espaules;	and it is clearly present, then you must cauterize with these cautery that we have said or chief, and the cautery in the nose, and II cauterizes above the spine of the neck, and VI cauterizes above the spine of the back, and I large above the buttocks and I other below, and II above the two shoulders;
et II sus les coutes, et II sus les tendrons dou pis, et I sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains;	and II above the ears, and II above the tendons of the worst kind, and I above each joint of the hands and feet, and above the wounds of the hands.
et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler;	and guard against the nerves that are above the lower back, so you do not burn them.
et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et I autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et I autre sus lou foie.	and never make a fire cauterization above the bone of the thumb, and one on the other bone of the stomach, and one on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite;	And it is said that the more you make a fire cauterization, the less you help, and move it away from the patient.
et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	And it is said that the hairs do not feel pain as much as healthy people do, because the body is already corrupted.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	It is necessary that the cauterization be large and small according to the members and the joints, according to what you will find in the ways of irons.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	After curing the wound with flour and honey and other cures until it is healed.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre;	When inflammation comes to any member and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, and it does not heal, then you should cauterize the member according to its size and smallness.
et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur;	and either the cauterization goes deep into the flesh of the member;
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	then the treatment of wounds until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure;	And never cauterize by hand and at the wrist and back, at the end of the member that makes the member immobile, and thus if it is ossified the inflammation;
et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	and no one should interfere with it unless they know the members and the veins moving through the body.
de albaras	do not comment on whether the translation is accurate or
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color;	When the disease known as «albaras» is awakened, and medical treatment does not help, then cauterize with a cautery a little in front, according to the amount of the skin that is affected, until the whiteness is removed, and it is moved its color;
puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie;	then the cure of flour and lentils with rose oil and plantain leaves, and blood of pigeon and blood of almond, of each one a part;
et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	and let it be mixed together, and let it be bound with a cloth, and let it be applied to the limb until it is healed.
li cure de chancre par cautere	the treatment of chancre by cauterization
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	When chancre appears at the beginning, and you see it stop spreading, then cauterize it with a cauterizing iron that seems like a circle, all around the edge of the chancre.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre;	And all the wise people said that one should also do a fire cauterization at the center of the chancre.
et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois;	And this does not seem good to me, because I think it will not be ulcerated and corrupted, and I have never seen it happen.
et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	And the more important thing is that it be cauterized around, with the cauterizing iron called "circle", as we have said in many cauterizations.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	of the swelling that cannot die
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens;	When someone has a disease called "adubelati", and it takes a long time to die or because of the excess that it causes or because of the age of the malady when they are old (that is, too old) and they have little blood, or for lack of tension;
et tu la vues haster de meurer:	and you see it happening quickly:
adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant;	then cauterize around the wound with many small cauteries by pricking;
aprés le laisse ensi.	after leaving it thus.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	For it will hasten to die.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see it pierce through the entire cauterization, then heat the cauterization from where this is the form:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	And place your hand in the middle of this disease called "adubelati" until the cauteries have perforated the skin, and be such that the cauteries feel it beforehand in a similar manner as the course of the pus is alleviated.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	After the treatment until they are completely healed.
li cure dou feu par fer	The treatment of fire by iron.
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	Another way of disease is called "corrodens", and is nothing but a moisture in the member, as it corrupts the members like dry wood.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est;	If you see this disease in the limb that can suffer cauteries and fire together, then heat the small and sharp cauteries greatly according to what is needed for the limb or the disease.
aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	after cauterizing all parts until you eradicate all the corruption, and nothing remains of it, that everything that is corrupted be removed completely.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	Then leave it three days, and apply the cauterized lead above the wounds, suffering great pain with oil until all the charred flesh is removed and all the corruption.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	After the treatment of wounds, they generate pus.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin;	And if you see after three days that healthy pus does not rise, it is good.
et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	And if it does not, then restart the cauterization above the part that is remaining decayed.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu;	And this wound has never been treated with medicine in place of fire cauterization;
mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division:	But all fire cauterization is of greater help, and I have already mentioned the treatment of medicine in the division:
pren la quant tu en as mestier.	Take it when you have the opportunity.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	of the joints which come to the feet
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	Many times it happens that at the feet by deficiency, a disease arises which is called "clubfoot" according to our understanding, and it is a great disfigurement which makes the foot look ugly.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	And the cauteries of this disease are in two ways.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	That is to say, fire cautery, and ice-hot cauterization.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges;	Fire cauterization is such that you heat it as if it were a pen of lead, and it should be made of good iron at the measure that it can penetrate the nail from all parts, and that it has narrow margins;
aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou;	After you put everything on top of the nail, and turn your hand all around the nail until it reaches the end of the nail.
et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture;	and let it stay there for three days until it begins to rot.
puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	Then make a poultice of wild, crushed herbs with yarn, and leave the poultice on all night, and the nail will fall off and be pulled out from its roots.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then cure the limb of inflammation by applying warmth until it is healed.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude;	And if they are converted by the wound, and often in the hands and feet, then it is necessary that you reapply cauterization with very hot fire.
et est en teil maniere:	and is in a similar manner:
pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues;	Take a needle of iron or steel, or a pen of quill, and place it over the nail and the wart, that is to say, prick the warts.
et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine;	And place the needle over it so that it pierces all around, then put a drop of hot wax, and hold your hand firmly, and press your hand in turning so that the edge of the needle comes to the root of the nail, and find the hot wax penetrating deeply just at the root;
et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre;	and bear the pain a little from the burning of the hot wax for an hour.
puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	then let it remain thus, and it will fall off at all its roots.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	Then do another one, until you have checked all those that are in the body, then cure the wounds that cause harm to the heart.
li cure dou trembler	cure the patient of trembling
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices IIII cauteres ou IV sus l’espinee dou dos, I cautere entre chescune espinee;	When some tremble from cold or fever and chills or other, it is necessary that you make four burns or four above the spine of the back, one cauterization between each spine.
et I cautere ou pez, et I sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire;	and one or two below the belly, and one above the stomach at the olive cauterization;
si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	it will let the tremble, and hasten the health from the disease of cold.
des pustules puans	of pus-filled blisters
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	No times have appeared from before with the body covered in wounds or pustules that come from large rotten substances.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule:	if it is necessary at the first when they appear that one make cauterization above each head of the pustule:
un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	a thin cauterization of birch, of which the point should be held in the fire, or of the root of aristolochia long, or at the lens cauterization.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez;	And never use cauterization at the beginning when they appear, according to this method, and it cannot grow more, but is destroyed by the excess from which they come, and are healed.
mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	But it must be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	when the artery is cut
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses;	Many times there are great flows of blood from the artery that is cut at the wound that comes to the surrounding parts, or to the incision of the abscess, or to the cauterization of the member, and similar things.
et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	And it is a very painful thing to stop.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus;	And whenever it happens to anyone, you must quickly place your finger on the wound of the vein, and press it very tightly until the bleeding stops from your finger, and no more comes out.
puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge;	Then apply the fire cautery with various sizes of blistering olive oil beads, both small and large, until they are all red.
puis empren I, ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	Then apply I, whether large or small depending on the wound and where the artery is located, and place the fire cautery above that vein where you hold your hand, and keep the fire cautery as long as the wound does not bleed too much.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement I autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if the first one fails and you lift your other hand above the vein, and the cauterizer is extinguished, then quickly take the other cauterizers that are at the fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez;	And do not stop doing this one after the other until the wound is completely healed.
et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide;	And be careful not to burn the nerve that is nearby, and that no other harm comes from the wound.
et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des IIII manieres que nos avons dit:	and it is said that when without cutting the artery, one cannot smell it immediately when the artery is large, unless by one of the four methods that we have mentioned.
ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc;	or by fire cauterization, or by extraction when it is not treated, or by strong force of thread, or by medicines placed above that have the power to smell blood.
et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	and it should be tied and held firmly in place.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Whoever administers the tightening of ropes or other things overheated, or similar things, does not benefit unless not.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne;	And if it has happened to anyone and they have no remedy present, then they should place their finger index above the wound of the vein as we have mentioned, and well strain until it is smelled over the wound and over the vein;
et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez;	and it should not be moved, but it should be massaged with cold frequently until it is very cold and the wound is frozen and filled and closed.
et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	and make inquiries about the cause of which he should use cauteries and medicines.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Here begins the second book of remedies for tails
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres;	We have told you in the first chapter all diseases in which it is necessary to use fire cauteries or burning medicines, and the questions and causes and instruments and forms of cauteries;
et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	and I have placed that chapter on the shoulder joints down to the feet, and I will go to this chapter by the same way because it is easier to find out what we want.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And therefore as I begin this chapter, it is necessary, dear son, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first of the cauteries, and for this reason it requires greater caution.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses;	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things;
ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	I warn you not to undertake foolishness.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	For many ways of people come for treatment.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice;	if they come from such people who have become so with their disease that they die immediately due to the fear of their disease, and the greatness of its evil.
et de ces doit on avoir paor.	and one must fear these.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit:	And of these there are those who give you understanding, and say:
«atendez, je sui garis»;	Wait, I am a gardener.
et li maladie est despitouse.	and the disease is difficult to treat.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los;	It should only be granted to those who come to you with this manner, but put more great caution in your honor than in your convenience, and do not open wildly but wisely of what you are certain and have taken and lost.
et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie;	and use prognosis and indication in the treatment of your diseases that health may be converted.
et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	And this will help you to gain good reputation, and glory, and memory for the long time.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Very dear son, Our Lords grant you good understanding and straightness, and if you wish to breathe from the holy inspiration of His hand, indeed.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	I have ordered you to read this chapter by examining other chapters, according to what is before or after the chapter on cauteries, which I have previously provided from head to foot, so that you can find it more easily.
dou chief plein d’aigue	The head is full of sharp points.
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant;	Know that this disease often comes to infants at birth, and when the neck is held too tightly in the child;
et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	And never is there a reason given that one might not be able to.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors;	And I have never seen this disease except in children, and all those that I have seen died from it.
et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	Therefore, it seems to me that it is better to avoid this work in such treatments.
Et je vis I enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir;	And I saw a child who was suffering from this disease, and the head became increasingly swollen each day until it could no longer support itself.
et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os;	And it was believed that the moisture caused its death, and this moisture is gathered outside of the bone above the sinus, between the gum and the bone.
et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large;	and the work is such that if moisture is between the bone and the joint, and abscesses are small, you should make an incision in the head of the bone wide;
et soit ausi longe com II nous, tant que li mostor corre;	and it should be as long as ours, until the moisture flows out;
et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	and then in the shape of a space:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai II fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is more extensive, and the abscess is larger, then make two cuts in the shape of a cross, according to this form.
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut:	and if the moisture is outside the bone, and the signs that you see the commissures of the head open from each part, and the sharp pain when you press it with your hand inside, and it does not return to you:
si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief III fendures selonc ceste maniere:	if it is necessary that you make three incisions in the head of the bone in this manner:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	And after the incision, remove all the moisture.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor;	After applying bandages and powders to the wounds, and putting wine and oil on them, leave them like this until the fifth hour.
puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	Then remove the bandages, and cure the wound with tents and poultices, and leave the shoulder equally strained, and feed the patient dried meat to relieve the moisture until the limb is comfortable and healthy.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue;	And another way of incision is that you look at the size of the abscess and the sharpness of the needle;
car aucune fois est elle devant;	for it is never the same.
aucune fois derrier;	never behind.
aucune fois en destre;	no time on the right;
et aucune fois en senestre.	and no time on the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir;	Then cut open where the abscess is open, and fill the sore, and make it according to what you have the power to do;
et warde que tu ne coper l’artere;	and be careful not to cover the artery;
et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	and bring out blood, so that the hairs do not die from the separation of blood and the evacuation of moisture.
de reume	of return
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les II arteres.	When it happens to anyone with a disease called "cataract" in the eyes or in the pupil, and the disease is ancient, and medical treatment does not help much, then the cure is to cauterize with what they cover the two arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief;	Therefore, although you cover it, the hairs must do their own thing;
aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel;	then rub the sore with a rough cloth until the arteries open, then hold the hairs to all the cloth;
puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues;	Then look at the vein that is bleeding, and the vessels on both sides are behind the ears, and they are not yet stopped.
puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	Then sign the vessels of the artery, then cut both with a sharp knife until the wound reaches the bone, and it should be through the wide part of the neck.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com II dois au traver.	And if you see, push the adhesive away from the artery and cover it above, cutting as it should through the middle.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is cut, if the blood flows continuously from above.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os;	And if the artery does not open at first, then you must measure the quantity of the space of three fingers, then sign the vessels and cut to the bone.
et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere;	And it should be six centimeters if it is necessary to put the arrow out, and perhaps a little more or less, depending on what the wound can tolerate, and the closure of the artery.
puis regarde la plaie:	then look at the wound
s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	if it remains above the bone point sharp, if the copper that is applied does not come out, then wash the wound and bind it, and the ointment treatment until it is healed.
de emigrainne	of the shoulder
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When the ancient shoulder dislocation comes, and the cautery is old, due to the moisture of tears and chills in the temples and old age and similar things, and it is treated by methods of medical cures and nothing else helps, then we should strain the arteries of the temples and cauterize them as we have told.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit;	And the method of extraction of them is that the hairs of his temples face backwards, and listen to the artery which opens in the temple, because it opens well by its pulsation, and is quickly restored afterward in all men who are too fat.
et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement;	and if it is restored, then hold his neck with some cloths, then wipe the limb with any rough cloth, and soak the limb in hot water until the artery opens clearly.
puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	Then take the spatula of which this is the form:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie;	Then lightly scrape the skin until you reach the artery, then cut it upwards with pincers, and remove all the threads that are adhered to each part.
et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	And if the artery is thin, then bend it to the tip of the needle, then cover that part according to the amount of the two joints.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	For if it is not covered, it will not heal completely.
Et trai dou sanc des VI c/, jusc’a III;	And draw out some blood from the sixth vein, just enough to reach the third.
et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en II leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc;	And if the artery is large, then it is necessary to tie it in two lengths of a strong silk thread, so that no blood comes before the suppuration of the wound, and comes out with the discharge of blood.
puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les II liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez;	then remove the excess that is between the two bones in that same hour, and then, if you see, if he cauterizes with the cauterizing iron directly to the bone as long as the affected parts are removed.
et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	and this is the difficult work, if the wounds do not have fever and he is of hot constitution.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors:	For the cauterizing is to finish the swellings:
por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	because it is of greater help against swellings.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites;	or it is necessary for the extraction of veins that one fills the limb with old cotton and places on well-made bandages;
et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And when they are reset, if there are dry remedies that create heat and tents, until they are healed.
et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez;	And if without cutting the artery as much as you work, then you must quickly apply heat with cauterization, or use the glass of vitriol and strain it in your hand that the wound is not soaked.
et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient;	And if you do not have this present, then put salt on the wound as much as you can until the wound is frozen, and raise the limb in cold water until it stops bleeding, and strain it as it should be.
et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de II pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	And what is more difficult and lighter in the extraction of the artery is that you cauterize the vein with this cauterization of two parts, but the cutting should be well spaced to last longer without heat.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	When instruments are too tightly fitted, they hold less heat.
Et doit avoir entre les II coutelz I doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les II leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en II leus;	And it should have between the two knives a space of about an inch, and then when you have marked the two lines, and you melt the hot iron above as far as it comes near to the bone, and cut the vein in two lines.
et soient esloigniet entre les II chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout;	and they should be separated between the two shoulder blades because it is not safe to use this cauterization at all times.
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And this is the shape of the cauterization:
des larmes	tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis;	When the tears of the eyes are flowing from the veins that are above the skin of the forehead, and it does not profit much from medical treatment, and you see the face of the patient becoming distorted, and it feels as if it is trembling.
et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	and they are kept oiled and moist so that the hair of the papers is burned, and the papers are charred, and scorched by the heat of the tears, if there is need for this care.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front;	And they call the ancient "curative contusion", and you should do for the back to the evil that has this disease the hairs that it has or front, then make three cuts or front equally according to the length of the front.
et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres;	and it should be one of the cuts just like the second one completely to the front in raising down just above the neck, and the others two on the ribs by above the papers, and guard from the incision of the arteries that are at the two ribs by above the papers;
et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins;	and keep your hand away from the continuation of the lower jaw, and let each wound have a quantity of three drops through the joints.
et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	and have a sponge piece and wipe the blood off the arrow, then pour the acid of two parts of this is the form:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision;	from the incision which is just above the second incision;
et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les II fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	and scrape all that is between the two wounds to the whole face which is above the bone, then make another part of the same incision just below the second, and then extract this acid.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	if you put the instrument called "curette" into the first cut, it is very sharp on one side and blunt on the other, and this is its shape:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	and place the sharp edge of the instrument towards the wound and the blunt side towards the bone, and scrape until it reaches the other cut.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer;	and cover all the vessels that descend from the head as much as the incision is continued just above the opening of the wound, and then make another part in the same wound just below the other.
et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris;	and then strain out the blood equally, and express the wound for the blood taken;
puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne;	then put in each wound a piece of old linen cloth, and put on bandages soaked in wine and oil and vinegar, and keep away from abscesses.
et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and the patient takes off the linen, and is administered a large amount of salt, then the healing ointment of basilicon with rose oil, and other remedies to cure wounds, until they are healed.
dou reume des eulz	renewal of the eyes
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees;	When anyone comes to cauterize as is customary, and you see the eyes tightened and small, and weakened vision, and burnt papers;
et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue;	and the hairs prick, and if they prick in the forehead, it causes great pain and the hairs are discharged.
adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	Therefore, treat these accidents with many incisions, and the bleeding that comes from it is like this.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	And it is that you command the eyelid to turn back, then make a great cut across the eyelid, and another one wide at the edge of the eye.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os;	And begin with the cut on the right temple to the left, and the incision should be just to the bone;
et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier;	and avoid your hand from the nerves of the temples that move at the side;
et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin;	and when the bone is exposed, wipe all the blood onto a sponge, and then clean between the two lips of the cut and put in thick cotton, and test with linen;
puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut;	Then place bandages soaked in wine and oil above it, and guard against abscess.
quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	When it is broken, it is necessary that you rub the bone until charcoal begins to grow, then treat with things that cause vomiting, which make one vomit.
En teil maniere:	In a similar manner:
pren II parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine IIII parties, et en fai emplaustre;	Take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of alum, and make a poultice.
et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	and administer it in these wounds to cause vomiting throughout.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the stoppage of the ears
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des IIII choses:	All that which drips into our ears is one of the four things:
ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer;	or grains, or beasts, or stones from the mine or similar things such as iron.
ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois;	For seed, as you say, peas, beans;
ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	or liquids that are clear and thin and similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	When it sticks in the ear stone or other kind of thing that does not fit well in the ear, do not let it grow in the ear, if you put the ear to the sunlight.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction;	If you see the stone, if there is any drop of purple oil or mustard oil, then moisten extraction.
et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine;	and the patient spits out of condition, and the nose is stopped when the sneezing comes, and puts inside the ear pieces of cloth or wool.
et estent l’oreille au desus.	and the ear is raised up.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure;	Many times it comes from this cure.
et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	and if it does not come, then moisten extraction with thin prongs, of which this is the form:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin;	If she jumps to the pins, it's good.
se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure;	If not, then apply gentle traction at the subtle point of the pin.
et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne;	And if she does not jump by that, then make a hole in the rain and blow her head into the hole or the opening of the ear very hard, and stop up the ear with soft wax so that the rain cannot enter.
puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit;	Then pull it out properly, for many times it comes out like we have said.
et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor;	And if it does not come out in such a way, then take some glue and put it on the teeth, and put something sharp at a point to make it, and put a little cotton around.
puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	Then press the gland above the stone or whatever it is, and draw out.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme;	And if she does not spring out of all these things that we have said, then quickly cut the ear as well as the abscess and pus, and spasm;
et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant;	and the manner of the cut is that you first make a small incision in the painful part of the ear, and extract the pus according to its strength, then place the pus between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and make a small incision at the root of the ear where the grease or fat depends;
et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche;	and let the incision be as wide as a moon, until you reach the stone, then chip it according to your power, and suck it vigorously into your mouth.
et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and treat it until it is healed.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction;	And if it is small and swells, administer extraction;
et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre I spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	and if it cannot come out, administer the following subtle spatula form:
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	and administer an incision of that small one.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces;	But do not make it thin when you think the grain is wet due to ear moisture, until you have made many pieces of it.
puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	then extract it with thin forceps and the sucker, as we have said, so that the extraction is aligned.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	In the case of earwax that falls into the ear, it is necessary to use nasal drops and clear the ear with a lot of old cotton.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	And let it lie across the very ear itself where the sharp is.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	If it jumps out because of the wind, that's good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu;	If not, take many needles according to the length of your thread and thin, and heat them a little in the fire;
et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille;	and insert the hairs one by one through the ear opening, and go up from the other foot, and prick with another needle on top of the one in the ear;
et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer;	and do not stop pricking with needle after needle until the sharp one breaks completely, and thus it will all break off;
et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars;	and if you see, take the reed, and blow one of the needles into the ear, and the other head taken from the fire until the softest reed is burned;
puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	then make another incision at other places until the sharp point is completely out, as we have said in the stone.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division;	In the extraction of the beast, if it is of small size, such as a mouse and similar things, treat it as we have said in the division.
mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures;	but if it is of large size, where one can feel it, then prepare for the extraction of pins.
et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	and this is the easiest thing to remove that is in the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil:	In the extraction of worms in the ears, when you treat them as we have said in the division and if they do not improve, then look at the ear in the sunlight.
s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	If there are no openings, then use fine forceps to pry them apart; and if they do not open, then take the cannula of this shape:
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	And it should be tight below and wide above.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine;	And insert the finest needle into the ear according to the amount of pain, then it forms all over the canal;
fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	Do this often enough until all the pus comes out.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere;	And if they do not obey to come out, then pack the canal with cotton as I have said in the stone;
et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations;	and if they do not emerge as we have said, then administer distillations that the ancients have used in the opening of veins, and you will find them where treating distillations;
et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And if you drip your oils and your medicines into the ear of this instrument, as you see here:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a I petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller;	And if it is of silver or bronze, it should be made with small openings below and larger ones above to drip;
et por presser dedens la distillation a I estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren I raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton;	And to press during the distillation, use a well-made silver instrument for this, and if you see, take a razor and wrap it around the tip evenly with cotton;
puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille;	Then pour your oil or juice, and whatever you see of your medicines in the can, and the can should be in the ear;
puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille;	Then push the oil or juice through the razor and around the cotton, and press your hand tightly until the oil is distilled or comes out of the ear;
et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations I poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille;	and the patient feels the pain within, and sometimes the distilled water is not well heated in the fire as it is poured into the ear.
et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	and be careful that it is not too cold, for the medicine would not be as good.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the stoppage of the ears
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles;	No child is born without some kind of ear problem.
et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir;	This also happens to adults due to ear wax buildup inside the ear, and this blockage never comes from within the ear if one cannot see it.
et aucune fois avient I poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	And never does the blockage come from within the ear, and one can see it well.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil;	That which comes from the front, if one cannot see it, is a painful sensation in many positions, and in this one where one sees, you must put the ear of the bad eye to the sun.
et regarde dedens:	and look inside:
se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	if you see the opacification apparent, if the work has this entire space of from which this is the form:
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille;	And let it be both and grinding in front and behind all flat, so that it does not blind the ear;
se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	if the opacification is of black or of the ear, if you have fine needles, and the coping lightly, until that char is completely crushed.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	And if the plug is in the ear, take a thin, light razor and heat it slightly over the fire, then place it on the leather of the ear.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille;	If you feel the pressure from which the pains are causing pain to hear, lightly pierce, and make sure you do not injure the nerves of the ear;
puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	then put a tent according to the width of the puncture, and tie it in the Egyptian knot.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet;	Do not do anything until the wound is dry, or take a tent and tie it in a tight rose, and pour powder on top of broken glass.
et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	and if you see the ear swelling, it is advisable to remove the tent and move another tent tied in a hard shell made of rose oil and wax, until the swelling is removed.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	then the healer as long as they are healthy.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if blood comes out, soak an sponge and wet it with cold water, and put it on the ear, and use other cures that stop the flow of blood which are either treating the distillations.
de la char des papieres	of the paper's charcoal
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines;	This is the book that comes in papers of the eyes when they are wet and are dry, if you must extend them with forceps and pins, and the cope of a span of their roots;
puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	then put it on the broken glass leg.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues;	And if without peeling, then cauterize with the fine lens burner, and the cauterizer after the incision is good for use;
et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines;	and often they are repaired, but nothing remains of their roots;
et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and do not return again.
de la gresle	of the gravel
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz;	Frequently arrive in papers things that seem to be crumbled in their form and hardness, and because of this disease is called "hail", and it is a collection of large moisture above and below the paper.
li ovraiges est telz:	The work is such as:
pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir;	If the hail moves from one side to another, and it is a light thing to know.
fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	Then make the wound wide, then scrape each part lightly, then take them with pincers, and cover.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide;	If you do not cover it without pricking a little the paper, it will not hurt the patient.
et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	and if its tear is large, it gathers at a seam, and the treatment until it is healed.
et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	and if it is small, do not apply force, for the swelling will restore it soon and cause pain.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre;	And if the grain is falling down into the inner part of the ear towards the upper part, turn the paper, and place the grain in some tweezers, and cover and press from one side and the other;
et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien;	and if the paper is displaced by the incision, it does not matter.
et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	and when the grain is covered, pour warm salted oil on the wound and treat the limb of what causes pain until the injuries are healed.
de la graisse des eulz	of the fat of the eyes
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz;	Exinach is a grease that is smeared on strips of paper and placed above the eyes, and it has more effect on children than adults, and it causes great pain to their eyes, and they have diarrhea in the mornings, and they cannot look at the light of the sun because their tears flow to their eyes.
et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	And because of this, they lie on their faces and sleep on them, and their papers are placed outside their eyelids, which become moist and swell with the exinach that opens in the oil.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	And when you press the joint to your touch and feel the extrusion among all.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain;	And the manner of the work is such that the painful one puts his head in your hand;
et puis pren I drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li;	and then take a piece of linen, and make a tent in the shape of a circle according to the amount that contains each part, then put it on him.
et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle;	and press from both sides, so that the contents are gathered in the circle;
puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne;	then cut in the middle of the moisture with a sharp knife, a wide incision, and not larger than the wound made at the opening of the vein;
et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach;	and cut the skin until you reach the contents;
et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	and in many positions comes the contents of the incision, in the shape of a white fat piece.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars;	Extract the honeycombs from all one piece of cloth between your two hands, and turn your hand to the right and left until it is spread out.
et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	And be careful not to push into the folds, that you do not bring all the spanwise to the oil, that you do not harm it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere;	And if it does not open at the beginning of the fold, then slightly twist the fold until it opens.
puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	Then extract it as we have said, then gently rub the cloth in hot and cold water, and put on the limb, and spread it out well.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	And if there are such men who bruise the cloth and put it on to corrupt the moisture that remains.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then the healer as long as he is healthy.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient comes to the healer with an abscess that is not drained, then the healer should apply moistening poultices until he is healthy.
des poilz des papieres	hairs of papers
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz;	When hairs are artificially placed in papers other than their natural position, and are awakened, they harm the eyes, and bring about diseases such as tears and softening of the papers and cornea, until it is caused by the destruction of the eyes.
et est li cure selonc IIII manieres:	And there are four ways to treat it:
ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	or by cauterization with fire together, or by medicine called "ague" according to what is before or in the chapter of cauterization, and it is done either by incision and stitching or by cauterization, according to what I will say.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre;	It is necessary for you to place the head of the evil in your right hand, then turn the paper of oil to your left hand;
s’elle est convertie, c’est boin;	If she is converted, it is good;
se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil desus;	if not, then prick her with a needle all along the thread above;
et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai I fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur;	and let it be on the edge of the paper or where the hair grows from these hairs, and pull the thread above all the paper, and turn it to the razor;
puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit;	then cut in the part outside the paper, outside the hairs adjusted, all the length covering, from the great arm to the little one;
puis estrai I fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	then pull the thread, and put outside the paper a small cotton and linen tent, then on top of the paper a figure of an envelope, like the belly of a mite, and all around it is necessary that the figure be according to the quantity you saw raise the paper which is divided into two.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie;	And if you have a tile that requires a lot of paper, according to how the paper is softened;
puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit;	then make all the space between the two lines that you have marked, and start from the large shoulder joint to the small;
et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute;	and let one of the cuts near the hairs in the larger part of the root, then lift the skin in one of the two corners of the wound, then scrape all;
puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce;	then assemble the two lips to one seam of a needle with all the thread of fine silk, and suck the blood, and let the excess hairs above the two edges at any thing gluing, if you see it done.
et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII;	And if not, then do not worry about it, leave the stitches and the threads for three days or four.
puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor;	Then treat the wound on the side of the stitches with dry and constricting things, for the paper will stick to the suppuration of the wound and the assembly of it, but the stitches are slowly (as they say) dissolving, and this is work without fear.
et si a une autre maniere:	And if there is another way:
et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	and you should shape the paper into a form that is as similar to the gauze of myrtle, as we have told you, into three layers according to the form that is here:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	Then apply this remedy which is above in equal parts according to the form that is here:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure;	And if you cannot hold the needles, and the thing is not even, take a needle or one with a thread, and place it in the shape.
et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment;	And put another thread below the large arm, and the second thread below the small one, and tie them evenly between your two hands.
puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then lift your hand evenly, and lift all the skin above where you have sewn, as we have said, then gather the two edges of the wound by stitching, and treat it until it is healed.
et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans;	And if an abscess comes to your incision, soothe it with a poultice and other soothing ointments.
et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit:	and never occurs that the hair of the paper is converted:
si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision;	if you must use what we have said about incision;
mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	but the stitching in one and the other is more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme:	The treatment of wounds is as follows:
et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai II caines par art, et II liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est;	and you convert the paper and make incisions inside according to what I have said, then make two wounds by art, and two stitches as thin as the paper and the width of the space is;
et cope as II chiés de II pars ou tu tiens les filz;	and tie them with the two threads where you hold the thread;
puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les II cainnes des II parties forment;	then assemble them subtly above what surmounts the paper of the oil, and strain the two wounds from the two parts formed;
et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	and let it remain thus for several days, and the skin that is stretched will die, rot, and putrefy, until it falls off by itself.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	If it takes too long, then if the skin has some strength, then heal it until it is healthy.
et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil;	And when the wound is covered, and if it is lifted up, the hairs will not grow back.
et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	And this is the form of the two needles that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of length and width:
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute I fil de soie souef et subtil;	The needles are such that you hold a thin needle, and pull the silk thread soft and thin;
puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc;	Then gently gather the bones and pull them apart slightly, and let the long hairs grow a span long.
puis ordene en la chasse I autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil;	Then order in the hunt another thin silk thread quickly, and pull the main thread tightly.
puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain;	Then place the misaligned joints on your healthy side.
et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil;	Then place it in the sun so that the work is straight and even, then gently push the needle through the entire hunt at the base of the pricked hair, and pierce into the paper firmly until you remove it above the natural hair.
puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a I ou II ou III ou plusors;	Then pull the hair up to the hunt, and push in the hunt that hair, if there is one or two or three or more.
puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	Then strain your hand until the hairs grow out far enough to cover the entire fur with natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil;	And if the fur is treated and the hairs do not grow out far enough, then treat the fur with the discharge above until it is completely dry and you can see through the oil.
adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo II jors ou III, tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus;	Therefore, treat the fur and the thread, close the oil and leave it to dry for two or three days until the hair is in its natural place and grows again.
et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne I poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	And if the hairs are small, accompany them with long hair from wild animals, and stretch them out with the one you leave until they are stretched and then tie them.
de la porriture de l’oil	of the preparation of the oil
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres:	When this disease, which is called "aleacrati" or the "porridge", comes in the eye, there are two methods:
l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	one natural, and the other unnatural.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	And it occurs by the wound, or by the barber or the cauterization, and by similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee;	And the method of the work is that you cut out that stitching, and dry the lips from it, and put in tents of linen, and bind it until it is healed;
et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	and you should only use things that dry and restrict in its care.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere;	For if you do this, the disease will return worse than before;
mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic;	but I work with things that are softening, such as fenugreek;
et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	and the herbs of high or high and seed of linen be cooked, and ointments of yellow sulfur melted in any of the oils, and it is wrapped in a tent, and the cure for this.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant;	And the treasures of your cure are such that you must be careful that it does not soil itself according to the form it was before;
et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	and these works that we have said are not other than in order to prevent this disease from returning according to the form it was before.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	of the oil that comes in the ear
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	This disease that is truly called "axacrati", and is natural and accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans;	The accidents come from wound and cutting and cauterization and similar things;
et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char;	And the method of the work in this way is that you hold a needle, in which it has one thread doubled, and the thread in the needle, and you make it pierce from the right arm to the left, so that the thread comes out in two pieces from the needle;
puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	then the needle is above all the thread, and the coping is at one span wide.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin;	And if the shape of the paper returns according to what it should be, it is good;
se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere;	if not, take the razor and put it in the groove, and turn the paper, and make two cuts where it costs inside the paper;
et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»;	and let the two cuts of the two angles of the incision that you have made be such that when they are assembled, the figure is as if it were the figure of a letter with no "Greek".
puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne;	then remove that char, according to the amount that its cost is damaged from what it should be, from which the paper is made, then add the two parts that are missing, and the cuts of a thread of linen.
puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then apply the care of what we have said about the softening medicines and tents, until it is healed.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant;	And if the illness comes from a cut or a stitch or a cauterization, then it is necessary that you make a plain cut outside of the hairs of the papers, and according to what is above.
puis desevre entre les II leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit;	Then deviate between the two leaves of a tent, as I have said.
et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil;	And one should perform the operation according to the form of the disease, as it is very diverse in shape, and wise masters compare all possible methods to how they can make the figure return to its natural shape.
et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	And the wounds themselves, according to what is needed for operation and tools in many different positions.
dou soudement de la papiere	The paper is soaked with.
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut;	When this sewing is done by hand in a certain way that the paper above is smeared with the white of oil, and cannot move or make its natural operations, then it is necessary to bring the tip of a razor outside the paper, and lift it up.
et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil;	and it is set with pins, until you copy what is airt to the subtle space, which is not too sharp nor too sharp, so that the pain cannot suffer that the subtle space is too sharp and does not burn the oil.
et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil;	and let your incision, of which you scrape that assembly, lightly, so that the paper returns according to its natural form;
et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere;	and it is healed all that assembly, and never in the sharp salty oil, and lift it from the sharp sweet and with colloid;
puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef;	then put between the paper and the oil a linen tent, and put on the oil wool fleece in abundance of urine;
et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	and after the third day, use a poultice and dirty things until he is healed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	of the joint of the oil
Saiches que li ungle est selonc II manieres:	There are two ways to treat the joint:
elle est nervouse et semblans a I dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om;	The first is nerve-related and resembles a hard, dry wound, and the other is not nerve-related but resembles a frozen, white moisture, so that when touched with iron and heated with pincers, it cannot be removed.
et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	Both of them begin near the large bone, and gradually grow larger and larger until they cover the entire eye and all the light and the movement of the oil.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz;	And the manner of incision is such that the hairs put their heads in your hand, then you work the eyes.
et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus;	and lightly hold the paper to your hand, then bend the angle with small tweezers, and stretch it upwards.
puis pren une aguille, et i met I poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et I fil fort;	then take a needle, and put the hair of a horse, or of a sheep, or of a cow, and thread it tightly.
et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement;	and double the point of the needle a little and push it into the angle, and push the needle through the whole, and tie the angle with a thread and stretch it upwards, and scrape all the hair along the side of the needle which leads to the pearl and silk to the hair just above, then cut the remaining in the root of the arm at every subtle thickness and with small forces, and leave the natural skin or the arm, so that by the incision no tears usually come out;
et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit;	And never has the bone stayed at the joint alone, and over time, as we have said.
puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	Then the skin is all the soft tissue that gives this shape:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie;	And be careful that the soft tissue does not touch the raw flesh and break it, and that the blood is not pierced.
et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor;	And after the incision, pour in a little bit of bruised silk oil, and make a poultice of charcoal, and leave it just above the other joint.
puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then the treatment that is necessary until he is healed.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines;	And if the bone is not nervous, and you cannot insert the needle, and the joints cannot enter, often this resemblance of a bone of medicines is cured.
et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	and they grow like I have described in the previous section, and if you see it covered, then work on the bad part, and take a sharp knife lightly according to this form:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor;	and you scrape the edge slightly, and if you see that it does not soften and the skin is close, then blow into the oil made of pitch, red wax, and silk thread, and stop the oil on the other side;
puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	then start the other work according to this same work, until it is completely hardened.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing is contrary in the oil, as with an abscess, then milk it, and cure the abscess thoroughly until it is healed, then begin the work again as before, until it is completely healed.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne;	and if the appearance of the flesh of the arm is in the oil by great harm, then skim it off and take a part and not all at once, so that no tears come to it;
puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	Then pour the red oil of colloquy, which is made of litargire.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	of the hair that grows above the eyebrow
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste;	Some men are born with no red hair at all, and cover the pearl and hold it above the papers and turn it back, and it seems like a balduster rose.
et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force;	And the work is such that the hairs put their head in your hand, then they work the hairs, and hold all that hair with suitable bends for this, and support it with strength.
puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige;	Then cut the first hair, and go all cutting to the razor just at the end, and guard that you do not blister the oil in the work.
et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre;	and let the incision of the spaniel that we have mentioned in the incision of the nail and with small forces of why we remove the skin, as it forms after this chapter demonstrates.
et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut;	and when the incision is completed and all the char is removed, use silk oil or distilled red vinegar and similar corrosive medicines, and put it on top of the oil with a cotton pad with a cloth soaked in urine, so that it is certain to prevent an abscess from forming.
et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut;	and if nothing remains and the swelling does not subside, and you doubt an abscess is forming, leave the oil and treat the abscess with things that calm it down.
puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	then return to your work until it is healed, and thus make charms cast in oil by this similarity.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil;	But it is necessary that you strengthen the cure of each weak vein by its natural way;
et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer;	and of the accidental way, in ironwork.
et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	and do not put your hand in any of these works until you see that this member is suffering from that work.
des voines des eulz	of the eyes
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	Red veins that are covered over the eye, and take away from the view their work and weaken the eye always.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel;	Therefore, the first thing you should look for in that oil is whether it is hot or cold, and there is no other disease besides the first one.
adonques le coil en teil maniere:	then the joint should be moved in this way:
comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	instruct the patient to put his head in your safe place, then gently move the joints all around according to your wisdom, and make the thin bones double according to this form:
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en I cors selonc ceste forme:	And let there be two times per degree in the body according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil;	then move those thin bones gently, and squeeze the blood out hour after hour until you can remove them from the joint:
et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes;	and be careful not to pierce the joint with sharp points of spatulas, and do this work at noon in front of the sun, and be very hot in your work so that you do not cause harm to those thin bones:
et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	And when you have done this, if you have green and red oil of wormwood to corrupt the humor that remains in the belly.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez;	And if you cannot collect all the bile in that hour, then make an ointment with the oil of calming things to ease the pain of the eyes, and let it stay on for some time until the pain is eased and the risk of abscess is assured, then resume according to this method until they are healed;
et c’est li forme des forces:	And that is the form of forces:
de la fistule de l’oil	of the oil fistula
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule:	The mirror is called "arissati" fistula:
quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	When you cure it with fire and medicine according to what I have said before, and it is not healed, then make an incision over the abscess where it should die, and drain all the moisture that is there, until the bone is revealed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme;	And when the bone is discovered, and you see the decay and the blackness, if the tool of this is in the form;
et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a I chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	and it is called "rough chisel", and it is made of iron from the sharp end to the chisel, and it is pointed as a lime if it is in the present form:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese;	And place it on the end of the bone that is decayed, then turn it between your two hands, and press your hand a little until you know that that decay is removed;
et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	and do not do it again, then restore the bone with drying remedies.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez;	if the bone is sound, and flesh has grown, and the body of the wound is sound, and it remains thus for forty days, and it does not return and is not postponed, and no bad accident happens, then it is healed.
se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme:	If not, there is no other method than to bring the fistula to the opening of the throat according to this form:
et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	and you should dislocate the bone the second time with iron and with medicines, and when it is discovered, take the forehead according to this form, and the patient's head of iron at three angles, and the fast should be attenuated just above as you see here:
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif;	then put it above the bone of the arm, and keep your hand away from the oil at that point, then turn the whole forehead until it pierces the bone and the patient feels the pain because if he holds his hand over his neck;
et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif;	and if the bone of medicines is dry as I have indicated, and when the child is born and the bones harden, then the matter goes to the knee;
si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	it is a lighter thing for the joint.
de l’issue de l’oil	from the end of the oil
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide;	when the eyes are widely open and do not close due to disturbance or relaxation, then it is necessary to hold the joint.
puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil I liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz;	then the healthy one, then put suction cups or hatches to draw blood, then put on oil made of acacia and aloe and incense and sarcocollis, and then strain the oil, and apply the plaster with bandages and cloths.
et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en IIII, et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier;	and the manner of the cloths is such that you grasp cloths that are sufficiently soft, and double each one into four, and then place one on top of the other according to the quantity that the wound requires.
puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir;	then apply pressure from above with a hard bandage, and restart the suctions to draw out without causing injury.
puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout;	then remove the suctions and leave the oil-soaked bandage on day and night, and if the wound breaks down, it is necessary that you reapply it firmly.
puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin;	then remove the bandage after day and night, and if the oil reappears, it is good.
se ce non;	if not;
si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	and the plasters and bandages and the linen and the leeches until they are healed.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	the tearing of a vein
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com I grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir;	When disruptions come in the woven cloth, then it is opened, and comes from far away, like the grain of resin, and is easily seen.
adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait I fil double des la partie dou larmier;	Therefore, if you see it covered, the work is such that you put a needle into the root of the part desoz jusc’a celi desus, then put another needle where the arm has the double thread of the part.
et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition;	and let it pierce, and leave the first needle according to its position;
puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef;	then take the limb and fold a double thickness of cloth around it, and tie it tightly, then remove the needle and place some soft oil on the wound.
et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee;	and leave it there until the thread heals with the wound, then care for the oil with comforting things until the wound is healed.
et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and never bind the wound with a piece of cloth from each part of a circle, until it is healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost;	And if they appear to be too large, then pierce the thin sponge that comes with the oil, and wipe away the moisture and dry the wound, and place it immediately.
puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	then extracted until it is sound.
de la bowe de l’oil	from under the oil
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue;	This disease, which is called "alcunnati", is nothing more than boil that is gathered in the oil, resembling an acute downward spike, and this is not an acute spike.
et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz;	And the manner of its appearance is such that you make the patient sit with the bad side elevated and straight, then take the chief between your hands from the two sides, and move it until you see the boil come out above to your eyes;
puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit;	then it should be carefully removed, and not let down and dismantled the light, and see the bad things as they should be.
et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	and if they do not set it back in place, it is very painful, and if they do not treat it as we have said,
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse;	if you place the painful part between your hands, then take a fine spatula and make it pass under the transparent skin and the eyelid, until the bone is dislocated.
et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and when it is out, pour hot honey mixed with melted honey or honey and fenugreek that has been boiled and melted into the eye, then treat it with other treatment until it is healed.
des aigues de l’oil	of the hot oils
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier;	We have seen similar cases in the division, and what is needed to pierce it.
si en oevre selonc la santeit.	if in work according to health.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort;	It is necessary that you place the misaligned bone between your crossed hands, away from the light for the sun, and with the sound oil firmly stretched.
puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres;	Then place the paper of the oil on your left hand if the bones are on the left, or on your right hand if the bones are on the right.
puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre;	Then take in your right hand if the bones are on the left, or in your left hand if the bones are on the right, the instrument called "almagda".
puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide;	Then place the point of the instrument above the crown by the thickness of a grain in the thinnest part of the oil on the part of the elbow, then strike the instrument called "almagda" firmly, and stretch your hand as long as it pierces through the oil, and feel that almagda is about to reach the empty thing.
et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour;	The width of the main vein should be measured from the forehead to the end of the nose.
et c’est li corone de l’oil;	And it is the crown of the oil.
si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	If you see the bone in that paper for the clarity of the canvas, then put the instrument above it where the sharp is, and press out one after another.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	If he is now sharp-sighted, he will see the hairs before him and the instrument in his eye.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc;	After resting a little, and if the sharp rises again, put the forceps with the instrument, and when it is stuck and does not rise, gently turn around your hand back and forth.
et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	and then place a small needle with a gem, and leave it in the eye until the oil is inside.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	Then put by default the eye is cleaned with a soft cloth soaked in rose oil and plenty of water, and bind it with clean oil.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	We, and those who are of our household, put on top of the wound with plenty of water.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if it cannot enter the oil due to its hardness, because there are men who have very hard eyes, then you must use the tool called "alberit", which has this shape:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit;	And then pierce only the conjunctiva, and do not move it too much, but make the eye subtle, then push almage, as we have said;
et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous;	and at the completion of the work, compare it to the pain and sleep that occurs, in which it lies on its back in the dark eye;
et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor;	and let it be moved in all movements, and take light foods, and do not move its head to the right or left, and let it be tied according to its position just as it is;
puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor;	then reset it in the same dark house, and prove its sight, and let it see some things, and then put the joint back just before sunset.
et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	but it is only necessary to do this at the beginning of the treatment or after the incision now, but it is necessary to gradually increase the height because of the sharp pain.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme;	if abscesses come, then reset the joint before sunset, and give it the food that alleviates the abscess.
et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	and when it is calm, then reset the sight and put it on its face in an orange peel to cover any light, and let it stay in that dark house.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas;	Then slowly go home little by little, and convert yourself to your case;
et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	and remove that no disciples should interfere in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens;	And some came to us who was of the Iraq, who told us that in some countries they make all people circumcised, because of the acute pain, but never have I seen anyone in our land, nor have I read anywhere in the books of the ancients;
et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	and perhaps it is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie;	And these are the similarities of the forms of circumcision, because those who do not know them see them;
et soient d’arain proprement:	and are of pure rain properly:
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en III angles ague.	And they have the same thinness in their heads and the backs in three angles.
de la char sor le neis	of the head to the nose
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez;	Never born or not issued charred varieties, because there are some that seem like scorpions with many legs;
et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	and if there are such and the char is enhanced with a dark color, and if the char has a good color.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil;	In such cases of these chars that are good, and not enhanced, it is appropriate to make the pain between your hands against the sun;
et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers;	and work its nostrils, and pour the oil onto those chars, and the tracks there;
pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	then hold it in the delicate space under the sharp edge of a part, until you know that that char is completely hardened.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout I des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien;	And if there remains any thing that cannot be covered, open it with all the instruments subtly and lightly, so that nothing remains.
et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient;	and if without causing harm, an abscess forms, treat it as it should be.
et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	and if they are malignant abscesses, hasten and cauterize them until the wound is clean and all the pus is removed, then pour or inject hot and sour wine.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez;	If the wound does not open, and moisture comes to the brain, treat it as if it is healthy.
et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier:	and if the moisture does not penetrate as it should, treat it as if there is bone underneath, because the instruments do not come to cut.
adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins;	then you should go and get a piece of thin linen cloth, and be careful not to tear it with your hands, and have between each thread some space or less.
et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche;	and put the hairs of the one you are treating into the linen cloth at the mouth, and pull it out until it comes through the throat.
et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire;	and often do this with children in schools, and it is an easy thing for someone who wants to do it.
puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	then hold the head that comes out through the throat in one hand, and the other head that comes out through the mouth in the other hand, and squeeze them alternately as we do with threads.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant;	Do this until you have cleaned out that wound so that the new flesh is not corrupted by that char, then remove the thread, suck the blood, and moisten the thread in Egyptian oil, and put it back in its place as before.
fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char;	Do this for three days or more, until the wound is cleansed of all that remains of the char.
et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use;	Then apply a piece of raw flesh for several days until it is healed, and if there is need for other remedies, use them.
et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	And this is the form of the instrument used to purge the shoulder, with which one distills oils and remedies onto it.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi;	And whether it is of silver or tin, resembling an open lamp, like a dog, and conduct it thus;
et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief;	and if you see, then make a closed dog, and let the instruments be played to remove the head;
et ait I mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	and hold it at the head for when heating the oil or any liquid.
de la char sor le neis	of the head to the nose
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder;	Many times a disease is born at the head of the nose that is called "tulli", and it grows and becomes large, until it is seen to be a thing to look at;
et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant;	and therefore it is necessary that you cut the nose at the beginning, and then open the whole thing, then put the fire cautery or the burning medicine on it;
et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens:	and if they are slow to cover it until it is large, take note if it is hard, of poor color, and without sense.
si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide;	if they do not touch it with iron for it is an infected abscess, for when it is covered, great harm comes to the wound;
et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	and if the abscess is softly touched, not of poor color, and you see that it can be entirely covered, then wash the wound and cover it with things that are secure and restricting.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	when the nose is cut off and sewn
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	there are many solutions that come in one of these cartilaginous parts, which is only slightly beneficial to some people.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc;	Therefore, if there is any, then look to see if the wound is fresh at all its blood;
et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then apply the two lips to a seam, then treat it until it is healed.
et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet;	and if the lips are already decayed on one side and the other, then you must scrape all the parts of them until they heal, then gather the two lips to a seam, strain it, and powder with dragon's blood powder and frankincense.
et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	and place the powders on a piece of strong or other adhesive plaster, and leave it until it heals through it, then treat the wound with an ointment until it is healed.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution:	The manner of the stitching is such that you gather the solution:
ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre;	or with needles, as we have said in the stitching of the belly;
ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	or with thread, as I have told you.
des apostemes des levres	of abscesses on the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant;	In some people there are abscesses within the lips, similar to small or large grains;
adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie;	therefore it is necessary to turn the lips, and cut open each one, and take out the pus with forceps and clean every part.
puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	then apply the wound with a solution of vinegar after the incision, until it is no longer moist.
et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then apply a dry cloth to the wound, and cure the limb of dry things until it is healed.
de la char des gencives	of the toothache
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»;	Many times, a tooth abscess arises above the gums, which the ancients called "albulus".
si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc;	If it is necessary, you must support it with forceps at its root, and let the pus or blood flow out.
puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives;	Then apply a broken piece of glass or other astringent and desiccating powders to the limb.
et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize:	And if that abscess returns after incision, and often does, then apply forceps again and cauterize it.
si ne revient mie aprés le cautere;	if it does not return after the cautery;
et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	and these are the forms of instruments for covering.
des sordens	deafness
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres;	Sometimes they are gathered at the root of the teeth, within the mouth between the gums, scrapes that are ugly and sharp;
et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant;	and sometimes they are the black and yellow and green teeth, until the corruption comes to the gum, and are the stinking teeth;
si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien;	if it is necessary that you remove the pain between your hands, and its roots are in your holy place, and cut the teeth or scrapes that are apparent, until nothing remains;
et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees;	And thus make of the black and green, and yellow and other stains, until they are cleaned.
et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin;	And if one has removed what is at the first layer, it is good.
se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis;	If not, start again from the second day and the third, until you have removed everything.
et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens;	And soak the teeth with various instruments to remove, according to what the work demonstrates, because the razor that one uses to remove the teeth has different forms than the one used between the teeth.
et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	And these forms and others be with you prepared.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire;	It is necessary when you are treating a tooth for pain that you delay pulling it as long as possible, because one should not do this to anyone.
car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	because it is a very high substance that we do not have an excuse for removing.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	Therefore, when the tooth is forced to be drawn, you should be certain of the tooth's root.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent;	Often the pain of the misaligned joint is relieved, and one should ensure that it is a holy tooth, and have the good tooth pulled.
et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors;	and in any case do not remove the pain by this means, until the bad ones are removed, for we have already done this to these saints.
et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars;	And when you are certain of the tooth that is decaying, it is necessary that you burn around the tooth on all sides. with great heat to protect the gum from all parts;
puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles;	then move the joint gently with your fingers or thin needles at the first point and point, until it is well dislocated, then firmly fix the needles.
et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	and let the joint with great pain between your knees, and hold it well so that it does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	After straightening the tooth correctly without breaking, and if it does not jump back, take one of these tools and push it gently into each part lightly, and shake it as you did first.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont;	And if the joint is dense and painful, then it is necessary to fill it with cloths where the punctures are.
et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre;	and if the thin needles are firmly held, so that they do not break when being pulled out.
et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	And it is necessary to carefully wipe around the gum to cleanse the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	And be careful not to break it, and that a part remains, and again give the pain by the greater evil of the root more severe pain from the first.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit;	And be warned that you do not act in such a manner as the ignorant saint does, who through their haste and boldness break everything at once, and never bring back what we have told.
mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut;	but bring forth always by the skilled hand of healing for the roots that they delay, or for the cart that they break, as we have often seen.
et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil;	and when the tooth is drawn, wash the mouth with wine or wheat bran and salt.
et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet;	and if blood comes out and often does, use the mouth with broken glass wine.
et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	If it does not heal, then cauterize it.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent;	The shapes of the instruments, with which one moves the first tooth, should be long points and large pliers, so they do not double over when you pull the tooth.
et ce sont les formes:	These are the forms:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And they should be thick enough so they do not bend when you pull, and they should be made of good iron, and they should have sharp teeth to hold.
de la racine des dens	from the root of the tooth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou II, tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne;	When the root remains in the tooth, it is necessary to place cotton moistened with oil or honey on the gum until the gum is softened, then pull out the hooks called "algefri," of which the patient seems like a beak;
et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	and they should be made inside as well as a lime and this is the form:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not want to come out with all these needles, it is necessary that you scrape around the root entirely, and there you put the instrument called "althali", which is a spoon, of which this is the shape:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin;	And if it is also large, so that it does not break immediately, and if its root jumps upwards, that is good.
se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	If not, with all the instruments, because of which the forms come after:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait II rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if one helps with this instrument that has two prongs, of which this is the shape:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other forceps that are before in the range of the teeth, and with this instrument that seems like large needles, of which this is the shape:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont;	And if these instruments also do not break it, and they are very dense.
et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez;	And so with other instruments, which are not counted as such:
et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	And the wise masters find their own instrument, according to what their observations and the disease show, because there are some diseases where the ancients did not teach an instrument for the variety of them and if it does not break the cartilage or other bones, or if it hurts, if he looks for instruments that are necessary, as I have said, and helps with gestures, because of which these forms come after:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster;	And let the bones be large and well-holding to hold the bone, that it not slip, but that it can be held and removed;
et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	and then restore the limb to its proper position, and if it has decay in the bone, and it is small, then the surgeon uses this tool:
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer:	When the tooth appears not in its natural position, and its shape is ugly, and especially in young women, then it is necessary to remove the tooth after the decay, and it is not in the right place, and no one can be a dentist or liar:
adonques lou raie;	therefore the rake;
et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a I petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	and if it is stuck with the tooth, take this tool that has such a shape, and it is similar to a small beak, and let it be made of iron sharp at the end:
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And the copper is slowly and slowly placed in the mouth for the hardness of the tooth, and because you do not move the other teeth, and if it appears that one can be removed, then the copper is removed with a small force as follows:
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles;	and it is also like the tip of the needle with which we make arrows;
et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece;	and in the tip of the tooth, lightly and gradually, so that it does not move until it pierces;
puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	then the flat at the end has no razor, and if the tooth is too sharp and it cuts the tongue, then you must file the sharpness until it is even, so that it does not cut the tongue or corrupt the speech.
quant li dent lochent	when they are pulling teeth
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut;	When the tooth is broken or by percussion or falling, and the pain cannot be relieved by pressing on the gums to prevent it from decaying, and you treat them with restrictive medicines, and this does not work;
si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques;	if they need to be restricted with a gold thread, because the silver thread becomes green and rots, but the gold never does;
et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens;	and let the thread be of a suitable thickness, neither too thick nor too thin, according to the quantity of the space between the teeth;
et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part;	and if you see that the teeth are coming together, then take the thread and double it between the two healthy teeth, then place the broken ones between the healthy teeth on the other side, as long as you can see clearly into the healthy tooth on the other side;
puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point;	then reapply the bandage to the part where you initially applied it, and gently and carefully stretch your hand until it does not move.
et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	and your bandage should be tied at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue;	Then cut the threads with scissors, and assemble them, and place them between the healthy tooth and the tongue so that it does not bleed on the tongue.
et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil;	Then leave it so tight as it can stay, and if it dislocates, or the thread breaks, then tie it with another thread.
si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	If it stays and serves in this way for the rest of its life, and it is the form of the teeth and the arrangement of two healthy teeth, and two molars, as you see.
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit;	And when the tooth is knocked out, if it is put back into its place, little by little, as we have said;
et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	and does not interfere with it, which is wise and painful, and once made, the shape of a goat's bone tooth is formed, and it is put back into its place where the defect is, and it is held as we have said, and it is left in place for a long time.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	to cut through the cartilage of the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi;	No such thing exists that comes out of the tongue or naturally, which is born thus;
ou par accident de plaie soudee;	or by accident of a wound;
et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue;	and the operations are such that you open the mouth of the patient, and put their head in your own, and relieve the tongue;
puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement;	Then copiously lubricate the affected nerve with oil, as long as the tongue is displaced from its position, and if there is hardness or no movement, and it is due to a wound, then apply the ointment and lubricate it generously.
et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz;	And be careful not to cut too deeply, as there is an artery nearby.
et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin;	And when you have done so, lift the limb with a cloth of red or cool linen, then place a tent over the tongue.
et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	And apply ointment to the wound every night, so that the limb cannot become infected.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet;	And if blood comes out, put some vinegar on the wound.
et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu;	And if the blood does not stop, then cauterize with a slow-burning iron, which is good for the body.
puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	Then apply other treatments until it is healed.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre;	And if you see that the wound is of a dark or black color and hard, and if it does not hurt, do not touch it, for it is an ulcer.
et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre;	And if it is inclined to bleed and there is moisture, then pour the wound with a thin, sharp instrument, and deliver it from both sides.
et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer;	and if it does not remain in place, put on vinegar-soaked cloth until it is cleaned, then return to your work until you remove all the force.
puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	then lift the limb from its socket and shake it, and treat other wounds until it is healed.
des apostemes de la gorge	of throat abscesses
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde:	Never come from within the throat, which are called "godath", and they are properly called the second mandibles, and when you treat them, as we have said in the division, and they are not healed, then be careful:
se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	if they are abscesses difficult to feel and of small size and dark color, do not touch them with iron.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc;	And if it is red and the root is large, do not touch it with a little iron, as for the escape of blood.
mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi;	but let it remain until it is ripe, and then you will break it, or it will break by itself.
et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	And if it is of white color and the root is thin, have prepared the instrument to cover, but first see if the abscesses are closed and at rest.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme;	Then place the pain in front of the sun, and its head is in your hand, and the work the mouth and the prick the sergeant between his hands, and press the tongue out of all the instrument, from which is the shape.
et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	and it should be of silver or fine brass like some knives:
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues;	and you can press the tongue with this tool, and you see the abscess, then take the needle and poke it into the amber, and draw it up as high as you can;
et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces;	and take nothing from the cloth with it, then wrap it around the tool, of which this is the shape, which resembles a forceps;
et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	and the teeth are sharp, and one side is pointed, and they are very sharp, and it is made of iron or brass;
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have this tool present, use a pair of tweezers, which is the form:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom;	And it should be chiseled on one side, and on the other part, not;
et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	And when you have cut the one of the arrowheads, then cut the other according to the same manner, and after the incision, gargle the sharp pain with hot, sharp, and cool water, and if there is blood flowing, gargle the sharp pain with hot water, or use pounded green pomegranate skins, or similar things, until the wound is clean.
puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then cure it until it is healed.
et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les II amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les II amandres igament.	And never do any other abscesses come out in the throat except the two arrowheads, so cut them then like the two arrowheads must be.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens;	I treated a woman with an abscess that was lodged within her throat, specifically a small abscess.
et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	And she had almost completely closed her throat, so that the woman could not breathe due to the condition that was choking her, and could neither eat nor drink, and died if she continued in such a way for a day or two.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	And the abscess was so large that it had already been drained twice through both nostrils.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe;	I therefore acted quickly, and pushed it in one incision, then cut out the rest, and cut out a large portion of blood.
puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue;	Then I carefully pushed it through the other incision made in the throat, and the work of the mouth and pressed her tongue.
aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc;	After I applied the bandage to these wounds, and drank a small amount of blood,
et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens;	and thus the woman's throat was dislocated, and she began to drink water and then wine, and did not stop cutting into that wound with a long knife;
et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros;	and the wounds reclosed and filled the skin that I had emptied, until it became very large;
adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge:	therefore I pressed it and cauterized it inside her throat:
ensi demora sens croistre;	and it did not grow larger;
et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	and I left those parts, and only God knows what happened after that.
de l’uve	of the eye
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»;	When returning to the eye, and it is inflamed and long, it is called "perpendicular".
et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	And if it is not very large and round, it is called "uve".
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes;	When it is treated as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not help much, and you see that the patient's pain is relieved, and it is thin, then you must remove it.
et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe;	And the one that is round and not very long;
et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	And it is bloody or of a dark color or black, then you must avoid the incision of it.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	For there is great danger in pricking it.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant;	Therefore, when you see it, according to the manner that I have said, of its breadth and length, you should make the hairs sit in front of the sun, and press the tongue against the instrument that we have mentioned before.
puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	Then cut the cord in the wound, and pull it out, and cover it with one or two of the instruments that I mentioned in the incision of the two mandrakes.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil;	And it is necessary that you do not cover more than the excess that is beyond the natural end;
car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle;	because if you cover more, it causes pain to the voice and speech.
et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And after the incision, use what we have said in the incision of the second mandible, and treat it until it is healed.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	And if the pains are too great for the patient to bear, then it is necessary to use a cauterizing instrument to relieve the pain.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	And the manner of the cautery is sharp and hot.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere;	And if the hairs put their head in your healthy hand, and then press the tongue against the instrument that we have said or in the chapter of cautery, and knead with a sharp, live chisel, so that it is not too thick or too clear;
et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	and in using the movement of this instrument, because of which this is its shape:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve;	And it has a head or hair where one puts the medicine, like the movement of a spoon, and put the instrument on all the medicine over the tongue;
et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece;	and the hairs should lie flat on his chest, so that the saliva and muscle tissue from his mouth can flow into the medicine within, so it does not drip down his throat and into his lungs.
puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie;	then hold your hand over the entire medicine and press it against the eye for a quarter of an hour, until you see the needle and the medication's effects are eased.
et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve;	and if you see it, take cotton and wrap it around any instrument, and wipe the cotton in the medicine, and blow the instrument through the entire length of the cotton into the eye until the cotton becomes red.
et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés IIII jors ou V.	And do this often, until the cautery is perfect, then let it dry and scab after four or five days.
Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine;	And if you are skilled in restarting the cautery of the medicine, then restart it, and after the cautery, apply a poultice of butter around the eye, and clean what is around the medicine;
et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	and be sure to use cold sharp ones, and treat with gargles until they are healed.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere;	This cure is more saving of the incision, than only the cautery;
s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en I pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir;	if it is cured by fumigation in this manner, take calamint and hyssop and origanum and rue and chamomile and wormwood and similar herbs, and gather all or some of them in one pot, and put vinegar in it, and make it boil;
et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait I estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	and let the pots be well glued with strong earth, and within the pot has an instrument shaped like this:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie;	And it should be of silver or tin, and one of the spikes should be inserted into the mouth of the patient until the steam rises to the wound through the gum, until the wound is dead.
aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent;	After the remedy is repeated often, until the wound dries, and make sure you do not apply this at the beginning of the appearance of the abscess, for many things happen.
et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	and do not apply it until the decline of the abscess.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut;	If this instrument is not present, take a knife and place it inside the head, so that the tongue does not protrude too much.
car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	because the knife does not cause excessive steam to burden the mouth, and it is a good remedy together with safety.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose;	Often it is asserted at the throat of bones or spines of fish, or nothing.
si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose;	Therefore, you must remove what you can see, and press the tongue against the sun at all times with the instrument, so that you can see the thing.
et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac;	And what you cannot see and is pushed back into the throat, it is necessary that you make him vomit the thing as soon as the meat is cooked in the stomach.
par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement;	If by chance, the other thing is also dislodged by vomiting.
ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou I morceil de pain sec;	or the hairs swallowed a piece of sponge, or a piece of naval, or a leaf of lettuce, or some dry bread crumbs.
et lie a l’esponge I fil, et puis la transglutisse;	and ties it to the sponge with thread, and then swallows it again.
et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer;	and when it comes back up, it will harden, and then be pulled out.
et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren I estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	and if it does not come out as we have said, take the instrument of a spoon in this form:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit;	And let the instrument be curved at the end so that it can more easily enter the throat, and have the head raised high.
et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens;	and guard that you do not touch the epiglottis, that it does not come out, nor push the bone inside;
et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse;	and move your hand so the hairs do not push the instrument, for it is better that the hair is out or the thing is clear;
si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	if the pushing goes down, or it pulls to all the instrument evenly, as long as it is even.
de la sansue de la gorge	of the throat's lining
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines;	No one has been healed by the saliva, as I said in the division, by the care of medicines;
et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	and when it does not help much, then look at the throat of the hairs in the sun, then you press the tongue to the instrument that I told you.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	And if you see the shoe, if it is made with all small nails, or with thin tongs that are worth a penny.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	And if it is not worth a penny, take a hair rope, and beat the evil one in the throat with it, then beat or move the iron as often as you can.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	And if the evil ones are all tired during the day.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent;	then take full I of sharp cold, and open the mouth, and the spit out in the direction to swallow, and move it with your hand often.
et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	and if soon as he feels the sharpness, he spits.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve;	and if it does not spit as we have said, then fumigate the bad smell of putrefaction, with the instrument that I mentioned in the fumigation of the eye;
fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	do this many times, because it will disappear without delay.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument;	And the way of the fumigation is that you hold the pot where he has charcoal visible, and it is covered with a cloth perforated in the middle, and in that punctured place is the object;
puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue;	then you should give your fumigation, and the painful one puts the head of the snake in its mouth, and closes the mouth, so that the smoke does not escape, but comes just to the nose.
et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois;	and the nose will now drip, and if it does not drip, then repeat the fumigation many times;
et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue;	and suffer the painful one thirst, and give it salty and bitter things to drink, and do not let it drink any sour thing.
et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	and then it has the task to be cured by this treatment.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge;	And the shape of the instrument used to treat the nose, so it is, when one can see it, similar to curved needles for threading through the throat;
et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier;	And it resembles the beak of a bird, and it has a roughness of lime, so that whatever it takes in, it cannot wear out.
et vez ci la forme:	and it looks like this shape:
li chapistres des apostemes	the chapters on abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille;	There are many types of abscesses, according to what memory brings from one and the other in this book, and they differ in puncture and cut.
et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	And it is in two ways that one is in its own likeness, and because it holds moisture.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	And the second manner is for those who are at the neck.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	For the abscesses of the head are different from those at the base, and the abscesses of the neck are different from those that come in joints, and each has its own judgment in the work.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement;	And if to abscesses one should not puncture, until the hole is completed according to its fulfillment.
et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	And if they have such that it is necessary to pierce when they are ripe, and do not die according to their completion, like abscesses that are beyond joints.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	For when abscesses come beyond joints, and it is left until it is surrounded by, perhaps because the ligament and nerve of the joint are corrupted, by which it is the cause of contraction in that limb.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil;	And if the abscess is beyond the main member, and if you delay the perforation until it dies, it will harm the main member.
ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs;	And if it is beyond the foundation, then pierce it when it is dead.
et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule;	And it is not necessary to pierce abscesses that are ripe before digestion is completed, except for those beyond the foundation, which should not be opened until it is ready, and then they will become long and there will be a fistula.
et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	and cannot heal in a long time.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes;	and it is best to lance the pus from the abscess according to its completion, and this is when the pain is eased, and the departure of fever, and the lessening of pain and swelling, and the decrease in debility and alleviation of the main symptom of the abscess, and the others;
et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues;	and it is best to make an incision lower down on the limb of the abscess where the pus is most dependent and open;
et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	and the incision should be made along the long axis of the body, and if the abscess is in the hands or feet, or in joints and nerves and arteries, and in all these places equally, where there is no blood flow.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	In such cases, according to the affected member.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	And when an abscess is in the throat, it is better to leave the incision until it is confirmed that digestion has been completed, as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure;	For if you pierce it before the sky, so it would flow along with the blood of it, and is plainly full of much dirt;
et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	and perhaps harden the lips and the deeply pierced ones of him.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	And if any abscess that is pierced according to the wide vein, as the member has need of it.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus;	And it is necessary that you heal them in small abscesses, small pustules;
et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme;	and in large abscesses, large pustules, and many wounds according to the resemblance of the greatness of the abscess;
et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper;	and if at such abscesses or it is necessary to cover the wound, and cover;
quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes:	when it has become just as the cloths, and is softened, then it is necessary to do as one does with boils:
et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres;	And if there are such as are cut into three angles, and if there are such as are coped with as the sole of a shoe, as abscesses;
et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	and if there are such as have a round cut, and other cuts and similar coverings.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement;	Those who do not have a head, as with a superficial abscess, it is necessary that you pierce clearly through.
et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie;	And it is necessary when the abscess is large, and it has a great deal of pus, and you pierce, not to draw out all the pus in that hour, but to draw out a part.
puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief;	then apply a poultice to the abscess on the other side, then take away anything directly.
fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute;	do this many times with great pressure, until the wound is completely closed.
meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	even if the wounds are of weak virtue, or if a woman is carrying, or small children, or old decrepit people.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	For the patient should never be raised too high with the release of the bow, for by chance the patient may die from the pain, and you would not be blamed.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite;	therefore avoid this chapter with great caution, and when you have pierced your abscess, then suck the wound, and see if the wound of the abscess is small;
et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton;	and if it is a gaping wound, then soothe the pain with linen or old cotton.
et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre;	and if they are large abscesses, and there is much pus, it is necessary that you make incisions in each one so that they face each other;
et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor;	and if you have pierced into the abscess a part of the skin, and you have pulled it around, it is necessary that you fill it with old cotton or shredded linen against moisture, and tie it just above the wound;
puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	then the bone, and the healing ointment until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	And if blood flows from your work, apply sharp cold and cooling ointment, and wipe the wound, and place it on the affected area repeatedly.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut;	and if the bleeding persists, and is treated with government and care, and the powders that I have said in hand are in this book, and if it is where it is tense, and if the abscesses are very painful, it is necessary that you put on tents and moistened cloths with vinegar and oil;
et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit;	If the joint is already in this state, and the limb is charred, then it is necessary to apply moistened cloths with vinegar and oil, or wine and oiled, just as we have said.
et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then drain the abscess and dress it, and treat it as necessary until it is healed.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes:	And it is necessary to know generally about the treatment of abscesses:
or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	as I have told you how to proceed before treating abscesses, and read this chapter.
des soros	of sores
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	When small abscesses come from the body, and there are ways that are in cloths, such as the lancing of a boil, and very many similar things.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz;	There are some that are fat and such as have moisture like chickens;
et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	And for those who are hard and bony to cutting, and there is no doubt if the artery is not cut against.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	And the work of the belly is such that you try all instruments called "intromissions", from which the form comes after, a thing it contains.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	For if it contains moisture, then they make it through above the long one.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien;	And when the moisture is drained, scrape off the hair that contains that moisture, for it returns when one leaves anything.
puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens;	Then soak cotton in Egyptian oil, if present.
se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor;	If not, with vinegar and salt, and apply it to the wound, and leave it just before the next day.
et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	And this will continue until it is removed.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit;	And then begin the cotton again, as before, the second day, and the third, until you are sure it will not remain for a long time.
puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat the wound with ointment until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc;	And if the abscess remains large, then apply the following remedy:
et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist;	and pour water and skin from all parts, and put all your remedy to draw out the pus.
et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	And if the arrow makes it worse, then do as I said earlier.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	And also do this with an abscess if it is pierced, and cut and treat as I have told you.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	And when cutting above an abscess, if it is less painful, for they are of little blood.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme;	And if any of these abscesses or wounds do not have pus, and are from the same type of abscess or wound that I copied or treated from an old woman;
et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier;	and found the abscess as hard, rough, and white, and could not break it.
et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	and if one had done so, they would have made just as bad a wound as from a stone.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe;	In other abscesses coming or near, but those that come at the top of children and at the roots of the ears, the opening should always be made as low down as possible, to let out the pus;
et les cure si com il covient.	and treat them accordingly.
des scrophules	of scrofula
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	often have abscess on the neck, and discharge pus, and inflammation, and sometimes appear elsewhere in the body, and are very painful, and are inflamed together.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit;	And each bubo is properly within its own side, as with the neck and the abscess of the head, as we have said;
et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	and the similarities of these scrofula are many.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	There are some that contain moisture, and some that are harmful and do not wish to follow health.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde;	in that one which you see in good disposition at the touchstone, and is similar to the color of the body, and moves from each part and is not connected to the veins or artery or conduit, and is not deeply penetrating.
si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief;	if it is necessary that you scrape it from above, and scrape the skin of each part, and place the two lips of the wound together as soon as possible, if you have skill, as we have said in abscesses of the head.
et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	and gradually and slowly, and be sure that you do not cover the nerve or vein, and is not connected to the spongy tissue or cutting, which the hand does not escape, and does not see too soon, before you cover what you should not.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie;	And if you cut the vein or artery, and it does not allow you to stop the bleeding, put vinegar or some powders that stop blood into the wound, and press the wound.
et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	and let it stay until the abscess is calmed down, and soften the wound, and begin to heal.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses;	And when the wound is clean, return to your work, until you complete it;
puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	then consider whether there are any small pustules left, and cut and drain them.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement;	And if there is much blood in the root of the pustule, then it is not recommended to cut that pustule at its root, but tie it with a strong double thread, and let it drop through the wound, without causing harm;
puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	then fill the wound with old cotton soaked in Egyptian oil, then apply the cure.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	And if you cut out the entire pustule, it is necessary that you bring together the two lips of the wound, and hold them in place, as there is no remaining superfluity due to the size of the pustule.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	it is necessary that you cover the root of it with a covering, and draw out the core, and hold it as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure;	Those abscesses that are superfluous, pierce where it opens and dies.
et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption;	and pierce it in this way as the one previously mentioned, depending on it, then immerse tents with oil and similar things, so that what remains does not corrupt from the corruption.
et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and when the wound is well bandaged, the oil cure is added with charcoal until it is healed.
de squinance	of dizziness
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge;	The ancients said and spoke of the necklace of the throat.
mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	but I have never seen such a thing in our land, and it is their written word.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee;	For those who are choking, the neck's furrow called "epiglottis" must be avoided;
et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en II amandres.	and it cannot be helped by this, because all the veins and the prime evil are in those who have abscesses in the mouth, or in the throat or in the hands.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the disease is in the throat pore, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to avoid the danger of strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige;	Therefore, when we want to cut the epiglottis, we must cut it outside three circles or four a small cut across, between the two circles or by the quantity of the cut of the throat, not in the cartilage;
et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	And those people are suitable for the section of the epiglottis because there is no cartilage, and the valves are long and thin.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil;	And if the master is not experienced, it is necessary to extend the skin of the neck all around, then cut the throat until it reaches the chin.
et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit;	And avoid the veins of blood, if you see anything, and then cut the throat, as we have said.
et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix;	And it is demonstrated by the section of the windpipe at the chin that jumps out through the limb that is broken, and by the lack of voice.
et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	and leave the wound open for a day.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les II levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige;	And when the hour has passed for which there is doubt of strangulation, gather the two lips of the wound together, and suture all the way through without the cartilage;
puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then administer medicines that cause blisters until they are healthy.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Albucasis says that one should not do this until the throat is completely stiffened, and the limbs are judged to be dead, and the defect has left the body.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort;	Therefore one must remove the epiglottis because the hairs cannot hold it, and he breathes through the wound, and thus is kept from death;
et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee;	and because the ancients ordered to leave the wound open until the evil of the disease has passed, and it passes in three days or four, and then they commanded to sew the wound and heal, as long as it was healed;
et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	and I will tell you what I saw.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon;	I saw that a young lady came to the sword, and stabbed herself in her neck, and cut off part of the veins of the neck.
et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	and I was called to heal her, and found her as if dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I discovered the wound, and found the arrow that had come out of it, and although she had not bled from the vein or the wound, blood flowed from the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee;	I hurried, and sewed the wound, and healed it so that she was well;
et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition;	and the young lady did not suffer any other harm than that she could only speak softly, and returned to her usual condition.
por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	because I know that in the sewing of the epiglottis there is no fear.
de la grosse gorge	of the large throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes;	This is called "hernia of the throat", and it is a large abscess in the color of a grape, and it is very common in women.
et est selonc II manieres:	It occurs in two ways:
naturez, et accidens;	natural, and accidental.
ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	or natural, which has no cause.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere;	And the accidental one occurs in two ways, one of which is similar to a boil, and the other way is similar to an abscess that comes from our artery.
et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire:	And there is fear, and it does not require to be opened except in the one that is small, and the proof and search are made throughout the entire incision.
se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point;	If you find it as I have not grasped it, and it cannot be found in any vein, if the copper, as we copper the bones, and bring it to all its covering, if there is none.
et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And search well soon, and treat as it should be, until it is healed perfectly.
des nous	For the fire cautery
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances;	Many methods of us are, of which I will say all the similarities;
et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	And now it is fitting that I tell all the difference that is between us and the other.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture;	I say that the other is cold and fever-causing, until the bile is passed, and is accomplished by the purgation;
adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	then rest the fever and the heat.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros;	Without the nout, there is no heat or fever or pain, and it contains the syfac, which is its own sacs and is according to the color of the blood, and begins like a rash, and becomes large.
et sont selonc II semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	and are according to two appearances, either dry or moist, and many colors are as I have said in the section.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	When you come to the care of a new patient, it is necessary to first examine and try the instrument called "entromissoire", according to its form as found in the chapter that follows.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme;	And the manner of the inquisition of the abscesses of us is that you grasp or more moist skin than you pierce in the abscess, and turn your fingers gently and gently, until you know that the instrument has pierced the core, then it is according to the size of the abscess;
puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	Then extract the dislocated bone, and take care not to break it.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes;	If the wound is bleeding excessively, apply a poultice of the same color as the wound, as I have described for other abscesses.
et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout;	And if after extracting the dislocated bone, moisture does not come out, squeeze it to remove the grease, then make a cross incision, and take out the pus with forceps, and lightly scrape off all parts and wash the wound with clean cloth that you take away with the blood.
et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	And if you cannot remove it cleanly, remove it in pieces until nothing remains.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois;	If there is nothing left, it returns to us many times;
et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	And if it takes a little while, and does not bother you, use some corrosive powders on the wound, and close the wound, and apply things to relieve abscesses, and treat other cures until it is healed.
et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	And if it is large, cut out the two lips of the wound, and treat what causes the infection with charcoal.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet II jors ou III, tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc;	And if it is bleeding and you have no other option, use the juice of broken glass, and leave it on for two or three days until the wound heals, and rest the bleeding of the blood.
puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	then return to the copper cup that was left out.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres:	See the forms of the instruments inserted, and there are three ways:
grans et moien et petit;	large and medium and small.
et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres:	and there are three quarters that are called "awl", and one that is called "barrel", and there are three ways:
grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule;	large, medium, and small, to puncture the abscesses of fistulas.
et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule;	They are also like the needles that one buys for sewing, and are made of brass, or iron, or silver, and cost as much as those that are yellow, and are more experienced in puncturing the sinuses of fistulas.
et sont de III manieres:	and there are three ways:
grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	great, medium, and small, according to the amount of the width of the wounds.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci:	The shapes of needles are mostly similar, as you can see here:
grans, moiens, et petis;	great, medium, and small.
et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi;	and there are needles that have two barbs in three ways as well.
et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres;	and there are needles that have three barbs, and they are also in three ways.
et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres;	and there are needles that have two barbs, and needles of one barb only, and they are also in three ways.
et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	all of these are necessary in their own way.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf;	The heads of these are sharp, and of such that do not cut more than a part, from which we skin the muscles, because we do not want to cut the vein or the nerve.
et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes;	And of these intermediaries are the almonds placed in the palms, so that the pain does not persist at the opening of the abscesses.
et sont de III manieres:	And there are three ways:
grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois;	Great, small, and medium, as you see.
et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus;	And we do not use more than in the joints, such as knees, and arms, and breasts, and shoulders, and similar joints.
et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	and never make another instrument small, resembling scarabs of pustules, according to this form, with which one pricks blood:
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	and it is never put back in place which should have healing contact with the veins, and arteries, and never again according to this great form:
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme;	Never burn the breasts of some men when they begin to be corrupted, until they seem like female breasts;
et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	and keep them inflamed and swollen, and whoever wants to heal them, if it is necessary according to this form of this line .b. until .g.:
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	then scrape the fat, and fill the wound with healing ointment, then sew the two lips of the wound together, and cure it until it is healed;
et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures;	And if the jaw is dislocated downwards, and is twisted due to its size, as it often happens in women, then make a cut into the two ribs above, through two similar wounds;
de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.;	so that the other holds to the other at the end of one and the other, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form, from this line .b. to the line .g.;
puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then scrape the skin that is between the two jaws, and remove the fat, and apply what we have said about stitching and powders, and what is necessary for healing, until it is healed.
et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif;	And if it is not safe, or the incision is not completely made, because the hairs do not want to rest, or due to the flow of blood, then you must fill the wound with cotton moistened in a corrosive ointment.
et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	And let it remain until it has absorbed the remaining and grease, then cure it until it is healed.
des apostemes des asselles	of abscesses of the hocks
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	These abscesses that come from the hocks are hard lumps or have ribs, and they contain moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Therefore, those that contain moisture should be cut according to this form, from the line .b. to the line .g.:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when all the pus in the abscess is drained, apply old cotton to the wound and leave it there for a day, then remove all the cotton, and treat the wound with appropriate ointment until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscesses are similar to pustules, then treat them as we have said about incising pustules, and if the wound remains open, then cauterize it as we have said before.
de la routure de l’artere	of the rupture of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme;	When the artery is cut, and the skin above it is sound, then often an abscess forms, and similarly, there is often bleeding from the vein and abscess.
et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont;	And if it is known, then one should know when it is for the artery, as the abscess is long and flat.
et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement;	and when you sense your duty, if you sense tightness;
et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans;	and when it is for the vein, then it is necessary to be careful of appearances;
et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	it is foolish to cover this abscess, and immediately when it is outside of the bones and muscles and where it is very deep, and it is very large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc;	Therefore, one should avoid the cure of iron, and the one at the head should also be avoided, and in the one that is from the enlargement of an artery made through the long skin;
puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte;	then work the incision as small, and then tear away the artery of the webs, until it is exposed;
puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples;	Then cut off the arrow from one side, and pierce it through to the other side, and stretch the artery with a double-stranded thread according to what I have shown you in the extraction of the two arteries that are in the temples.
puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme;	Then puncture the limb that is between the two ligaments of an instrument until the pus that is inside comes out, and remove the abscess.
puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient;	Then apply the remedy as I have instructed, until the wound heals.
puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then treat this condition that has occurred to it, until it is healthy.
et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit;	and if the abscess is in the belly, it is necessary that you dip your hand into the abscess to remove all the pus from the skin, then pull out the needle away from the limb that you hold in your hand, and pierce it, and if there is a double layer of skin, so that you can draw it from the other side.
puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil;	then tie the abscess, as I have told you, or with one of two threads from the two wounds.
et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus;	and if you doubt that the thread will not hold, then insert another needle all along the abscess at the incision of the first needle, and stretch the threads into four loops.
puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez;	Then drain the abscess until the excess pus is removed, then clean the wound and leave what remains.
puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then apply a moistened cloth with wine and oil, then treat the wounds with tenting and poultices until they are healed.
des apostemes des ners	of abscesses of the nerves
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	Similarly, abscesses come in the artery and vein, abscesses also come to the nerves when they are cut, or from too much work, and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor;	And there are often injuries and doubts in all these cases where there are joints, and it is the painful abscesses, and its color resembles the color of the flesh, and it is in many positions with pain.
et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur;	And when it is stretched, the patient feels great pain, and it is not in the same position as the flesh, but outside of the wound.
et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer:	and moves well from all parts, and does not go forward or backward, nor dislocate nor displace, and that which is in joints does not need to be covered by iron.
par aventure i vanroit contraction;	by chance I had contraction;
et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	and that which is at the head or face, makes the skin to the spatula.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine;	If the abscess is small, take a needle and lance it at its root;
et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if it is large, hang it from the tip, skin it, then bone it and stitch the wound to the seam, and care for it until it is healed.
des grosses boces pendans	of large tumors hanging
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros;	Never occurs in the abdomen and no other place, and it is a disease called "fungus" by its resemblance to mushrooms, and it is in the fine roots, and the large legs.
et en i a de petis et de mout grans;	And there are small and very large ones.
et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	And I saw a man who had two in his belly that were more like mushrooms than anything else, and there was no difference, and they were white, and had fine roots, and were torn, and were filled with moisture.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine;	I took them and found in one eighteen ounces heavy, and in the other six drachms, and the work of the incision is that you look to see if the roots are moist, and the color of the root is white and moist and of fine root.
si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	If the copper is wide at the spout, and they are present with the fire cauterizer.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer;	For in cutting, there are often too great losses of blood, and if you do not stop it, then hurry to use the fire cauterizer;
et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors;	and if you see the evil spouting and painful from the cut of the iron, then take a piece of cloth well made, and tie it around the wound as we have said, and leave it for two hours;
et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail;	and then tighten it, and do not stop pulling the cloth from below until it covers the wound, and cut through it with effort.
et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne;	and if the roots are large, then it is best to cover them directly on the belly, but you can also cover half of it, then cauterize so it does not return.
puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	then treat the wound, and make sure you do not cover the thrush which is of pale color and poor sensation and milky appearance.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For it is some abscesses which become infected, and I will come to the treatment of wounds after this.
quant li boude ist fuer	When the foot is injured,
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit;	if the appearance of the bubo comes from fire wound or cut of syphilitic, and is above the belly and in some of the sores, as it has in other wounds, or of blood that cuts veins or arteries according to what is before, or of moisture;
et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	If it is by the breaking of the tooth and through the discharge of pus, then the color of the abscess is similar to the color of blood, and it is a light thing without pain, and open from various sources.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is for the purpose of the intestine, then it is most diverse, and when one presses it to its two sides so that it returns, and then it comes back, and perhaps if it is torn, and expands greatly at the entrance of the bath and for great labor.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie;	If it is by moisture, it is a light thing, and open well when you press it with your hand, but do not force it.
et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit;	If it is by blood, it opens with these signs that the abscesses are large and hard, and it is filled with a quantity.
et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	If it is by windiness, it is a swelling at the touch, and the work is that you look to see if it appears from the blood of the artery, or of the vein, or windiness.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	If you must leave, let them care for themselves.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	For as I told you in the chapter of abscesses, for the artery and for the vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude;	And if its appearance is for the intestines or the boil, then it is necessary to command the patient to tint his bandage, and be stretched out straight, then sign all around the belly;
puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine;	then command him to lie still between your hands, then go around the limb that you have signed all over, then stretch out half of the abscess above all the big bone;
puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz;	then tie him around with a strong thread, or a tight silk cord, and let it be loose on the injured limb;
puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine;	then open the half of the abscess stretched out over the limb, and insert your finger, and pull out the intestine;
se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre;	If you find the joint, pull it out, and push the intestine to the side of the belly.
et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit;	And if you find the bone, take it by the end, and cut off the excess.
et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier;	And if the artery or vein makes you go against it, then go around it, and return to your work and take two needles, and insert two threads, and push the two needles around what you have done in order to pierce.
puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi;	Then strain the abscess in four places above the needles, and if you see, remove the needles, and leave the place until it is healed, and cut the dead flesh by itself.
ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit;	when you cover it with a thin cloth and pour in what is necessary, then treat the wound as we have said, and drain the abscess.
et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	and remove the arrow or the moisture that you have removed, then treat the limb as it needs, and soak the limb.
dou chancre	For the fire cauterization, instruct
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer;	We have said in the division the similarities of chancre, and how one should treat with medicines, and how one must avoid the cure of iron.
et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement;	and let us say the chancre is ingrained in the marsh, and great caution in its treatment, and the ancient one said that when chancres are in a place where it can be removed as if chancre which is in the breasts, and in the armpits, and similar places, and all of it must be removed when it is at the beginning.
et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner;	When it is large and old, it does not matter that you approach it, for I have never been able to heal it.
ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	I have never seen any healed before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire;	And the work, when it is in place where it can be removed, as we have said, is that you remove the evil of black bile once;
puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide I boin leu por faire l’ovraige;	then make it healthy if it has manifest repletion, then remove the evil from the good limb to do the work;
puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier;	then pour your ointments or salves, and hair from all parts, and the bone from all parts without leaving anything;
et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	and let the blood flow fully, and clean the wound well with your hand or something else, and if the blood clots against the incision of the artery or vein, then cauterize it until the blood is stopped.
puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	then perform other treatments until they are healed.
de ydropisie	For hydropy, instruct the patient to let the h
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer:	We have said in the division the similarities of hydropsy, and how the assembly of the sharp is made, and the signs of each similarity, and the treatment by medicines, and that which is cured by iron.
si est eclites soulement;	if it is only illuminated.
et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances:	And one should not touch iron in these two similar cases:
c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose;	That is to say, tympanites and hypospadias, for this is a deadly matter;
donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses;	Therefore, when you treat this resemblance of hydropsy which is called "eclites" of medicines, and the cure does not help, look if the pains are weak, or if he has another disease than hydropsy, as in all cases and solution of the belly and similar things;
si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance;	if you do not touch iron, for there is doubt.
et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer:	And if you see the pain of great virtue, and he has no other disease than hydropsy alone, and he is not too thin nor too old, then thus proceed:
lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	Raise the painful limb up to your hands, and the assistant presses the belly by pushing the sharp instrument to the lowest part of the worst, then take the spatula with spinous form according to this form:
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	And cutting of two parts.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier;	and the tip, and make sure it is not too sharp so that it does not pierce the intestine when cutting, and it does not bleed;
puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines:	then look if the hernia is pushed against the intestines:
si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil;	if it is necessary that you cut them from the belly three fingers down from the navel;
et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois;	and if the hernia is due to the disease of the liver, then cut your incision on the right side of the belly three fingers down.
et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu;	and if it is for the shoulder, then to the right, and it should only be that the painful parts are shown above the wound so that the excess does not run to the weak limb.
puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor;	then pierce all the skin with the instrument, and the bone, and loosen your hand to all the space between the skin and the flesh as when scraping at the quantity of an inch or around.
puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	then pierce the flesh until the space reaches the wound, and this is the end of the needle, then remove it, and then pierce with this instrument which has the following form:
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus;	And it is similar to a thin silver chain, and is made of light brass or silver, and has a small hole at one end.
et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus;	and on the other side, three small holes.
et II d’autre part, et I d’autre;	and two on another side, and one on the other.
et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	And it is shaped like a quill, and is cut as a pen, and this is the shape of the incision that the scribes make on the quill.
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument;	At the top of it is the nib, so that when the instrument comes to the tip, they now write with it.
vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort;	Therefore, empty the middle or one-third part, because if you empty it more than necessary at that hour, by chance, it may cause the patient's death due to the resolution of their spirit from the arm, or they may lose their hand, or they may approach death.
mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz;	but according to the quantity of its power, and according to what the arrangements of the power of evil mean, and its fangs.
puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere;	Then take the tool and hold the sharp edge, and it is now held by the one who stops the perforation that is above the puncture, of which I have spoken, that you pierce in this manner.
puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit;	Then restart the tool on the other day, if you see the evil suffering, and take a small quantity from the sharp edge.
fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	Do this every day, and be careful not to follow for as long as it does not delay but a little sharp edge.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre;	If you doubt the injury and leave it for too long, the wound will be covered with dirt or sand, and by much sweat or bathing and in the sun, and it will become infected from drinking.
et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	And the treatment of drying medicines until it is clean, and cauterize above the stomach and above the liver and above the spleen after the extraction of the arrow, as I have said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	of the stopping of the rod
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	No child ever is born who does not have some pertuss in the rod, or the pertuss is small, or it is not in its place.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	If it is necessary to pierce very thinly throughout the entire length according to this form:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet;	Then put or pierce a thin needle through the bottom, and tie it and keep it thus for three days or four, and when it wants to urinate, if it is removed, and urine is made, and then put it back.
et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	And by chance, it does not seem to fit, for the urine that comes out does not keep it closed.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	If the one who is pierced is small, then treat him with a thin piece of cloth from the bottom, as we have said, and it will expand.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut;	Those who do not have the perineum in their joint cannot give birth, for none are born with the perineum at the top of the staff, because it cannot urinate before they raise their staff up.
et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	And they cannot defecate because the matter cannot come out just to the marsh, and it is a bad disease.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient;	And the way of the work is such that the pains are hidden so quickly on their back, the top of the staff and the copper as like the waist of a pen, so that the perineum opens in the middle, as it should.
et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	and guard against the flow of blood that often comes, and if it does, if the cloth that stops blood flows, and treat the wound until it is healed.
des pustules de la verge	of the pus from the knife
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide;	often come these blisters on the finger, and it is an ugly appearance of a char.
et en i a malignes et non malignes;	and there are both harmful and not harmful ones;
si covient que tu les preignes a I oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien;	if it is necessary that you squeeze them at the base, and clean and dry all, then put on gauze in Egyptian bandage;
puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	then the treatment of bandage until it is healed.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	And if it is a malignant ulcer, black and putrid, then you must apply cauterization.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier;	if you have cleaned it, and if the blister is inside the finger, and part of it is inside the skin and part outside, then it is necessary that you remove the blister that is inside first;
et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	And when it is swollen, if the doctor is not present.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion;	For when you treat it together, if you are not sure about the fracture of the bone that it is not pierced, and then blackness and corruption in its bone and where the connection.
si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then cut off all that is black and corrupted, then bind it with the plaster of honey and flour that is made of the skin of grapefruit and cloves, then the doctor of other treatments until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	If bleeding occurs, then apply the lunar cauterization according to this form:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble:	The cautery if helps in two positions together:
c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption;	That is to say, at the drainage of abscess, and at the corruption.
et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi;	and if the head of the shoulder is broken and twisted, it is necessary that you break or direct the staff like a club, and urinate on the wounds.
et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars;	and when the skin is pulled across the head of the staff which has not been circumcised, or it has a wound or an abscess, then you must burn it with the instrument that has hair, until the flesh is separated, and deliver the head of the staff from all parts;
et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil;	and if it is a difficult thing to divide the head, then you must burn it with the spatula at any part of the head and the skin;
puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	Then thoroughly dry between two and one puts a thin layer of fine flax thread in cold water, that it does not adhere again.
de la circoncision	of circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies;	Circumcision is not different from other wounds;
toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Whenever we perform this work of our will, and properly in children, it is a matter that we should do the best work, and the lightest for their health.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancients did not mention circumcision of their children, because they did not use it in their law, and we have only what we have acquired by experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor I dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule;	For I have seen the largest part of masters and sages who performed circumcision during childhood, and with force, and at all one time;
si fuioit li keurs car il i a II toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	if it was the chosen one because there were two cloths, and perhaps if one covered it from above and delayed the other outside.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre;	When it is covered with copper, and the pain is doubled, and the wound cleansing which is done from below is not sure of the exact point of the member;
et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	and the cleaning of the finger by chance escapes the iron, and ruins the work, and many times it happens that they do not have to clean it, and I want.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	Of the mundication which is done with force to all the length of the thread, I have found the best of the experiment, for the forces cut as much from above as from below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens;	For when you press your hand, if you cut evenly in all the skin;
mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir;	but that the thread is well stretched around the skin;
et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	and that the method of the first work is such that you make the child think, if he listens, that you only tie the thread around the rod as much as possible, and then throw it in all the ways that you can;
puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens;	then place the fetus between your hands straight out, and apply force between your hands or away from your feet so the child does not see it, nor any of the instruments.
puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens;	then close your hand around the staff and blow or suck, and pull it up until the desired length of the staff is reached.
puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien;	then clean it well of the dirt that is gathered, then tie the limb with a double thread, then tie it from one end to the other.
et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge;	and hold it with two fingers of the second hand at the pouch and the index, and pinch between the two ropes, then pull the child up gently and pull out the staff.
puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres;	then let the blood flow slowly and slowly, for it is the most dangerous.
et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and apply powder on and on the powder with the glue of a mule's hoof boiled in quicklime tempered with rosewater, confected with rose oil and fresh, and let it stay overnight, and continue the other cure until it is healed.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste:	The form of forces at the mummification is as follows:
li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	the two forces should be equal and strong, and the forces should also be great like the even hand.
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision;	The error of mummification is that the cuts are made too deep at the incision;
donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme;	Therefore, you must extend it to your angle, as the joint causes an abscess.
et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	And the coping evenly, and if you cannot hold it at your angle, then use nails, and then the coping.
Et s’il trespassent III jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement;	And if they overshoot three times, and what is outside the rod is swollen, let it remain until the abscess is fully healed, and scrape lightly;
si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	if the coping moves as you can move it, and keep away from the part of the rod, it will not harm him.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point;	Therefore cure the limb of soiled wounds from powder, which we have said or treated in the treatment of powders, and if the coping is done too carefully, it goes beyond, it will not harm;
cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Cure the dislocations, as we have said, until they are healed.
dou retenement de l’urine	retaining of the urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division;	The retention of urine is caused by the obstruction of a stone, or frozen blood, or a bone, or charcoal, or similar things, as we have said in the section.
et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz;	And if the urine is not released, and you see that the retention is due to a stone which is lodged in the neck of the bladder, then it is necessary to pull it up over the knees.
et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet;	And let them be placed on their backs, and extend their belly from the upper part of the back, and restrain the hairs as much as possible.
et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e;	and consequently, the neck of the bladder is pressed against the stone above, causing the urine to leak out.
et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme:	and if it does not come out as we have said, and the pain is great, then you must administer extraction using an instrument called "syringe", which has this form:
et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil;	and it should be made of thin silver wire, like the quill of an eagle.
et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	and it should be the tail of a long and half-palm, and thin at the tip.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue;	And the way to extract urine is that you take a double thread of yarn or cotton, and tie it to the tip of the syringe, and pull the thread inside the syringe.
et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede;	And cope the excess of the cloth and the bottom with juice from the slingshot, then oil the slingshot with oil or butter and egg yolk, and place the painful area on a chair, and apply the wet cotton and oil of olive and vinegar;
puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude;	then lightly place the slingshot in the cotton, until it reaches the base of the cotton, then double the cotton over against the bandage;
puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors;	then press the slingshot before juice from the cotton, and feel the pain coming with the empty thing, and this is not made according to this order unless because of the reason that it leads or goes is twisted;
puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine;	then the thread is drawn through all the yarn slowly and slowly, and the urine follows the yarn, then it is extracted forcefully, and make a correction of the urine.
et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	and restart the catheter until the bladder is emptied, and align the hairs.
des maladies de la vessie	of bladder diseases
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When skin or blood enters the bladder, or putrefaction and assembly occurs, and you see it distill water and medicines, then use any tool called «clepsedre», and its form is:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus:	It is closed, and if it has three openings.
II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois;	one on one side, and one on the other, as you see;
et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est;	and the threads are inserted through the holes that the medicine cuts so that it stops well the urethra, if one can draw out the moisture, and put in what is needed.
et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens;	When you see your medicines going into the bladder, put the head of the catheter in the moisture, and draw it to the drainage which is inside.
si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens;	If you drain the moisture from the catheter, and then blow strongly into the drainage inside.
si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira;	If the moisture enters inside, and comes to the bladder now, so that the patient feels it.
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie:	And this is the form of the subtle catheter with which you catheterize the bladder:
si est ci:	It is as follows:
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut;	And it is of silver or brass, and it is the highest one.
et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet;	And it is open at the top where the bend is.
puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu;	Then take a sheep's bladder and put the moisture that you saw clustered in the bladder, then tie it between the two breasts with a double thread of wool, and heat the moisture over the fire.
puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie;	Then push the tip of the cluster into the rod, then strain your hand on the bladder all around the moisture, until the hairs feel that that moisture has come to the bladder.
et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor;	And if you do not have a bladder, then take a piece of parchment and make a circle, and pierce it roundly through.
puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument;	Then push the thread strongly into those holes, then assemble the circle as you would assemble a bowl, and put inside what you saw of oil and moisture and salt, and tie it in the instrument.
et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	And do as you have done with the bladder, of pressing with your hand until the moisture comes to the bladder.
de la piere	of the stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines;	We have said in the previous section the ways of arrows and their extraction together with remedies.
et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille;	And I have said the difference between an arrow embedded in rain and all the signs, and in which arrow one should make a cut.
et en la vessie, et en la verge;	And in the bladder, and in the penis;
et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	And I will tell you clearly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit;	I say that the arrow that is embedded in the bladder often happens to children, and it is a sign that the sharp pain of the bladder resembles a sharp pain in its subtlety.
et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist;	and it opens the hair, and grinds the painful spikes, and does it many times, and then soothes.
et a mout de ces saut li fondemens;	and with much of these, the base.
et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont IIII ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece;	and is light for the healing of children up to four years old, and is very painful in the elderly, and is constant in those between youth and old age.
et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	and it is the cure lighter for those who have large stones, than for those who have small ones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	And when we come to the treatment, it is first necessary to cleanse the wound with a poultice, to draw out all the filth that is in the intestines.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	For it never hinders one from seeking the stone.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut;	Then take the pain by the feet, and stand up and move away from the side, so that the stone descends to the base of the bladder, and does not come out once high.
puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval;	then let the patient sit between your hands, and his hands should be away from his thighs, so that the urine flows downwards.
puis la quier et la touche dedens;	Then the knees and the toes;
se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	If you feel a stone in the space, hurry now to cut above the stone.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis;	And if it does not break at the touch of all, then rub your right index finger with oil from your right hand, if the pain is sharp, or your middle finger, if the pain is dull;
et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie;	and place it at its base, and knee the stone, and when you feel it at your finger, then moisten the foreskin with urine.
puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	Then press against your thumb, and the bone against where you see it cut.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille;	And command the minister to press the bladder in his hand, and command him to extend the right testicles with his hand, and the left hand remove the skin that is outside the testicles in the part where the cut is made.
puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	Then insert the spatula, which is shaped like this:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre;	And make a cut between what is between the testicles and the fundament, not in the middle but on the right side of the naval.
et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans;	And the cut should be straight above the stone, and your thumb should be on the fundament, and the cut should be across so that it is wide outside, but narrow inside, according to the size of the stone, not too large.
par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail;	If by chance the pressure is too much for what it should be, which is on the foundation, it will suddenly jump out of place.
et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges:	And it slips that there are stones or sharp edges and margins where it can get stuck.
si est griés a issir;	If it is greasy to pull out;
et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	And if there are parts that are soft and smooth like a glove, with a rounded shape, its extraction is easy.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant;	In this case where there are sharp edges and margins, make the incision wider;
et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe;	and if it does not jump out, then it is necessary to hold it with forceps that are like a clamp at the head, to prevent the stone from escaping.
ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief;	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole;	And if you do not engage it thus, the small pox will spread, and if it is not dissected, then strain it with vinegar.
et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	And if there is more than one stone, first remove the largest at the neck of the bladder, then cut above, then remove it, and the smaller ones later if there are many.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	And if it is very large, it should be made larger, and a larger wound should be made.
Car II choses avienent au malaide:	For two things happen to the patient:
ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder;	or he dies, or the urine flows out because the sutures cannot hold.
mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces;	But if you try to pull it out, or tear it off with pliers, until you tear it into pieces;
et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut;	and when you have completed your work, apply incense and aloe and dragon's blood to the wound, and bandage it, and place a moist cloth on it soaked in oil and wine, or in oil and vinegar and cold rosewater, to alleviate the abscess.
puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	Then resolve the pain on its neck, and do not let the bone slip back into place.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you reset it, rub the joint well with oil and vinegar, then apply a poultice of mustard plaster and basilicon until it is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine:	And if the abscess comes to the wound and corrosions, and congelemens of blood in the bladder, and it is retained so that the urine is held back, which is known in a certain way as without a jump with the urine:
boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit;	Then put your finger on the wound, and remove that blood, because if it remains, it will irritate the bladder, and it will spoil.
puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then lift the wound with sharp and smooth and silk, and help in all ways that you can, until it is healed.
et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	And it is necessary that all the bandages that you use to treat him, that you tie them around both thighs, and place the medicines on the wound.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir;	And if it is a small stone, and it is conducted with a reed, and tied around, and the urine cannot come out;
si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	if the cure of which I said before, that you cut many times, and excuse the cutting for this cure.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	I have already experienced this.
Pren I foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a III angles fichiees en I tison:	Take an iron rod according to this form and be at three angles tied with a thread:
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie;	Then take a thread and tie it around the stone outside of the bone, so that it cannot return to the bladder.
puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere;	Then gently push the finger into the thread until it reaches the stone.
et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part;	And slowly turn the finger back and forth in the stone until you can pierce it from the other side.
si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	If urine comes out soon, then press your hand above the part of the stone that remains inside the thread.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides;	If it is already broken and shoots out with the urine, and is sharp on the hairs;
et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie;	and if you cannot do this for any reason that defends it, then tie the thread outside of the stone and the other above, then make the thread in the place of the stone between the two threads, then pull it out, and release the thread, and clean the clotted blood that is in the wound;
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the healer as long as he is healthy.
de la piere des femmes	of the stone from women
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por III choses:	It rarely happens that a needle is inserted into women, and if it ever does, then the healer is in great distress, and it is prohibited for three reasons:
l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge;	One is that perhaps the woman is a virgin;
et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	And the second is that one cannot find a woman who is well-informed and willing to reveal her secret, especially when she is chaste.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains;	And the third reason is that perhaps one cannot find a woman who is well-informed in this art of hands.
et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil;	And the fourth reason is that if the woman's needle is longer than the man's, because it should have a deeper groove and there is great pain. And if necessary, one must send for a woman who is well-informed and knows how to insert the needle, and if you do not find such a woman, then it is not advisable to proceed with the operation.
et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere;	And the present one is a wise woman in the life of women, or a woman who knows a part of the art, and she commands that she do what you command of the examination of the stone;
et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge:	and look very closely if the woman is virgin:
adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere;	then it is necessary to place her hand or foundation and seek the stone;
et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	and if she finds it, then she must hold her hand away from her foundation, and recommends that she place her hand or with the pain, and press her right hand firmly on the bladder:
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse;	if she finds it, then it is necessary to move it from great to great from the entrance of the bladder until it reaches the root of the thigh;
puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie;	Then cut into the stone in the root of the thigh against the middle of the knee, where it is moved and feels the stone in that part.
et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite;	and do not move his leg above or below the stone, and let the wound be small at first.
puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont:	Then stop the bleeding in the wound, if you feel the stone so sharp that the wound can be closed until the stone can be removed, and know that many ways of stones are:
c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	It is to know, small and large and sharp and smooth, long and round, and those that have rain.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	If you have similar cases to know the outcome.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	And if you do not know, then put it in vinegar for an hour until the stone is cleaned.
puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre;	then return to your work, until the stone is fully removed, and have the tools that I mentioned in the extraction of the stone for people to assist you in your work.
et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide;	and if it does not move, and it is the artery that is cut, then put powder on the wound and bandage it with tents and bandages, and do not start again, and leave the stone and do not pull it out, lest by chance the patient dies.
puis cure la plaie.	then treat the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	When the heat of the blood is calmed, and the wound has healed, then return to your work until the stone is formed.
de hernie carnouse	of hernia carbuncle
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef;	Water is nothing other than an assembly of moisture or white saphir, which is dissolved out of the cavities that contain the urine.
et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit I autre oef;	and is called "syfac", and it is never properly in the web of the eyelid, if one thinks that it is the other eyelid;
et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit;	and it is the thick skin between the white syfac that we have said;
et ceu n’avient se poc non.	and it does not have a name.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the growth of this branch is due to its weakness that comes from the roots, and it is spread by that matter.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors:	And it never comes from striking on the eyelids, and this moisture has many colors:
ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus;	or it is yellowish to jaundice, or it is without redness, or black, or watery white, and it has more;
et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	and these are the signs to recognize this assembly, for if it is the white syfac that we have said, then the abscesses are present, slightly long like the shape of an eyelid, and do not open the eyelids, because it has moisture all around.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef;	And if he has moisture in the own bandage, then abscesses are treated with a part of the egg, and for this reason it is thought to be another egg;
et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien;	and if his moisture is between the skin of the wounds and the white sfax, then he feels it well;
donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	therefore when you want to know the color of the moisture, try in all the surrounding tissue where it was before.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to what comes after the introducer, judge what is inside.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors;	And when we cure it with iron, then it is necessary that the hairs be cleansed according to some power and the replenishment of his body;
puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz;	then the sweat on his back, above something a little high, and put much cloth on him;
puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions;	then lift up on the right side, and command the minister to lean to the left, and extend the rod to one of the two ribs near the ribs;
puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir;	then take the spatula and cover the ribs with the skin on the long side up to the sharp point, and your blade should be straight in a cutting motion across the ribs towards the white face, and gently scrape the skin according to the power;
puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont;	then pierce the white face flat with a sharp, wide opening, and extract all the sharpness, then place your forceps, and press the white face upwards;
et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement;	and do not touch the bones of the ribs, but only the sinews.
cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue;	and carefully remove the entire or even the ribs themselves, if you do not cut it well, it will return to him sharply.
et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac;	and if the bone breaks during your work, then reset it in its place when you have completed the work of the sinew.
puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then sew together the two pieces of the rib bone at a seam, then treat it as with other wounds until it is healed.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc;	And if you break the bone and it becomes corrupted with another disease, then it is necessary to tie the veins that are suspended, in doubt of the flow of blood.
puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	Then copulate the joint to all the suspensory, and strain the eye, and treat it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices;	And if it is sharp and assembled in two parts together, these are two branches.
si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset;	If you copulate the other part as you have done the first evenly, then soak the blood, and put in the wound linseed steeped in rose oil.
et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	And put on top other linseed steeped in wine and oil, and put over the two joints, and put over doubled cloths, and tie it to all the limb which is according to this form.
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil;	Then take two cloths and place them according to this pattern and sewn together at the waist of the undergarments, and one of them on the back just above the buttocks, and the other at the side where the armpit is.
et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier;	and the other two over the two angles, and let the whole assembly be the restriction in the loop of the undergarment.
et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers;	And never apply this cauterization in the form of an iron tail, and it is that you grasp the delicate cauterizing needle and pierce the skin of the wounds, and let it be heated as we have said, so that the white matter that contains the acid is discovered;
si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	Take the fire cautery in this form, and pierce the affected area with a thin needle, and burn the skin with this delicate cautery:
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout;	And cover it in all ways that you can, until you remove everything;
et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef;	and be careful that the flesh does not touch the bone;
et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve;	and make sure that this work is more safe;
et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille;	and keep from bleeding of blood, and make sure that the work of the needle is even;
et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	and if nothing goes against you, or an abscess forms or bleeding occurs or other things, then cure what goes against you, according to what is said above.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit;	And if the pain is unbearable, and does not want to endure this work due to its horror, then apply perforation as I have told you, and when you are certain that the boiling water is ready, place the injured part on a raised seat.
pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors;	Then pierce the abscess in the unaffected part of the body, and place the perforation at a distance from the entire length of the body.
et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer;	And let the holes be wide enough so that all the sharp pain is removed.
puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee;	Then place cotton on the wound and tie it, and let it bleed until all the sharp pain is removed, then care for the wound until the wound is healed.
et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant;	and if the white cloth does not allow the sharp edge to exit from the mouth of the wound, then you should insert a pen or the instrument used to treat hydrophobia, of which the form is as follows:
et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	and widen the wound slightly, and make sure that the sharp edge returns, and it is reassembled after six months or within a year, and when it is reassembled as before, and thus it will pass the pains in its course.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the testicles
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse;	make sure that in the section of this branch, many positions are possible, for which it seems to me that moving it is better than leaving it;
et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	I will tell you about the work and similar things of an abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions;	Therefore, many abscesses come from wounds, and at the same time from blows;
et c’est par mout de cas.	and this is often the case.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion;	It is to know by excessive sharp and wet, which is expanded from blows, or from impact;
et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors;	and the color of the abscess according to the color of the blood;
et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief;	and does not show pain, and is a painful abscess.
et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	And perhaps some gray, painless and pale abscesses, and of yellowish color, and never come from a vein or from inflammation of the blood.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois;	When it is by the out of artery, then it is known by the position of the abscess being high, when you press it to your fingers;
et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	and it only requires that you touch it.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars;	Those who are made of venous blood are known by their position at the expression of gentle touch of the fingers, and can well do the cut across this resemblance, and across others.
et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	and it is that you cope the courage of the coins, then the wound is high, and the trauma from the white swab, and deliver the suspended part of all parts of the wound.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope;	If the shoulder is already set with these charms, then it is necessary to remove the shoulder and the cloth.
et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	And if it is in the armpit or inside the ribs, then it is necessary to remove all of that which is inside the ribs, and the cloth should be replaced.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the hair at birth is on the back of the head, it is necessary that you shave it all, and straighten the forehead, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your work is done, apply the wound with a soft cloth soaked in rose oil and wine, then apply other treatments until it is healed.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the testicles
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait;	This is an abscess surrounded by an envelope resembling a blister, with the softening of the sinews, and the painful movement of the limbs as it moves.
et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	And the treatment of this disease is just as difficult and painful as the previous one, and we will tell you about it in the work, according to what the ancients did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment;	You should sit the painful limb on an elevated seat, then lift the suspensory ligament of the fingers to your two fingers, and all the tendons that are close to the carpus, and comb the masters, and extend them properly.
puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples;	Then cut the sharp spatula wide through the tendons at that place, as long as they are exposed, and then scrape each part, as we have said in the extraction of the arteries that are in the temples.
puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief;	Then insert a needle or one with double thread, and tie it to the first joint where the blood came out, and tie it to the other end.
puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues;	then place the copper correctly in the middle, according to the length of the wound, and draw out the corrupted moisture;
puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions;	then treat the wound as with others by injecting ointment, so that no one notices that they have inserted one of the coins.
car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz;	for if there is no harm, and all the men come in sight, then it is necessary to remove the coins from all the men.
si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	if they do not lose their coin through the incision of the men, and dry up and cannot be helped.
de la routure dou syfac	of the toothache
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions;	The consequences of this branch are due to the section that comes or sticks out, or the extension over the belly in the part of the angles, because the intestines descend from that break to one of the coins.
et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes:	And this rent is due to either too much sucking, or from the extension of the limb, and these two methods come from many causes:
ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses;	or from impact, or from jumping, or from a loud noise, or from lifting heavy weight, and similar things;
et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement;	and the signs when it is due to too much sucking, is that it happens slowly and gradually, in a long stretch, and does not come suddenly;
et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	and the abscesses are even up to the chest, because the sucking quickly reaches the intestines.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs of the cutting of the tongue are that it brings on sudden pain at the beginning, and there are various appearances of abscesses outside the skin, and it is for the end of the intestine and the heart because of the cutting of the tongue.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And sometimes the worms are found with the intestines, and they are retained inside, and cause great pain to suffer from the misalignment, especially when pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these cures of iron with fear, because it should be avoided.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir;	And the method of treatment is that you command or prick at the intestines to twist them into a ball in the wound, if it can be pushed back inside;
puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes;	Then place it on its shoulder. Between your hands, and lift the elbows;
puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc;	then press the chest above, and cover all the skin of the ribs;
puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir;	then stuff between the buttocks woolen cloths according to what you have skill to open the wound, and let them be such that the eyes do not come out;
puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars;	then scrape the belly that is outside the skin of the ribs, until the white belly is exposed from all parts;
puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac;	then stuff your middle finger in the part that leads to the ribs, in the part between the white belly that is outside the skin of the gut, and between the second belly, and depart from where it is behind the gut, and between the second belly;
et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille;	and if it moves to the right within the curve of the ribs, and places the white cheek on your right hand, and raises the chin towards all the face towards the waist;
et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement;	and commands the assistant to extend the chin upwards, and release what is behind the jawbone;
et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz;	and ask if there is any intestine wrapped or white cheek hard, and if you find anything, if it pushes against the belly outside;
puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions;	then take a needle or it has the thick thread made of silk, and push it into the back part of the face, which is after the skin of the ribs;
aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz;	After the belly, then cut the tendons that appear like hairs, as long as there are four hairs.
puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars;	Then gather them one above the other in the shape of a cross, and bind them with a strong thread of two parts.
puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne;	Then wrap the tendons like hairs, and bind them with two parts of thread, so that no one who might touch them could enter into wounds, as an abscess does not come.
et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi;	And then apply the thread along the first thread of two parts of that, and after these two threads leave the thread that is outside the skin of the belly, the great one of a dowry.
et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte;	and then the other according to the roundness that the mouth carries.
puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant;	then cut in the part that is outside the skin of the fingers, as we have said before.
puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	then apply a softened wool in oil to the wounds, and put it on as we have said before.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And never cauterize the white, pus-filled wound that we have said, after incision, due to doubt of bleeding.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui;	for this has often been done, and leave the wool until it heals over it.
et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece;	and if it takes too long to heal, then boil water and put it on as we have said before until it heals.
puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	then treat the wound with other treatments until it is completely healed.
de hernie carnouse	of hernia carbuncle
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this branch, I have never seen anyone dare to make the cure by iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz;	And the ancients said that it is made so that it is like a branch that is together with the bone, in a way that you tie the vessels, after the incision slightly to the outside.
puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient;	Then cover it with a bandage, and treat the abscess that works, until the vessels die.
et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the treatment as we have said, until they are healed.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus;	No time comes for tearing and breaking, as we have said, and open the veins;
et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres;	and do not cut any of the intestines at the same time, and if there is, it is little, and repair every hour.
et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent;	And if he remains too long at this point, the wound or the infection spreads, as the intestines descend.
et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert;	And it happens by the extension of the pus that is in the angles, as we have said, because it is extended, then it is softened and the muscles are stretched and opened.
et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit;	And the treatment is by cauterization, as we have previously said.
et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere:	And it is never treated in this way:
et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois;	And the hairs are cut off with a sharp blade over their back between your hands, then the limb is stretched widely according to the quantity of three fingers.
et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac;	and then extract the sinew that is outside the skin that connects, then take the tendon and put it on top of the bone that appears from the sinew.
et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre;	and press it against the front of the abdomen, then cut the two bones that appear from the sinew above the head of the tendon, and cut both.
puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines;	then extract the head of the tendon, and do not cover it with the sinew or extend the wound or anything else, as I have told you in the treatment of the root of the intestines.
puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	then treat it according to the treatment of wounds.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when you remove the splinters, uncover and heal the wound until it is healed.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The splinter is hidden, and does not appear in the rent, and the cauteries are dull in this limb, and closer to salvation.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	of the softening of leather from harnesses
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir;	Many times the tendons of the joints are softened in some men, because the cartilage inside is softened and it can be seen.
et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil;	and it is a matter of skill, when one wants to cure it, that one makes the misaligned part lie on its back, and the copper which is softened over the natural skin;
puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a III costures ou IIII fermement;	then join the two lips at a seam, and if you see that it is too much, cut off the excess of the softened skin at three or four stitches;
puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	then cover between the seams, and treat it like other wounds until it is healed, and cut off the thread.
dou chastrement	for gently
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre;	It is said that these things are not mentioned in our law, and for this reason I do not want to speak of them in this book;
et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres:	and are necessary for two ways:
dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure;	one is that the physician responds when asked, and in his knowledge the cure;
et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	and the other, because we often have experience in castrating some animals to help us, such as goats and sheep and rams and others.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres:	I say therefore that castration is done in two ways:
ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	or by traction, or by cutting.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant;	In the one that we make by traction, we make our seat the animal in high heat, until the testicles are softened and during;
puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	then hold them in your hand, until they are reset and you no longer feel them.
Du chastrement de taille:	The punishment of the waist:
covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez;	it is necessary that you rub the animal skin with your right hand, and press the leather of the sleeves against it, then tie the suspenders, and burn each eyelet at the top, when you have well scorched them;
et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz;	and leave no spot of the face and the subtle face that is on the sleeves;
et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure;	and this method of punishment is better than that which is made by attraction, because at the attraction something remains from the sleeves, by which the animal desires pleasure;
puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Then treat the wound until it is healed.
des hermofrodites	des hermaphrodites
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes:	There are two main methods for men:
l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	One method is that between the two testicles, open wide as the natural shape of a woman, with hair and sometimes cutting the urine.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	And the other way is in women, and has a penis like a finger and two testicles.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies;	And the treatment of men and women is that you remove all infected sores, and treat them as other wounds;
en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	In the second method, men whose urine sprays through the skin of the testicles have no treatment.
de la tentigene	of the incision
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir;	Tenting is an infected sore above the natural part, as long as it is too ugly to see.
et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	and some women have had it as large as a hand, and that is the cure.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement;	You should wipe away the excess blood from your hand or fingers, and clean it lightly.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	and do not move too much in front, as arrows do not come, then the treatment of other cures until it is healed.
et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	and another char that is born from the mouth of a marsh, and use it, and by chance it jumps forward, and it is similar to a cow, and for this reason they called the old "cow disease".
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If it is necessary to treat it, as we have said about the treatment, and care for it until it is healed.
de erratique	of erratic
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis;	It is erratic when the nature of the woman is not well known, or the pustules are small.
et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est;	And it is either natural by birth, or an accident due to disease that has come.
ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit;	Or it is due to a charm, or a subtle blow or sharp, and it is done by force in the marsh, or in the ribs, or outside, or wherever it may be.
et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir;	And they prevent the conception, and childbirth, and perhaps the flowers to have.
et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	And the knowledge of this is by the gaze of the tail.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	If the swelling appears to be nearby, then it is either yours or his.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi:	If it is a subtle blow, and it is near to the two lips, then you hurry, and the treatment will be as follows:
met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes;	Put your two index fingers together, and the woman is on her back, spreading her legs;
puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens;	then the two books are formed, as long as the subtle sphincter is not torn, and not over the obstructions.
puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	then take linen, and soak it in oil, and place it on the limb, and grind the woman against him every day, so that he cannot stitch.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	And if the facial swelling is hard and rough, then it is necessary to apply a poultice like a leaf of mint.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope;	If the obstructions are made of bone, then soak it in vinegar and cover it.
et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef;	and have the remedies stained with blood, such as dragon's blood, incense, and plenty of sulfur.
puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder;	then apply a wide piece of cloth, so that the wound cannot stitch.
et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec;	and then let it be long, and the bandage a tent of dry linen;
puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat with other remedies until it is healed.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	And when in the marsh comes a horse's kick, cover it according to this method, unless it is an infected abscess.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	For the infected abscess in the marsh, one should not touch it with fire.
des emorroides	of hemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul;	Emorrhages are openings of veins which do not usually bleed, and when the emorrhages are old they become thrombosis.
et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	and we have had in the section similar cases and signs, and I will say here those that require treatment.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	I say that hemorrhoids and thelul, when they are formed in the marsh, and do not appear until felt, if not treated with iron.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	Those that can be felt at the edge of the marsh, are those that can be treated.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses;	Therefore it is necessary that you put the woman in a cool house, then apply leeches, and the cope in its roots, then powder of medicines restraining blood, such as acacia and dragon's blood and incense, and similar things.
puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide;	Then, press his feet against the wall for an hour, then put it in cold water.
et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	And if blood comes out, if it sits in a decoction of sumac and the skin of green apples and galls and similar things, then take flour of wheat, mix with honey and egg, and make a poultice on his back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	If he is strong, it is good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir;	If not, then make him dizzy by suction at the back and breasts without hurting;
puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	Then take the cloth, and soak it in juice of plantain or in juice of elder with old wine, and make him dizzy at the limb.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	And when the abscess is ready, treat the wound with poultices until it is healed.
et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul;	and the one called "albathir" is red and resembles the sharp chief, so cover it as I have said for the throat.
et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then treat it until it is healed.
des apostemes de la marris	of abscesses in the marsh
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	Many types of abscesses come in the marsh, such as chancre and pustular abscess and herpes and estiomenes and fistulas and hemorrhoids and chaut abscess, and many other diseases that I have mentioned in the division.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe;	Therefore, I must say in this treatment of the abscess that comes in the marsh, which is not one of the abscesses that are filled with pus.
et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	And if you know the work of iron, look to see if the abscess is hard and at the beginning of its arrival, and painful and feverish, and if it becomes red, then you can see it.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie;	Therefore do not rush to pierce, but wait until the pain is eased;
et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe;	and then place the dislocated part on the seat, and have two small seats where it leans, and support it on its back and gather its feet to the sides of the leg;
et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien;	and let its knees be spread apart, and place its arms away from its hips, and tie them together with a strong cord;
puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme;	then place the ball against the right side, and introduce the tool used to make the mouth of the marsh, from which afterwards comes the form;
et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide;	and it is necessary that when you see this tool being introduced, that you check the depth of the marsh, so that nothing comes in front of it which it should not, and that it does not dislocate the limb;
et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve;	and if the instruments are larger, it is necessary to cover the depth of the marsh with cloths, so that the instruments do not hurt him.
et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	and it is necessary to put the horn of the instrument above, and to stain the instrument.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit;	And when the abscesses are open, and they make it by hand, then it is necessary to cover the head, at the spatula level.
et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec;	And when the wound is drained, then it is necessary to put in the wound moistened cloths in red or green dry oil.
et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites;	and put the bandage of the wound at the depth of the marsh, and put above the marsh and above the clean moistened cloth in vinegar or wine.
puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then the healer after two hours of heating comes to the patient, as long as they are healthy.
et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites;	and never lift the marsh and the wound with a poultice of honey and honey, and then with honey or roots of lily and aristolochia being cooked.
puis reveigne a l’oignement.	then reapply the heating.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	And if the wound is sutured with a marl, it is necessary to be careful not to use iron, but to cure it as we have said in the division.
de l’enfantement	of childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar:	Midwifery is first to the birth that she knows the natural shape of the child, and the signs if it is when you see the woman approaching, and wants to smell the armpit.
adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir;	then quickly take the child out.
adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui;	then shake that child according to its natural shape, and it comes out with its head first, and the second part with it.
et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost;	and when you see these signs, if it is necessary to gently press on its belly, so that the child comes out quickly.
car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification;	for when it descends with its head first, and the second part is with it, and it is cleaned of its excess by good washing.
et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	and this that comes differently does not come naturally.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises;	for it never comes out of its feet, and it comes out forcefully from the back or the head, and the hands, or it comes out over its belly, or sometimes, and it is turned by chance on its neck, and by other bad shapes.
si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	If it is necessary for the shoulder to be skillful and subtle in these things, and if one becomes aware of error and deception, and I will show you all the figures how one should assist them.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent;	If the child comes out through its own head, and the woman gives birth painfully, and the strength of the one who is giving birth is weak, then let her sit on a seat, or the women hold her.
et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	And take oil or fenugreek cooked in its own fat, and then give the shoulder between its two fingers the smallest amount of it that is here in this form:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers;	and break the second joint, and cover its joint until the moisture that is inside has gone away.
et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament;	Take the belly of the woman until the child descends, and if it does not, then it is necessary to grease the woman with mustard plaster made from fenugreek with sesame oil.
puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre:	Then make her inhale and exhale through a cone, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour.
si istra maintenant l’enfes.	If now the child is born.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc;	And if both hands are dislocated, then it is necessary to gently and slowly reset them little by little.
et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut;	And if they cannot be placed in position, then place the woman on a chair, and lift her feet up high.
puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement;	Then, remove the seat above ground, and tie it up so that the woman does not urinate during the removal.
et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	And if the hands cannot enter, and the child is dead, then use the hands that were previously placed on the buttocks, remove the child, and reset it evenly.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	from the child's birth above its feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut;	When the child comes out of its feet, if it is necessary to put it up high;
et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz;	and then turn it little by little until it is even;
puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	Then take the feet and extend them little by little.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi;	If it jumps towards the toes, then command it to bend, and make it spit out the condition.
si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	If you must, God willing.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it does not lie down as we have said, gently turn it little by little until it is in the natural position.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	Then it will be perfectly fine.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier;	And if it does not come out as we have experienced, say so and take muscle powder of high, and oil of sage, and melted glue, and grind everything in a mortar;
et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz;	and put on the natural substance of the woman inside and outside of this plaster, then make it sit in high heat until above the ribs;
et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre;	and when it is softened outside, make a garland of myrrh, and put it on, and let it sit for an hour.
puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	then make it sit on the seat, then make it vomit and hold its mouth and nose, and lightly press its belly, for it is about to vomit now.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	of the child's head above its knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc;	When a child comes in this form, so put the baby's hands gently and gently;
puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit;	then it should be laid on its back, and the feet hang down, and it should lie on the bed;
et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval;	and gently fold its hands, then grasp the hands on the stomach, and remove the swaddling clothes until it is dressed all over;
et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains;	and if the child does not cry, then take its feet and gently move them, then move the stomach upwards, then push your hands;
et ewe l’enfant poc et poc;	and gently feed the child.
et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	and command the woman to hold it until the child is born.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	of the issue of the child who comes out widely with a hand extended
I covient engignier a ramener la main:	You must engineer to bring back the hand:
s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler;	if you cannot bring it back, then lift the woman and go;
s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment;	if she cannot go, then make her lie on the bed, and bend her knees gently;
puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit;	then apply the muscle relief that I have mentioned;
et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main;	and if she does not improve, then make her sit on the chair, and then study how to bring back the hand.
et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	and if the child is according to the natural shape, and make her spit, and command her to bend until the child comes out.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	of the child's neck, and have his hands spread out, and his face turned towards his mother's back
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement;	It is necessary for the patient to soak their hand in water, then slowly and gently turn it, and lightly rub it.
et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc;	And when it is even, place the natural muscle balm of aloe and oil, as we have said, then command the patient to move it slowly.
et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne;	And when you have done this, place it on the seat, and command the patient to sit down.
et la fai esternuer.	And make them spit out.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	in the same way for all the second joints
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie;	When it comes to this way in the second joint, then adjust the second joint to your angle, until the moisture is drained.
et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes;	And if it cannot be adjusted to its face and neck, then adjust the back, so that it is not held back, and let the adjustment go.
puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois:	Then push the child inward, until you have placed it as it should be, and command the woman that she does not give birth again:
adonques si istra legierement.	then strain lightly.
de l’issue des gemelz	of the issue of twins
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent III ou IIII;	it is said that children are born many times, and sometimes in giving birth, three or four:
et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	and this is not a strange thing, and it happens often.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom;	these are strange things, and they do not live if they are not named:
je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude;	I know that they are multiplied, and they are divided by the midwife who gives them names, which is tied to the belly:
et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	and never come out as naturally as others do, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait;	And if they come out harshly, as we have said the treatment should be, and if there is a subtle breeze, and do it quickly and lightly as it does.
et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	and do so as it is worthwhile for health.
de plusors enfans	of many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient;	Never are they formed in the first, second, third, fourth, fifth, sixth, seventh, or more than fifteen years old, and are all formed in the shape of a child by the measurement of the wise glorious, and it is fitting that the breeze should heal everything, for perhaps similar things happen to them.
si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	Do it according to what is appropriate.
de l’enfant mort	of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains;	When treating a woman for a dead or live baby, as I mentioned in the section on labor, and it does not come out, and you are forced to perform surgery with your hands;
si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort;	if it is necessary that you remove from the woman if she is of sound health and has no accident or fear of death;
si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees;	if it is necessary that the woman be placed on her back, and her legs bent down, and her legs raised;
et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant;	and the midwife the tweezers of the other part, where she is tied to the bed so that she is not treated with the delivery of the child;
puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges;	then rub the mouth of a tumor with moist mustard seed mixed with garlic and fenugreek seeds, then insert the juice of these oils and mixtures into the tumor;
puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief;	then gently close the tumor, then check if the needles are suitable for the skin, and if the patient is not allergic, then let it drip on their forehead;
si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes;	if the needles are inserted into their eyes or in their throat or in their mouth or in their palate or behind the beard or on the forehead or beside the costal cartilages, and if they drip on their feet, then let them drop on the soles of their feet or on their chest or on their shoulders;
et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide;	And it is necessary that he dye the wound with his right hand, and place the cauterizer between the fingers of his left hand, and hold the cautery lightly in any of the ways we have mentioned, until he reaches the empty thing.
et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	And this is the shape of the wound:
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz;	Then hold against the other wound, or if you have skill in this matter, so that the extraction is equal.
et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	Then hold it equally by moving from one side to the other, in order to move, and let the wounds be dyed with equal dye, as is the shape:
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie;	And if a part remains, oil some of its bones with oil, and put them in that part, and pull the other part;
et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	and if none remains, put this bone or more on top of the limb, and do it as much as it all goes out.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote;	And if one hand comes in front of the other, and it cannot be brought back by tightness, then you must wrap around the injured part, until it all goes out;
puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	then put the bandage in the joint of the foot or at the heel, and so you must do in the other hand, and to both feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue;	And if the child is large and tight at the outlet, or has an acute angled head, it is necessary that you push the spatula-shaped bone between your fingers, and making the head and straightening the acute angle.
ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui;	or you break it with the tool called "almidach", from which the shape comes with the tools or chapter that follows this one.
et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment;	and thus make the same action if the child has a large natural head.
et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer;	and then pull the bones with pliers, and if the child jumps and is held by the forceps, it must be cut as much as possible until the blood that has been issued stops.
et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues;	If she cannot get out, then break the copper piece with which you can.
et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	And if it is inflated in the belly or under the ribs, then you must prick it until the pus flows out.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	If it is above its feet, then it is light attraction, and the direction to the mouth of the marsh is light.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main;	And if it is hard in the belly or in the groin, then you must squeeze it out with a cloth wrapped around your hand.
et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre;	And making the belly or the groin, as much as the pus that flows out.
et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris;	And if the other member is broken, and the patient remains, then boil the bay leaf in water, and bring it to the mouth of the wound.
puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer;	then apply heat or cold, and treat it accordingly;
et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses;	and if the mouth is swollen due to an abscess that has come, it does not need to be pierced, but rather things that are wet and heavy should be administered;
et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	and apply plasters, and soak in hot and moistening baths.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif;	and if it is on the side of the chest, and you can make it even, then treat it as we have said for a living infant;
et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	and if you cannot make it even, then treat it by applying pieces and leave nothing of the second part.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris;	And when you have done this, apply what we have said about abscesses that come from the marsh.
et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	And if blood comes out, it should be stopped with immediate pressure, and other treatments applied.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut I autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	I saw a woman in whose womb an infant had died, then consulted the other with regard to that one, and it also died.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time, some abscesses appeared in the groin, and they swelled so much that they burst, and then began to cause great pain.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I went to the doctor, and he thought for a long time, and could not close the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I applied strong adhesive, and it pulled out some bones, and after some time, others came out.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I was very surprised because the belly does not have bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	I thought it was the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point;	I dressed the wound, and in the process broke bones, until the woman was no better.
et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu;	And she remained long in this condition, and it was only a little improvement from the bloodletting.
et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	And I did not remember this chapter until now because when the masters find an unusual thing, they know how to provide help.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	bring the marble back to its place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres;	This comes after the form of the presser, by which we have the books.
et a II tornans as II chiés des II liiens.	And at the second turn, to the second question of the two joints.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux;	However, the horns should be more slender than the restrictor, and should be made of smooth or box wood.
et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi;	And its mouth should be one and a half inches wide, and the edge of the trees should be, and a span and a half long.
et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus;	And between the two joints should be two stoppers of this same wood, which are firmly fixed in one and the other, half a span long or a little more.
et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	et these two incisions are made in the mouth of the horse when turning the two corners.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles;	Another form, which appears more subtle and lighter, should be made of smooth or boxwood, according to the appearance of the tongs.
et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large;	and it should have two incisions, such as you see, of one span in length and one wide.
et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes;	and when you see that the horse's mouth is open with all the instruments, place the woman on the bed, the feet down and the legs spread, then insert the two incisions incised together into the mouth, and hold the head of the instrument between her teeth.
puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	Then work your hand with all the tools, as you have done with evenly made needles, according to the quantity that you see opening the mouth of the marsh, until the bail does what it wants.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances;	These tools are all above, and they are multiplied in their likenesses;
et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	And when the master has them all arranged, the work is more difficult, and higher for those who have more of them.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	If you do not disregard the tool that you have not matched, for its need is not excusable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis;	When the second one is retained at childhood, it is necessary that you command the pain to retain its hair, and then make it spit out the conditions, and hold your hands to the mouth and nose;
et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	And if she jumps for the sky, well then.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire;	If not, take the pot, and make a poultice or covering, and put herbs that can open the mouth of the marsh, such as calamint, anise, chamomile, cassia lignea, and centaury.
toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu;	All these herbs, or any of them, should be cooked or poured over boiling water above the fire.
puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris;	Then put a cloth or poultice from the pot in her mouth, and the other head in the mouth of the marsh, and let the steam come into the marsh.
puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	Then make her spit it out, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If the patient sneezes repeatedly.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine;	And if she remains after this treatment, and is not much improved, command the bath attendant to rub her right hand with oil of sesame or mustard plaster, and then apply it to the affected area, and ask for the second one.
et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction;	And when she finds it, grasp and extend it slowly and straight, so that the husband does not hinder its extraction.
mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie;	But move it slightly to the right and left, and then pull it out.
si venra et se desaerdra.	If it comes out and disperses.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes;	And if the husband's mouth is also stretched, we have said the cure of expectoration and fumigation of herbs;
et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire;	If she is not of all that we have said, then guard that you do not follow her;
mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon;	but it is advisable that what is at the mouth of the wound, that you tie it to the belly of the woman, then clyster with the four-ingredient ointment;
si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer;	if the pains and bring back, and come force;
mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	but always, when she vomits if comes bad smell to the stomach and head, and bleeds the pain.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu:	If therefore fumigations inconvenient to that:
aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	none of the ancients have experienced fumigation of watercress and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The shape of the instrument used to fume the woman during retention of flowers and the secondine is this:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu;	And it is similar to glass, and one puts the head subtly in its place, and the wounds are large over the fire;
et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	and either the smoke over the coals, and the lice until they are killed, and then start another one.
de percier lou fondement	to pierce the foundation
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac:	Many children are born who do not have the foundation pierced, but it is stupefied by some subtle poison:
si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche;	so it is necessary for the midwife to pierce that poison at its proper place, and not pierce too deeply with the sharp instrument, and cover the wound so that it does not touch it;
puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then apply a poultice of mallow on wine and oil, then the healing ointment until they are healed.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it will not set, place or press a splint on it, and let it remain for some time, and it should be strengthened as the child wishes to go into rooms.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme;	And sometimes comes the stink of pus from a wound or an abscess;
si covient coper celui soudement:	if it is necessary to cover that pus:
si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	if they are treated, as we have said of the dog's excrement.
de la fistule dou fondement	of the fistula from the base
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors;	Fistulas that come from below the foundation are noduled, and grosser than those coming above the foundation, or in the space of two parts, if there is one fistula or more;
et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans;	and when that nodule is old, it works and increases the moisture above the white or subtle bowels, and sometimes those fistulas persist.
et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	And they are known by the fact that there is vomiting or vapors when the pain causes vomiting, and sometimes it happens that some words come out.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge;	And if there are fistulas that perforate the bladder, and perforate half of the penis.
et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	And they reach the joint of the ribs, and penetrate the throat.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant:	And thus one knows the fistula passing through the base, and not passing through.
et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	And it is that you should strike your sharp index or base, and insert a thin needle of silver or iron into the fistula when there is no twisting.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit;	And if he has twisting, then beat him with a thin tent peg, or the hair of a horse, until you feel the tent or the hair at your hand.
et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit:	and if you do not feel it, and he does not come from pustule egestion or windiness or vomiting, as we have said:
saiches qu’elle ne perce mie;	so that it does not pierce through.
si te haste dou curer.	if you are in a hurry to cure.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula is persistent near the bladder or near a urine conduit, if it allows urine to pass, and cannot be healed by medicines.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu;	if it has pierced up to the joint of the thigh, then beat him with the tent coming from the body.
s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement;	if there is no twisting and the invention of the pain is around, then it is because he has been bitten by a snake, and there is no medicine or soundly by cauterization.
et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	And in these fistulas, there is no cure except for patience and the vanity of those who try to heal them.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos;	In that one which is not ancient and not persistent, with hope of healing by iron, as I have experienced, and it is that the pain hides between your hands on its back;
et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre;	and the patient's legs up to his knees, and his knees bent towards his belly;
puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	then pour water or mud, if there is twisting, until you see the tent come out.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet;	If the pain is felt around the foundation, then it is necessary that you insert your second finger, feeling as if the tent has pierced it;
et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans;	And it should be discovered or you sense between your teeth the sphacel or the char, then scrape that it is finished;
si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	if not to grind a little that we cannot heal it.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc;	It is said that one can heal all, but this happens rarely;
et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit;	and the aid that is made, if it is to heat the subtle cauterization according to the width of the fistula, as it is already said;
et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement;	and the whole mouth is put into the fistula, until it comes out of the base;
et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil;	and do this two or three times, until you scrape that these charred pieces are removed, which are similar to an arrowhead;
et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	and then the treatment of broken bones in butter, until that bone sets, then the treatment of cauterizing charcoal and sealing.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If it is thus healthy, it is well.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez;	If so, no other method can be used;
et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur;	and if the bone is between, and does not pierce through the foundation, and between the tooth and the tent a thick layer of charcoal or sphagnum, and you see the fistula at which the covering points.
si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente;	if the covering of the beginning of the fistula, and is pushed back before the tent, and then the cauterizing after, until it reaches the top of the tent.
et sera delivré li tente, et cherra;	and he will be delivered from the tent, and fall.
puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	then one must believe those charcoals that seem like a goose feather, and not remain doubting.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if you cannot pull it out, and cut between you and the work, then cauterize with fire or medicine.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses:	For the fire cautery assembles two good things:
c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor;	that is to say, the burning of these charcoals applied, and the draining of blood and the drawing out of moisture;
puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe;	then the cure of moldy tents is to boil or crush them in a mortar, until the liquid is poured out, and the charcoal is burned in the liquid;
puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	then cure the wound of boils soaked in hard charcoal, and the dry medicines.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it is healed, it is healthy and does not return.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if the fistula comes from just above the foundation, and is distant from the body, then press on the top or foundation, and ask what it is.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres:	If you feel the tent, and there are two threads or sutures or charcoal, where it is about to pierce, there is no other remedy but hope and faith, by administering one of the three methods:
ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier;	or you cauterize it as we have said, or you cut it off at the base, or if you can, you put in tents and treat it as first aid.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit;	and do not move too much in the first few days, so as not to cover the foundation that holds the base, and the excretions come out through the opening.
puis le cure, si com nos avons dit;	then treat it as we have said;
par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé;	If fortunately it will be healed, or you remove that covering and the bandage since it is cut below the base, or by tent or by other appointed instrument.
puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues;	Then put your finger in that wound which is in the sore, as much as you can.
puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement:	Then study to restore the wound, and to delay the fistula in the part before the base.
si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	If it is a lighter thing to the pain.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere:	And sometimes fistulas are in this manner:
et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	And when you put the tent in the fistula, and it is where it costs the base below the skin above, then take a tent perforated at the head in this form:
Et i boute I fil tort en II, et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And you push the wire through it, and push the probe along the entire length of the wire into the fistula until it reaches the top.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement;	If it is persistent in the margin of the foundation downwards, then hold the thread of that which is punctured, in such a way that you bring your own or the foundation upwards.
et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II;	And trace the head of the thread, and gather the two parts together, and hold one against the other, and let it rest for one or two days.
et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent;	And keep it under no pressure until the thread covers those that are between the two, and heal.
puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	Then treat the wound until it is dried and healed.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not perforate, then try to puncture it in all possible ways that you can, unless it is too deep.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it does not matter to make the sutures so deep if it is too deep, and then treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans;	The shape of the spiny stone that they make the fistula is very sharp and one-sided;
et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	And on the other hand, not, because we do not know what we should not know, as you see here:
des emorroydes	from the worms
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres:	There are two kinds of dislocations:
ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement;	Or they are in the foundation, like grains of resin, and there are small and large ones, and in this case, blood is involved, and there are one or more, and they are under the foundation and at the base of the foundation;
mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors;	But those that are underneath have little moisture, and they are cut or a little sharp or a little bloody, and they have the color of the flesh;
et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz;	And the treatment of those who have them in the foundation is that you command the patient to urinate in different rooms, until the foundation is clean and the child appears;
si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines;	If you hurry, and it can be done with pliers, or you hold it at your fingernail, then cut it at its roots.
et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot;	And if they cannot hold it by their moisture, then take them with a cloth, or a rag, or a piece of linen.
et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere;	And strain them with your fingers, then cut, and powder with any hot powders that are in place of the fire cautery.
ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	Or you cauterize them as it is said in the book of fire cautery, then treat with other treatments until they are healed.
et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement;	And if the foundation cannot come out, then cauterize the painful part with biting and rough laxative to clean what is in the foundation, so it can come out openly.
cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere;	When the painful joints are pressed, and if their roots are deeply rooted, then the light treatment is applied.
et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	And you should press them with your finger or pliers, and cover them, then treat them as we have said, until they are healed, and do not fear the incision by iron.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere:	If it is necessary that you mend the wound in this way:
pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large;	Take a sharp needle, and thread it onto a needle, and then pull the thread from above and make the needle pierce from the other side, and turn the two threads away from the needle, and if it is wide.
et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc;	Hold the thread firmly, then release the thread, and extract the needle, and do likewise with all others, and leave it for a time to allow the excess blood to flow.
puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose;	Then place above the wound a piece of cloth soaked in red oil or cerate, and place it above the wound, and instruct the patient to rest.
et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then let it remain until they heal, and when they are healed, apply ointment and other remedies until they are healed.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	drily with the hands where the base is founded
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	often found dry where the intestines are, and due to constriction of nature, and when the disease is old and medicine does not help.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir;	If it is necessary to reset at the tip of a small bone or with your finger, the surface of which does not allow it to become moist.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient;	then the healer should position it as it should be.
et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez;	and if it cannot be positioned, then restart the scraping more forcefully than before until it is clean, and let it be scorched.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	then the healer should make it clean.
dou fremit	high fever
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont;	Mice are a small appearance deformed on the chest, and they go deep into the flesh.
et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	and never find the cause, and it feels like a fever of coldness, and it spreads throughout the body, and more than in other parts.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor;	And the healer should take a quill of a goose pen, or a strong pen of a vulture, and place that quill on the coldness, until the circle around the coldness is complete.
puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	Then turn your hand to all the soreness until you remove everything within the heat, and put it in front, and extract the heat from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see, do this in the form of a rain or iron dog according to this shape, and be subtlely removed and drawn upwards:
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser.	Do not let go, to hold on to both and press.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	And if you see that the heat is cauterized, as it is in front or in the chapter of cautery.
de la forme dou clistere	of the shape of the splint
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet;	Never made a salve with silver, lead, molten gold or tin;
et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	And never made those small and large instruments according to those that you will bring.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Those who are to be nursed in the care of children and those who are weak and painful, are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The form of the bandage is small and large, depending on how wide the belly is tied in this way:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez;	And if there is a disadvantage where the belly is tied, as you see, and the bowel is inside, then you must pierce;
et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I;	And say to one of the costal arms, two on the right side, and one on the left.
et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre;	And let the belly be filled with medicines from a pig's bladder or parchment, and perforate all around with small holes, and put one inch of space between each hole, then wind a thread tightly around in an X or around, and gather the belly as if it were a goat.
et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize;	And when the medicine is inside, tie the thread strongly to the instrument in front of a strong thread, then apply a poultice.
et c’est li forme dou cercle:	And this is the shape of a circle.
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement;	And let the medicine not be too hot or too cold, and oil the head of the poultice with oil or egg yolk, or a similar thing, then apply it lightly.
puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet;	then the ministers pour water into his two hands together, until it is all clear, then remove the cloth, and lift the patient's legs to a sitting position, and if he wishes to get out of bed, then help him as much as possible.
et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	and if he sleeps all night, it is even greater help.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you apply the poultice in the illness of diarrhea, and the medicine wants to come out, start it again as long as it is healthy.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant;	And if they are hemorrhoids at the base, or an abscess, then the cloth should be as gentle as for a child.
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	and this is the form of a gentle cloth over the skin where it is stretched:
des plaies	of wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies;	We have said in the division, the treatment of wounds.
or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	We will tell you about the treatments for hands and medicines, according to the completion.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are different according to what they are made of, and according to the parts or wounds that are made, and from which they are made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses;	The things by which wounds are made are done by piercing with a spear, and cutting with a sword or dagger, or of lance or staff or arrow, or similar things.
ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres;	or that are made according to the lessons of the body, such as a wound that pierces through the neck, or the head, or the foot, or the belly, or the liver, and similar members.
et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	and I will tell you the treatment of every wound, and I will begin with simple head wounds, because the memory will come in its chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut:	I say that when a simple wound comes or the head is not broken, and if it is a puncture of a similar thing, and the skin is completely torn and is large, and you slightly doubt an abscess:
si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree;	if you quickly heal the head itself if it comes soon from blood of the wound, and whether the healing is on the affected part:
et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	and avoid the pains of overeating of wine and heavy meats.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char;	And if he does not want to heal, let him soften his meat, and do not drink wine, and do not change his food:
et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice;	Put on the wound, if it is suppurating and pus comes out, moistened cotton with rose oil or sterilized wine.
et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés;	And if there is no suppuration, put on the wound, if it is fresh and full of blood, and it does not move due to air, powder that I will say a little later.
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound has moved, put on some bandages until it is healed.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large like a tailor's cut and similar, and the lips cannot come together by tenting, then stitch them together by sewing, as I will say about wounds of the belly, from sewing.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope;	If the wound is exposed to the bone, and can be moved, and only holds at one point, tie it.
puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	Then treat the wound with medicine, and replace durable leather in its place, and command the patient to eat soft foods, such as tests and cooked grain, like chicken, and similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure;	And if you find any suppuration or pus on the skin, and it is not attached to the bone, then scrape it all away, and pour in vinegar, then heal.
et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil;	And if there is an artery in the wound or vein, without cutting it, and it cannot be stopped by medicines, then tie the artery, and if you find any suppuration or pus in it, dislodge it, and tie it with a thread.
et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	And if it does not help, then cauterize it.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere:	And if these wounds are small and simple, then the treatment is light:
et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	and you put in this powder that sours as soon as the air touches it.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est:	And the manner of the powder is as follows:
pren encens une partie;	Take a part of incense;
sanc de dragon II parties;	blood of dragon two parts;
chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc;	live chalk three parts, and the powder finely ground, and fill the wound, and let it set firmly and join to all its blood;
et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle;	and then bind it well, and leave it without movement until it does not swell;
car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	for one should not use the medicine until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And never use chalk alone when one does not have incense or dragon's blood, but that the wound has moved.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre;	And if the wound has moved, immediately in its place, do not put any other of this powder;
mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe;	but place some digestible ointments, or hair of barley flour made of quicklime and honey, until it flows out.
puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	then the healer performs other treatments until they are healthy.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz;	And if a bone fracture comes with the wound, and it is small, then extract it with delicate pins;
et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	and I will tell you afterwards about the main fractures.
de la plaie dou col	of the neck wound
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If the wound comes from the neck and it is simple, there is no difference between this and the main fractures, but if the neck nerves or the artery is cut.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire;	If it is the nerves, then there is no other method than to leave the treatment and not put anything restricting, because it harms nerves and causes them to retreat;
et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres;	and do not place anything sharp on the wound, for the substance of the nerves is cold, and its continuity with the brain, which is one of the highest members.
mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	but let the medicine be gentle, like how wounds are washed with warm water, and mixed with rose oil, and bandages are also washed with warm water, and other remedies according to this manner, and keep them moist.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, then bind it with a bandage, and treat it until it is healed.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu;	And if the wounds are deep and full of pus, then prick or lower the limb.
et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est;	And if the artery is cut and blood flows, then stop it, and bandage it, and cauterize as necessary.
et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel;	And if it is pricked by a thorn in the neck, and cut off, or if the wound is cleaned, and the conductor is kept, by which the meat goes, if the wound is on the back of the neck, and do not touch the neck but put it back according to its natural shape.
et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then gradually tighten the bandage, and leave it for some time, then treat the wounds until they are healed.
et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier;	And if the wound has made an impression on the bone, and it is necessary to remove it.
et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue;	And if there are pieces of bone, and you can remove them all, and those that you cannot remove, leave until the wound has healed, and then disinfect and align the wound.
et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	If the wound is fresh, then apply powder on top of the powder I have mentioned.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if he has bone in the wound and there is a fistula, then treat it as I have described in his chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	of the wound of spear or of dagger
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne:	If it is a spear or sword wound, and the wound is deep, look to see if there is any ventricle (air pocket) that the hairs do not reach:
saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz;	then shave off those hairs that are mortal:
et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide;	if it is not deep and the wound is fresh throughout its entire length, then do not apply powder or bandage for the first hour for the blood that does not stop flowing out of the body, and let it return to the heart, and cover the pain:
mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor;	but I apply an attractive ointment, and tie it twice a day.
et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors;	and if you do not have an ointment, put dry cotton in the wound to soak up the moisture, and let it rest on the wound for three days, or four, or more.
si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne;	if no spasm occurs, nor trembling of the heart from another cause;
et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	and when you see good conditions, cut open the wound to save it.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	cure the other wounds and other treatments, until they are healed.
et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule;	and if it cannot heal and work, then cut open the fistula.
si la cure si com on doit.	if the care is done as it should be.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant;	And if the wound is from a sword or dagger cut, and it is simple, or worse, at the back, then the care for what is in front.
s’elle est grans, de cousture;	if it is large, of stitching.
et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez;	and if it is small, of powder, and if it is pressed into the bone, and has broken off pieces, then remove the wound, and the traces if they are necessary.
et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions;	and if they are not necessary, then let the wound rot, it will help the extraction.
et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	and other wounds to other members are as the judgments as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	abdominal rupture
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis;	The dislocations of the belly are large, medium, and small.
de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus;	Of the great wound, the intestines never jump out once, or the nerves of the intestines, by which they are inserted.
et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut;	And the sewing is more painful, and never is worse than the small wound than the great one, because one must put the intestines back in, if not they are put back in from top to bottom.
por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II.	Therefore, because the intestines swell quickly when they feel the cold, and they are put back in more easily, and because the medium-sized wound is worth less, because one must roll the intestines back to their place like the others.
Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres:	And the tear of the belly is according to FOUR methods:
les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies;	The two common sutures in the belly wound are in the seam of the belly, and the seam of other wounds of the chest and TWO other private seams are common to other wounds;
et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	And all in all, they are more suitable with the seam of the belly, and I will say each one and explain it.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres:	I say that when the wound is small, and nothing of the intestine is protruding, and there is no other thing to be done, it is best to put back by one of the TWO methods:
ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	either because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestine is swollen by the heat.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere:	When it is cold, warm it in this manner:
moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	Soak a sponge or some dry bread only in hot water, or boil it in hot, sour, and salty water until the intestine swells enough to be removed.
et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	And never do this again, as it may cause harm and should not be repeated to avoid discomfort.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose;	And when you see the swelling separate, moisten the intestine with hot or cold water and cook the meat, as this will make it easier to enter.
et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes;	And if it cannot enter, make a small incision in the instrument used to remove tumors.
et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait;	and the first care is to move the wounded part, that we should not cut without great necessity.
et c’est li estrumens por le fendre:	And these are the tools for the cutting:
si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	If you cut within the beak and not without, and see the shape:
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	And when the wound is enlarged and the intestines have jumped out, if you can put them back in their natural form according to their own place, because this is good.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief;	When the wound is wide and in the lower part of the abdomen, it is necessary to place the injured part on its back, and raise its legs higher than its head;
et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre;	and if it is in the lower part of the abdomen, place the head and the foot higher than the other parts, and also if the wound extends to one of the two sides, make sure that the injured part is higher than the other.
et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	And thus, you should manage as I have described in severe and moderate wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres;	For small wounds, apply what you have prepared, then place your hands between the wound and the patient's hand, and administer healing ointment that covers the entire wound and closes the lips.
et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort;	And this is the common method of stitching, and you should grasp one or more needles, according to the quantity of the width of the wound, then leave the tip of the wound a little space, and there insert a needle with good strong thread.
et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble;	And pierce the two needles through the two pieces of skin, which is outside the skin, until you make it pierce from that part, and gather the two ends of the thread together.
puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille;	Then the thread of a doubled string around the needle of one part, then gather the two ends of the wound evenly, and leave one inch of space, and insert another needle.
puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte;	Then tie the wound with a thread as you did with the first needle, and do not stop doing this according to what you know about needles until all the wound is closed.
et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer:	And let the needles be of medium size, between thin and thick, because thin needles cover the entire wound, and too thick ones cannot enter well.
por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes;	Therefore it is necessary that they be of medium size.
et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure;	and should not be placed too far from the edge of the skin and flesh, lest they pierce and open the wound before sewing.
et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee;	and then cover the wounded with needles, so they do not poke the bad hair at night, and put bandages or cloths on the wounded with needles to keep them in place, and leave them until the wound is sewn.
et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II.	And this method of sewing with needles is more suitable for small wounds, because it requires only one or two needles.
Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien;	The second method of sewing is common, and it is that you gather the two pieces of flesh and the two pieces of skin together with one needle and a strong thread in the middle.
et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras;	and when you have perceived these joints all together, if you reset the needle in the part where you began, in the manner that one does with the drills.
et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi;	and put a space between each stitch the thickness of a small needle.
ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	This stitch heals the man, and I sewed a wound that one had in the abdomen, which was made by a knife, and it was the wound more than one palm of great, and it was the intestines two palms of great, and it was the wound inside the belly.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	I brought back the intestine after it had been for 24 hours missing, and the wound was dressed with 15 hours, and cured, and was healed.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle;	And the man had been judged that he would die, and it was a miracle;
et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines;	and did not care for it with bandaging, for I was in a place where none were found, nor any medicine.
et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	and I put moss twice a day on the wound, and washed it with honey water until it was clean.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture:	Or I will tell you the two main methods of stitching:
pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens;	Take the needle, and the thread from the part behind this inside.
quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer;	When it has pierced the curved part on the right side, then the head of the needle or the thread where you have put the needle, and make it pierce from the other side of the part inside behind this.
et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	and the understanding of this stitching is that you sew as the tailor does the fur, and you leave one side of the seam once, and bring it back from another side, until the stitching is entirely completed.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere:	The second method of stitching, which Galen properly describes, is such that some do, who assemble the two parts naturally together, and apply one end of the seam to the other end, in a similar manner.
fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac;	Take a needle or one end of the arrow near, and pierce that part alone, and leave the two ends of the seam.
puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac;	Then turn the needle, and pierce it through the part before this, from below upwards, as for the two wounds of the throat.
puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit;	Then pierce both through the part before this, from below upwards, in the two other wounds of the other shoulder.
et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	And this is the most common method of sewing and stitching.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune;	If anyone says this word, and no one testifies to it, then one should sew the belly with needles, where there is thread in each.
et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies;	And one should insert one needle from one side and the other from the other side, in the manner of those who sew corsets.
et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	and it is more painful than other parts of the abdomen.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies:	The judgment of the wound is such as the judgment of other wounds:
et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout;	and it is that when you cut open the fresh wound to its full depth, and as soon as the doctor has moved it, you should replace the intestine and the skin.
puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe;	then apply the powder of incandescent charcoal, and if the doctor has moved it, then apply any ointment that is present until the wound heals.
et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach;	and sew up the wound, and be sure to clean the surface and the inside.
puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then treat the wound as with others, until it is healed.
et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	And if you do not have medicines, put it on as soon as possible, when it starts to bleed, with old cloth, and move it 20 times a day until it is healed.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples;	For you have no business with other medicines in many positions where the wounds are simple;
et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles;	And if you doubt that the wound does not communicate with the main members, then it is necessary to massage gently with oil of cold or red oil, and put it inside the angles, and remove from the joints;
et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine;	If he feels pain or nausea in the abdomen, and often occurs, then cluster him with black wine vinegar, and immediately if nausea comes to the intestines.
et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	And the puncture of the inside, and the salves that when it is the large intestines, it is lighter to heal than the small ones.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	The intestine called "jeun" cannot heal when it is exposed, and this is due to the smallness of the veins that are, and because of the subtlety of the whole body, and its proximity to the nature of nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres;	And if the pus jumps from the wound, and put it back as the intestines while it is fresh.
et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres;	And if it is old and becomes green or black, then you must tie the limb that is black, because there are veins and arteries.
puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	then remove the thing that is between the ligaments, and put the two fingers hanging from the part of the wound away from the wound until the extraction when the bones chip, and the wound opens.
de la routure dou boueil	of the breakage of the bone
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance;	When the intestines are punctured, and the wound is small, if it can be returned to some people, because I saw that a man was gutted by the belly of a lance.
et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez;	and it was the wound on the right side of the stomach, and it was inflamed and became a fistula, and in it was the excretion and the ventosity.
je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	I put care according to what I could, and did not stop until it was healed, and the wound closed.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre;	And when I saw him stitching, I doubted whether the hairs had harm in his belly;
et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans;	and there was no harm, but he remained in better conditions, and fed and watered;
et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere:	and they said no experts that when he has a small wound in the intestine, that he should be tied in such a manner:
pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus;	take thick strings, then gather the lips of the wound, and when the string has opened his mouth, then place it across both lips, so that he strains his mouth open;
et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise;	and then cover the head, and it holds so that he cannot slip, then place the other string as before, until the wound is completely closed;
et cout la plaie.	and examine the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere:	If the sharp object is in the intestine, and no harm comes to the patient, and it can be tied with a thin thread that is taken from the intestine of an animal, in such a way:
pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure;	take the sharp object from the intestine of the animal that is very dirty, and then tie it to the thread of thin linen, then wrap the thread around the needle, and examine the intestine, and pull it out through the hole;
et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance;	and this way of sewing is no further than according to the way of faith and hope;
et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	If the wound is large and extensive, especially when it is in one of the internal cavities, there is no remedy or health, only subtlety.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	of fistula or where it is
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	all wounds or abscesses, when they appear, are universally called "fistulas", and specifically when they are cut and opened.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil;	And a fistula is along the spine, a hard and white sore, where no pain is felt, and it is as sharp as the beak of an eagle.
et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse;	And sometimes clear and sometimes thick.
aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez;	And sometimes little and sometimes enough.
et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes:	And I have spoken of this in the section on wounds, that every wound that is not healed, and there is no char, it is only because of one of the EIGHT causes:
c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors;	It is to know, by the smallness of blood or wounds;
ou por sa malice;	or because of its evil.
ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char;	or because there is hard clotting within, and on the lips, which does not allow blood to flow.
ou il i a trop de bowe;	or there is too much swelling.
ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit;	or the joint is twisted, and the matter is of bad quality.
ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure;	or the medicine is not good for the treatment.
ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence;	or because the corruption is like a plague.
ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature;	or because the property in the region is late in digestion, and late in health, and expelled by nature.
ou il i a voinnes ou os:	where there are veins or bones
et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	and I have already shown all these causes, signs, and remedies in the chapter.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	It is necessary for me to inform you of the treatment of fistulas made by manual work.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors;	It is said that fistulas can occur in all members of the body;
car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez;	because there are fistulas that come from great veins, and arteries, and nerves, or to the face, or to the intestines, or to the bladder, or to any of the ribs, or to the spine of the back, or to any joint of the hands or feet;
et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	and if it comes to the property of the main member, and similar ones.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance;	And all these fistulas of this kind are of great suffering, and there is only labor and ignorance.
et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier;	And if there is no fistula that does not come from the joint that I have said, and you have confidence in the cure, and you know the remedy, take a rain or iron tent, if the fistula is straight, if it is crooked.
et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit;	And if the fistula is crooked, then circle it with a thin tent of wool, for the wool pours through the twists.
et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie;	And if the fistula has many holes and you cannot well encircle it with tents, then cleanse it through one of the holes, for the moisture will cut from one hole to another, and it cleans.
puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent;	then correctly and carefully to your power, that you know if there is bone or nerve, and is cut in half, and ask well of the patient about the pain he feels when pressing your hand, and the limb where he feels it.
et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens;	and when you will know truly the limb where it is, and if it is far from the joint, or nerve, or artery, or vein, or any of the limbs that I have told you, then proceed according to what I have told you, and remove the cause and the corrupt matter that is inside.
et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons;	and then the cure until it is healthy, and if the fistula is well deeply at the right place, then you should cut in half as much as you can, then put moist bandages in medicine water, and push them into the main part of the fistula, until the medicine corrodes the excess that remains at the bottom.
et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then I apply clean, warm wax, until it is healed.
et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	And if it is not healed by then, cauterize as we have said, and if the bone is corrupted by a fistula, cut it off.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit;	If the vein or nerves do not harm your principal members, as we have said.
et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez;	And if the bone is exposed, and there is corruption and blackness, then clean out the corruption until it is all gone, then apply clean wax until it is healed.
et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font:	And if it is not healed, and remains bowed as before, then do not delay in seeking further treatment.
si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu;	If you discover and desire to be at the bottom, and remove all corruption, then restore the limb.
et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	And if it is thus healthy, it is well.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir;	If not, seek that the corruption is too deep, that you cannot reach it;
si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature;	if there is no other means than to wait for nature.
et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un;	And if there is a small bone corrupted, and you can pull it out with pincers, if it is drawn to the appropriate tool for that, and if there are many bones, then remove them all.
et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	And if the moisture makes it against you, and there is no mistake or fear, then boil and moisten and char, and deliver the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os;	And if you cannot remove them within an hour, place a warm, moistening substance on the wound to soften the bones, and leave it until the bones are surrounded by flesh, and then they will be more easily removed.
et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie;	And if they are large bones, such as a leg or thigh, then wait until the corruption is complete and the bone is completely softened, then close the wound.
et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os;	And if there is a large part of the corruption, and it comes to form a mass around the bone;
si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez;	if it should be covered and covered with all around the corruption, and then treat it until it is completely healed.
et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	And I will tell you of a fistula that happened to a man in his leg, so that you might take example and help in your work.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir;	He was a young man around 30 years old, who had pain in his leg from a cause that came from within the body, such that the matters came to the leg, and was inflamed by a large abscess, and there was no cause to open it.
mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors;	But the wise ones over-opened it so much that the abscess opened, and they drained many matters, and it became a fistula, and there came much pain that everyone was groaning and sweating from the body.
et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors;	and many sought and sought care within two years, and there was no knowledge in the art of hands, until I was called, and saw her leg and the medicines that were used to treat it, and what was running through the pores at great speed.
et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	and became red the veins of the young, and had a yellowish color.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	I pitched a tent in one of these holes, and then I searched all the holes, and found that one was coming into contact with the other from all parts of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens;	I therefore hastened, and took from one of the pores until I discovered a part of the bone, and found it rotten and pierced, and the corruption was coming into the bone from within.
je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai;	I thought what appeared to me of the rotten bone, and I thought that there was no other corruption, but that which I had taken.
et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder;	and began to restore the wound with medicines soaked in long tension, and could not stick.
et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu;	Then I re-examined, and discovered the bone as before, and found continuous corruption in the bone, and the marrow, and then I removed it, and I was unable to heal the limb.
mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines;	But I could only manage to remove as much of the bone as possible, and then treat it throughout its entire length, and then restore it with medicines.
et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	And it healed and healed quickly, but did not want to start the work again except for the weakness of the pain, which could not bear it, and for the fear of death that I had of him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	For the evacuation of blood often occurred, but he was healed entirely, and in place of the bone grew a hard cartilage, and it was of good disposition and had no harm or contradiction throughout, neither to the left nor to the right.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere:	And if the jawbone is broken in any part of the body, it should be treated in this way:
pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut;	take a piece of cloth, and place it at the top of the bone that opens, and command that it not be extended upwards;
et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char;	and place another piece of linen, larger than the first, on top of the part that is outside the bone, and extend the jaw, so that you can remove the rotten flesh from outside, and cover the wound above the place where you want it to be, so that it does not bleed;
et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue;	and place a bandage or a cloth outside the bone to cover the rotten flesh.
et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	And it is necessary to be as much silk as one can see and feel the corruption, and be another time.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute;	And if the tooth is rotten and does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part, then remove the whole crown.
puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit;	Then put the wax on one side of the corruption and then silk from one part to the other, and let the silk be as long as possible from the corruption, as we have said.
et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part;	And if the corruption is in the joint, then cut the corrupted joint and silk the bone on the other side.
et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper;	and if its deformity is in the continuation of the second joints, there is no other remedy than to apply copper.
et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert;	and if its deformity is at the tip of the finger or toe, this is very difficult, but nevertheless you must inquire about that corrosion, how it opens.
et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire;	and clean it in all the ways you can, but do not cut the vein or the nerve against your will.
et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce;	and wash those that the cutter and the threads for covering these bones are many, according to the shape of the bones and the appearance of the nails, and their size and subtlety, and their greatness and smallness, and their hardness.
et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument;	and therefore it is necessary to arrange each similar work's tool;
et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies;	and the work will show you the tool that you will need to have knowledge of this art, according to the knowledge of diseases and their symptoms;
si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	if you think the tool that you have according to what it should be.
dou feu	with fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer;	The head of the shoulder dislocates either due to moisture, or due to lack;
et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre;	and when you have cured that corrosion by the care of medicines, and it does not improve, then it is necessary to amputate that member until the place where the corrosion comes, so that the pain escapes by death, or by malice, which is greater, due to the lack of the member;
et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors;	and the signs are such that the limb becomes black, so it seems as if it has been burned by fire, and remains black, then it goes through the corrosion of member to member, and takes hold of the whole body.
si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	if you have a bite, and if it is by the percussion of some poisonous animals, such as scorpions of the sea and snakes, and similar, if the corrosion is at the back of the neck, then the copper, and do not give it any space to come near the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras;	And if it comes near the hand, then the copper at the joint, so that the corrosion does not come near the arm.
et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute;	and if it comes to the arm, then cut the copper.
et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut;	and if it passes the collarbone, it is death, and there is no remedy except the amount of its virtue.
et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet:	and then do as follows when the corrosion comes or stings:
s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe;	if it comes to the first joint, then cut after the other joint.
et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet;	and if it stings, then cut all the sting.
et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil;	and if it goes up the leg, then cut at the knee joint.
et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort;	and if it comes above the knee, there is no other remedy than to let the pain kill.
et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers;	And the manner of applying a bandage or a cloth to the limb is such that you tie it above and below, and extend some bandages along one side, and other bandages along the other side, and you soak the char between the two limbs at a span's width, until the bone is exposed;
puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	then the bandage or cloth, and put a piece of linen on each part, so that the bandage does not touch the healthy limb, and comes to the injury, other lesion, and abscess;
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans;	And if blood comes out when you work, then cauterize the limb quickly, or put some astringent powders on it;
puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	then return to your medicine as it is accomplished, then bind the injured limb with a convenient bandage, and treat it until it is healed.
et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet:	and I will tell you what happened to the man in the story:
il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet;	he suffered a severe burn that looked like fire, and that corrosion first affected his entire body;
et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez;	and when the doctor saw the corrosion, he covered the body with a bandage, and it was healed.
et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions;	and after some time, the corrosion returned to his hand, and it came to me, and I put him on things that were reflective after cleaning the wound, but I could not stop the corrosion.
et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere;	and he asked me to hold his hand, and I did not want to do so unless I had hope of recovering the matter.
et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible;	and I also doubted that if I cut off his hand, he would not die, for the power of the ointment was weak.
et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez;	and he completely lost hope, and returned to his land, and stopped covering his hand, and was healed.
et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	and I have not counted it worth mentioning except for the purpose of doing something else if one has such business.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe;	Abscess never comes in the joint that is greased, and it lasts for so long that it causes great swelling.
et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz;	Then pierce and cut through, and into the belly, and let the limbs remain still, as if in a vat.
et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»;	And the skin above is also as delicate as the cloth you remove, and does not corrode the bone or nerve, and such diseases are called "sinus", and are not called "fistula".
mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»;	But if it is so long that it reaches the bone in front, it is called "fistula".
et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz;	And if the skin is so thin that it covers the bone all around, and even when it is as delicate as cloth.
et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	and does not become corrupted by its decay.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi:	And if you have sworn that the skin will not decay, and the corruption is not yet in progress, and the skin is blackened by fire, then the treatment of the ointment should be as follows:
regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite:	Look if the wound is large, and the belly that is in it has a putrid odor, then the ointment of Egyptian medicine made as follows:
prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel;	Take garlic, oil, and litharge equally, and put them in a small vessel to boil in the fire until the medicine is red and as thick as honey;
et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus;	And then take as much as needed according to your necessity, and make it into a sharp and sweet mixture, and apply it to the chest, and hold the abscess open.
et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant;	and leave the medicine in place for two hours, then expel it by squeezing;
fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor;	do this as many times as necessary until the chest is clean and the pus is removed.
et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez;	and never use the mixture of ash and powdered sulfur when this medicine is not present, and you should squeeze powdered vine wood, and pour boiling water over it, then let it drain, and apply it to the chest, until you know that the chest is clean.
et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet;	and if the pain is too great for them to bear, neither Egyptian medicine nor the sharp powder of ashes, then apply a poultice of honey and clay or if they have a little bit of burnt willow bark.
ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain;	or you apply a poultice of honey and melted wine, where the honey has the property of healing and cleansing, and the wine makes the wound rot.
et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin;	and when you have done this, and you have secured that the wound is well healed, then apply a poultice of what makes new flesh grow in it, and it is that you hold a definite plaster, and they make it with rose oil and wine.
ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens;	where you cauterize the wound with some medicines and ointments, of which I have described their properties or treatment of ointments.
et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez;	and if the pain is small and the wound cannot take in the cataplasm, then enlarge it a little with a needle, and put in an Egyptian tenting or basilicon ointment until it is enlarged.
et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	and if the wound is too large, then cut and leave it open as much as possible where the cataplasm can enter, and if the pain is above the shoulder, then cover or higher up the shoulder where it is.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char;	When the bow is in place, do not let the arrow stick out.
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere:	And if you cannot cover the entire side as you see fit, then arrange it in such a way that the bow is at its lowest point where it is, for when the bow is in place, do not let the arrow stick out and if you cannot cover the entire side as you see fit, then arrange it in this manner:
que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe;	so that the bow gently slides down, and leave nothing of the bow.
et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain;	and take consolidative remedies to place on the wound, and stay on the linen cloth that covers the entire wound;
puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois;	then apply the force in the right place to push back the swelling of the chest not too wide from the first, since it is stuck tightly under the other cloth according to the amount of the swelling, and put it on the wound to align the bowels, and do not remove the large drape until after many days once.
et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste;	and the one who is on the wound of the chest, often remove to remove the bowels, and check what comes out of the bowels, whether it is poison or little or enough, or digested or undigested.
et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez;	and take note if the patient feels pain or not, and whether there is an abscess or not, and when your medicine has been extended in a certain way and you see the nature that jumps over the wound of the chest, check if the chest is already raised, and approach the healthy side.
et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	and then dislocate it in the morning, or the next day, and when you dislocate the wound, if you change the bandage, and renew the poultice.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the chest is pushed inward after many hours, push the chest back so it does not remain misaligned.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	And if subtle poisons are cut after long tension, do not despair of health, for health approaches.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire;	For there are people who delay in applying char to their wounds, and those who do the opposite;
et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie;	and if they apply it in an undigested manner after many days, it is possible that the breasts will not heal.
et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine;	and if the breasts take a long time to heal, and are distant, then apply moist medicines in substance and dry in virtue, such as poultice, because there is a large part of vitriol, and this is the last medicine;
pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance;	Take a definite amount of honey, and make it into a poultice with rose oil, and add an equal amount of old wine in substance.
puis le confit et en use;	Then use it.
et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu;	And this itself is made of cooked honey, when there is no raw honey present, or you take myrrh and aloe and incense, and grind it, and the powder on the honey when it is over the fire.
et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire;	Then glue it to a cloth, and place it on the chest, and never administer it long, and roots of star anise, which is also like flour and hundred.
et en use de simples ou de compostes:	and in the use of simple or compound remedies:
broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use;	grind them, and make powder from them, and put on honey that I have said, and use it;
et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens;	and if the cure is long, and not cured by this cure, then scrape away the corruption that has formed, and make an impression in the bone, or in hard members, or in joints;
si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	if the cure of the cure of the fistula, as we have said before.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	of the abscess of the elbow
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois;	Panarice is an abscess that arises outside the joint of the little finger of the hand, or the toe, or by chance it arises in other places;
et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute;	When it is dislocated, and no precaution is taken, if it comes into contact with an abscess, and it is covered and poured with boiling water until it reaches the root of the nail, and perhaps it covers all of it;
et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	and it comes into contact with the bone, until it reaches the point of intense pain, and the affected part is large and red.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	If you treat it as we have said in the division, and the cure does not help much, then you must remove all the excess that remains from the elbow, then cauterize the wound afterward.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne;	The cauteries are very helpful if the bones are healthy, and the nail is healthy;
et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout;	and if the nail is close to the flesh, and it begins to prick, and the wound, then you must put the cauterizing iron on the outside of the nail so that it does not penetrate the flesh, and bring the burnt part upwards, and carefully and gently cover this char with healing and corrosive medicines to remove everything;
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then apply poultices until they are healed.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner;	And if the corrosion is in the bone, then cut off and remove it, for as much as the bone has been corrupted, it cannot be healed.
et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	And if you see the other decaying, then cut off and remove it as before mentioned, then apply poultices until they are healed.
et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier;	And if it is foul, swollen, and causing great pain, then you must first cleanse it.
puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor;	Then cut the infected part off with a sharp knife, making sure that the cut does not come into contact with the healthy flesh around the nail, for the pain would be too great.
et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	And if it happens, put something on top to soothe it.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	The sharp pain of the hand
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	The sharp pain that arises in the hands of some men by chance is all chronic, and sometimes it is in the fingers or where there are bones, and never in the nail, and none of them arise at the root of the joint, or in any of the ten fingers.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet;	Those who are born without any bone in the shoulder do not move, and those who are born at the joint of the shoulder may move by chance.
la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere:	The size of the one who is chubby is lighter, in this way:
taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	size it at its root of a wide span.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer:	Those who are born at the root of the joint are difficult to cure:
si te tien dou coper.	if you hold it with a copper.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	In those who are born or must be at the back, it is necessary that you first cut the round bone reasonably close to the bone, then cut the bone to a suitable silk according to this, then cure it until it is healed.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The same things that come together in two ways come from birth or from the wound, or from burning of fire, or from similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz;	If it is appropriate to cover that which is sore, so that it may return according to its natural forms.
puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent;	Then place between two tents or cloths soaked in rose oil, so they do not stick.
ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	Or you place between two thin pieces of wood, until the bones are sound, as they should be.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	When it comes to both of his hands with the palm, if that suits the healing as it should.
des vils	of the base
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors;	Veins are large and swollen with excess melancholy, which comes from many members of the body.
et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	And they come more in the legs of those who walk and work and carry, than in others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	Therefore, you should never administer any purgative of clay, and then give the healthy one from the basilica.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres:	The cure of iron is according to two methods:
l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir;	One is that one takes the blood and draws out the black blood.
et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	And the other way is to tie the vein, and pull it out completely.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere:	The cut is done in this way:
arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil;	First, the sharp knife is heated very hot, until the thick sinews are not thinned, then the leg is straightened from the misaligned position above the knee to the lower part of the groin;
puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir;	then cut the vein in the thigh, or in the first, second, or third part, with a wide blade, then lift and pull out the black blood with your hand from one side to the other, until as many sinews as the pain can bear are removed.
et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire;	and then tie it up, and command him to rub with meat juice mixed with black pepper.
et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	And repeat the evacuation and cleansing when the veins are clear, and expose to the air.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere:	The following is done in this way:
reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes;	Rub the painful leg, if there is much hair, then put it in hot water, and apply hot compresses to the leg until it turns red, and open the veins.
et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville;	If you have no hot water, heat it on the fire, and then place the heated cloth over the vein where it is long at the knee or in the lower leg.
puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent;	Then work the skin at the incision, and scrape the vein from every part, as it appears when touched.
et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche;	And you see it red and black, and when it enters the skin seems like a white cord.
puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois;	Then push the needle through, as long as it is raised from the skin, and then you can put it lightly at the incision, then cover it in the other place with two or three fingers.
puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers;	Then scrape the skin over the vein as it appears, then lift it to the wound, as you have done, and put it at another incision, as you have done first.
puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille;	then take another size, or if you have experience with this, then lightly, and apply it to the second part of the wound, then remove it and lightly apply it to the second size.
puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope;	then extract the sizes in size, until all the strength is gone, then apply it.
et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse;	and if you cannot pull and lift it, then if an arrow with a strong double point enters the thread, and tie it and remove it, and turn your hand from one side to the other, until it is gone.
et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide;	and be careful that it does not stick, because if it sticks, then one cannot pull or lift it, and it causes harm to the patient.
et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset;	and when you have fully treated it, place on the wound a cloth soaked in wine and rose oil.
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and the care until it is healed.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie;	And if the wound is contracted and twisted and swollen all together, and it is not straight, as we have said, then it is necessary that you cut it painfully, but do not cover it.
et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	and treat it as we have previously said.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne;	The shape of the iron that covers the wound is curved, and does not cut through it, so that it does not cover the vein.
et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	and it is of large curvature, because if it were too fine, it would cover the vein, but it should be large as we have said, and this is its shape:
de la voinne civile	of the civil vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor;	This vein is enlarged in the legs, in hot parts where there are no herbs or trees, and in land that has no moisture.
et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	And by chance it arises in other parts than the legs, and there is a puss that comes out from under the skin, as it comes from within the body winding and turning, enlarged between skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	And if the signs of the beginning of this vein are such that it comes in the leg a very large inflammation, then the limb changes, and the vein begins to issue forth, like the root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe;	When the wound is open, it is necessary that you wrap around a piece of cloth of one and a half inches wide and two inches long, and wet it, and leave the cloth on the leg, and every time it is not there, if you wrap it around the cloth, and wet it.
et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue;	If it is too long, cut off a part of it, and wrap the remaining part around its root, and do not cover it completely until it is all out.
car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie;	For if you cover it, it will go back into the wound, and cause abscess and pus or infection in the limb, and make the patient very sick.
por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors;	For this reason, it is necessary that it be treated very little and very slowly from the top, and nothing should remain or rot.
et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse;	And there should never be this vein when it is treated with V palms of length, or X, and sometimes I have seen it come out from X palms long, and when you cover it, it will burst the skin or puncture, and go all the way down to the bottom.
et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	and clear out the matter that is inside, and administer to the patient medicines infused for the purpose of healing any injury, then treat the wounds as you would with abscesses.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains;	And never rain on this vein, and especially when it opens at the joint of the finger, or finger, and if much blood comes out, and it is difficult to stop.
cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	Treat the wound as we have said before.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	of verses that are born between skin and flesh
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer;	This disease is called "cow disease" in our land, because it often affects cows, and it is a small worm that grows between skin and flesh, and moves throughout the body, and is felt by all members to member, until it reaches the skin where it was, and jumps out.
et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre;	and is caused by the presence of certain humors, such as come from worms and lumbricus and ascarides or intestines.
et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil;	and it is doubted as to its harm, for when it goes through the body, and it rises to the head, and it comes to the brain, perhaps enters, and destroys the brain.
et ceu avient maintes fois.	this often happens.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait:	when you see it to cure and draw out, then one cannot do but when it goes:
si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire;	then it is necessary that you hold the limb above and away from a very tightly bound bandage, then cut across and draw it out, and if it turns back into the body, then you should cauterize with fire until it dies.
et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit;	and the greatest harm it does is that it consumes oil, as we have said.
et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer;	and if you see it coming or close to the oil, hold the spoon firmly over it, then pour on it and remove it.
et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	and it is necessary to use the ointment of healing herbs for the diseases caused by bad humors, and if there are wounds from eating rotten meat.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	of the pain that comes from windiness
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre;	This disease is called in our land "wakirir", and it is a pain that comes to certain members, and then moves from member to member.
et je vis ceu que je vos di.	I see what I told you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais;	I was called to a woman with a bad arm, and I discovered that her arm was swollen, and there was a small abscess in the armpit.
et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre;	And soon after, I saw it grow as large as a worm in the shoulder, much faster than anything, as if it were live silver when cut from the bone.
li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais;	The pain departed from the arm and moved to the shoulder, then a little later it corrupted throughout the body, until it reached the other arm.
puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	Then she told me that she twisted around her body, as I saw.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I was greatly amazed at how it moved from one limb to another, for I had never seen this disease move in this way.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme;	Nevertheless, I wanted to make sure that she could move the pain from one arm to the other, but I did not see her do it as I saw in the woman.
et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte;	and I thought it was because the woman had dry skin, and the veins exposed, and because that visibility was constrained;
et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	and they do not reveal themselves to those who are delicate, and who have moist skin and veins covered.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer;	And when you see how to cure this disease, and the pain feels as we have said, if it opens as we have described, then tie above and below hastily, and then cover it so that that visibility is constrained to the limb is gone;
et cauterize le leu;	and burn the limb.
et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	and if you do not see it with your eyes, then treat the cause of that visibility, like foul-smelling pills, and snake pills, and similar others.
des saiettes	of arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	Arrows are various, according to their appearances and according to the types of bodies they penetrate.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees;	The variety of them is that there are those who have large points, and small ones, and pointed ones, and polished ones.
et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces;	and of those who have II angles, and of those who have tongues, and of those which have pieces.
et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres:	and that which penetrates into any member if it penetrates according to the two ways:
ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	or in a principal member such as the neck, as the spine, heart, liver, lungs, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and similar members.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent:	When it penetrates therefore into any part of these members, and the sign of death, which I will tell you later, appears to you:
si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions;	if it is necessary for you to extract this arrow, as many die afterwards in various positions;
et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	and when this bad sign does not appear to you, and the arrow is not completely removed from the wound, then cut it and treat the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole;	and the sign of the skull when the arrow pierces and goes through the bone, and the sinus above the skull, which is blindness and swelling and sweating and redness of the throat, and spasms and confusion of understanding, and vomiting of bile;
et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles;	and perhaps there is no pain in the nostrils or ears.
et par aventure pert la parole et la voix;	and possibly the word and voice;
et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char;	and white watery fluid like pus, and also like boiling pitch from the wound;
et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	and if this sign appears to you, then take care of the patient, and remove the arrow if it is not already out.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide;	The sign of the arrow when it pierces or enters is that it is close to the right breast, and also feels like it was stuck in something hard, not empty.
et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope:	and possibly the arrow moves like pus, and also cuts through black blood, and brings coldness and cold sweat, and syncope.
saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	Then they are sent away due to doubt of death.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign that the arrow has not been pulled out is that without complaining of pus, it jumps out of the wound, and the throat swells, and the limbs change color, and it gasps for breath and seeks the cold air.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes;	And if the arrowhead is stuck in the coverlet of the poor, it is behind the small ribs;
et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire;	and gives great pain and shortness of breath.
et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	and move all the members of the shoulder.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the arrowhead is stuck in the stomach, by chance if it jumps out of the wound nothing of the undigested meat.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if the arrowhead is stuck in the abdomen, and it does not come out through the intestinal wall, there is no hope of cure or extraction of the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor:	And if the arrowhead is stuck in the bladder, and the urine comes out and goes away, and the patient feels great pain:
saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	Then it is clear that the wound is mortal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other limbs, such as the arms and neck and throat and shoulder and back and spine and hip and knee and feet, and similar members, are safe according to various positions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in the nerve or artery, and it is not venomous, as I will tell you what happened to me, because of what you were doing otherwise.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis:	It happened to a man who had an arrow stuck in his thigh at the root of the knee:
je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	I tried to remove it, and took it out from the other side through the fat of the ear, and he was cured without any harm.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles;	And in one game, an arrow that shot into the grease of the oil outside the paper, and the arrow was returned, and could not reach beyond the tip facing the fust, and it was a great arrow of a Turkish bow, entirely made of iron without ears.
li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	The game was sound, and no harmful accidents came to it.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles:	And an arrow shot into the throat of a Christian, and the arrow was Arabic with ears.
je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	I healed the wounds, and skillfully treated it, and the Christian was healed.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit;	And a arrow was stuck in a man, whether it was in his head or belly, and I thought he would die.
et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition;	and then after thirty hours, he did not change his condition;
je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	I cut into the arrow, inserted a probe, and pulled it out, and there was no bad outcome.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus;	And if you want to a man who an arrow fell on or back, and the wound was sewn up from above;
et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	and the arrow remained inside him, and did not change his natural conditions, and found no harm in any of his natural functions.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie;	And if you want to another man who an arrow fell on his face, and the wound was sewn up;
et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor;	and prolongs thus without great pain;
et mout d’autres semblans.	and many similar things.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie;	And a spear was thrown at the man of the prince, the king, who had his head in the neck, and was slightly inclined to the right side;
et estoit li saiette toute reponue.	and the spear was entirely embedded.
Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	I was called for after it had been three days.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	If the wound is very narrow.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie;	I found it all in a very thin tent, and did not feel any pain.
et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	and he felt sharp pain and pain on his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast;	I thought it was from the tip of the spear. I put it on his forehead, attractive digestive, because the eyes do not swell;
et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	And I saw the head of the arrow.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis;	And I placed the poultice on it immediately, and dressed the wound directly, and left it in place for a long time, until he felt the arrowhead still inside his nostril.
et il le me dist.	And he told me.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu;	I placed a corrosive medicine on the wound immediately, until it was open, and I tried to extract it, and felt the head of the arrow sticking in his neck.
puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement;	Then I pushed it into the opening of the wound with that corrosive medicine, until the head of the arrow appeared visible to me.
et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir;	and it passed well the ends within four months, and then began to ulcerate the wound that I had sewn with needles, on one side and the other, and could not heal.
adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	Therefore, I continued to subtly and cleverly manipulate tools, until I took the needles again, well made, according to what its form will be at the end of this chapter, so that I sew it, and restore the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer:	And the physician judged that the cartilage of the nose could not be restored:
je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	I restored it anyway, and the wound was healed, and the pain was completely cured.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre;	I have told you the quality of some arrow extractions, so that you put your care above what I do not say, for the books cannot contain everything.
mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	But the wise masters compare well with little knowledge, and above what is present and lacking, they find new work, and new instruments, in the understanding of strange things that happen in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres:	I say that arrows do not come from members where they are stuck, unless in two ways:
ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part;	or by the limb through which they enter, or by another part.
et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	And that which goes through the part where it enters, is an arrow entering in its joints, and never comes out of them.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue;	And if she does not jump now, let her remain until the charcoal is burned through and the issue is alleviated.
et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor;	And if she is stuck in the bone, and cannot be removed, let her remain thus for several days, and move it every day.
et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	Then she jumps, and if she does not jump, pierce all around with a fine needle until the flesh around is expanded, and then draw it out.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide:	And if the arrow is stuck in the head bone, and goes towards one of the belly's ventricles, and any of the accidents that I have mentioned to the patient:
si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	if not to pull it out immediately, but let it be even for some time after, because if the arrow comes out too soon, it is death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	And if the arrow is not firmly lodged in the bone only, and does not come out by itself, and stays for several days without causing harm, then use the device to pull it out.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit;	And if it is very stuck and cannot come out, then administer tar to it as I have told you.
puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	then cure the limb until it is healed.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente;	And if the arrow is reinserted into the body so that it cannot be seen, then it is hidden in the whole tent.
et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble;	and if you feel it, then pull it out with any suitable tool.
et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans;	and if you cannot pull it out due to the narrowness of the wound and the deepness of the arrow, and there is no bone or sinew or vein, then leave it until the wound becomes large.
et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire;	and if you find the arrow, and if it has ears in the arrow that it holds, then break the char that is stuck to two parts of the muscle that you can, and then break or pull out the ears of the arrow, as much as you can pull it;
et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	and carefully do not break the shaft, so that you can pull it out more forcefully.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot do it once, then push the lung back inside through the ribs, as extraction causes pain.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre;	And if the bleeding of blood makes you contrary, then follow what we have said about the treatment in its chapter;
et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement;	and guard against the incision of the nerve and the vein, and put effort as you can muscle to pull out the arrow without danger, or soon or late, or tightly or firmly;
et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	Put the patient according to the shape it was in when the arrow hit, for this is the greatest help, and if you cannot, put it according to what the signs show.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment:	The arrow that comes from another part, where it opens nothing, or the skin is swollen in that place where one can see or feel it.
taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai:	Then cut above, as far as the hooks can take, and then extract it.
si saut fuer maintenant.	If it jumps now.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is retained in the bone, round your hand and push it into the bone until it enters, then expand the bone, then remove it.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer;	And if it cannot come out, leave it in and then restart the extraction until it comes out.
et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust;	And if it is from an arrow and it is, if it is stuck in the whole body;
et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument;	and if it is stuck in the chest, and you see that it is administered slowly, if it is administered with a tool, so that the tip of the arrow enters the hair of the tool;
et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	and then pull out, and if the arrow is stuck, if it is pulled out with the tool entering pointedly, to facilitate the extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	And if the arrow is embedded, it is necessary that you cut out all of the flesh around where the poison is, if you can, then treat the wound as appropriate.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope;	And if the arrow is stuck in the back or belly or in the stomach or bladder or side, and it is close, and you can cover it up, if it can be covered.
et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est;	and do not cover the vein and the limb, then pull it out, and then suture the wound, if necessary.
et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and continue the treatment until they are healed.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The shape of the forceps used to extract arrows is similar to a bird's beak, and here is the form:
Et en sont mout de manieres:	And there are many ways to do this:
grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	large, medium, and small, according to the amount of blood.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	The shape of the arrowhead is like the beak of a bird, to stick into the point of the arrow, such as this shape.
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	The shape of the barbs to stick and to hold is like this:
des voinnes dou cors communes	veins common to the body
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir:	There are 31 veins that can be tapped from which one has or takes 16, that is to say:
II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»;	2 bananas that are after the ears, which are called the two "herbaceous";
et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans;	and the 2 arteries that are in the two temples apparent;
et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»;	and two veins that are in the two armpits, which are called "aspirants";
et li voine que est emmi le front;	and the vein that is behind the forehead;
et li voinne que est au chief dou neis;	and the vein that is at the back of the neck;
et les II guindeges qui sont ou col;	and the two jugulars which are on the neck;
et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»;	and the two veins that are on the lips above the mouth, and these are the veins that are called "augicherich";
et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	and the two veins that are outside the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras:	The veins that are commonly bled are five in each arm:
l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»;	one is the cervical, and is on the right side of the chest, and is called the "vein of the head";
et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»;	The moxa is called "hast", and it is composed of the cephalic and basilar, and they call it the lay people "vein of the heart".
et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	And the basilar is on the right side, and they call it the lay people "vein of the belly", and it is above the sacrum, and it is that from which one heals, which opens obviously above the pouch.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains;	And the savatte is the vein that is between the auricular and annular, and it has rain.
et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes:	And in the leg and where the knee is, there are three veins:
l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit;	One is outside the pouch of the left rib cage, and the second is above the knee on the right side.
et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei;	and the vein that is called "nesse", which is in the knee of the other side.
et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	and in the other leg, there are three veins besides those.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine;	The cleansing of the veins that are after the ears helps with ancient catarrh and headaches.
et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre;	And the quality of the cleaner, as I told you, and that you rub the head of the pain, and rub the limb where the veins are on a rough cloth.
puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief:	Then press the painful spots on their neck to a noose, until the two veins appear behind the ears in two folds of the neck.
quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche;	For the questions you have about your shoulder, and where you feel the hairs away from your shoulder, if they are painful, squeeze them.
puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues;	Then take the needle, and the thread from outside the vein to the bone, then lift your hand above the vein, and cut and remove the skin and the vein well, you must pass through it twice, and let out the pus until you see.
puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee;	Then drain and bandage, as long as it is healed.
et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	And I have already said the incision and the cauterization in the first book.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz;	The healing of the two arteries that are in the two temples, it is better to embrace them gently, and soothe them, and apply a custom-made compress to them.
et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis:	and the qualities of a good surgeon are as I say:
et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement;	and that he holds his head steady, so that both veins are clearly visible;
et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche;	and feels the hairs on his chin, and then shaves them;
puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit;	then lift the skin over the vein at the chin index, and prick it with a lancet outside, and lift the vein upwards, and cover it as you have done in the other veins, and draw off the blood according to your need.
puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton;	then release the dislocation, and put your finger on the vein for an hour, then put cotton on it;
et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee;	and then form a bandage, and leave it until it is healed.
et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	And we have spoken of them and their treatment and extraction, which begins the book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor;	The healing of the facial veins is as valuable as the healing of headaches and ancient facial diseases, and migraines, and rheumatism.
et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere;	And the quality of the pain is such that the patient twists their neck, until the vein appears.
puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	Then take the tool called "fossil", which has this shape:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues;	And place the tip of it on the vein, and hold it with your hand or something else, and let the blood flow according to the quantity you see.
puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	Then relieve the pain by loosening the neck, and tie the vein until it is healed and only once in a while with a wide flame.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus;	However, the fire should not be too hot.
et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	And the cauterizing iron should be straight, because the teeth are close, and by chance it may break the flame when it is thin.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice;	The cauterizing of the two veins that are in the two arms helps them, and at the elbow, and at the wrist, and at the eye in the oil, and for diseases of the face.
et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant;	And the quality of their cauterizing is such that the pain is relieved by twisting any ligament, as before.
puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	then the healthy one, and let the health pass through the wound, a little long of the flame, a little wide, for there is no hair.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise;	And if the fire is too fine, perhaps it will break;
puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	then apply cotton to the blood, as much as you have skill, and then tie it up and bind it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene;	The health of the vein in the neck is useful against ague, and for sudden swelling, and for diseases of the face, such as migraine and redness that comes to the face, and constantly when it is old;
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre;	and the quality of the health is such that the pain is strained at the neck, then strain the neck to your right hand, and take the fine fire long, and put it between the lip and the space between the two noses, for the vein does not open well on its own, and the saint will begin to bleed now;
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree;	and do not move it too much, and apply the bloodletting according to your need, then bind it for a night, as it is quickly restored.
et c’est li forme dou flaime:	And this is the shape of the flame:
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes;	The oil of the two myrtles helps to narrow the almond, and at the beginning of melting, and for many diseases, and for impetigo, and for corrosions, and for herpes, and for stomatitis.
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit;	And the quality of the oil is such that the pains stray from both sides, as we have said.
et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est;	And let the masters be above the top of the pain, and the pain lies across one seat, then oil the long one a little widely, then apply the bloodletting gradually, as much as necessary.
puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle;	then perform the other vein, then release the artery, and hold the veins steady, so they do not constrict.
et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	and let it bleed until morning, so the wound may heal.
de la sainie des leivres	of the health of the liver
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The health of the liver above helps to cool in the mouth, and prevents tooth decay, and cracks in the lips, and mouth sores and around.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit;	And the quality of the bandage is to place the wound in front of you, and hold its neck as I have said.
puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires:	then turn the lip, and look at the veins, one on the right cheek and the other on the left, which are black, and by which there are small black veins inside.
cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	Therefore, examine both sides, and if you do not know them, and you are in doubt, compare the largest of each part, and do the same with the two veins that are above and below, for it is the same method.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	of the tongue's disorder
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche;	The veins that are below the tongue help after the venipuncture of the cephalic, and it is at the narrowing of the throat, and for diseases of the eye, and for diseases of the mouth.
et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire:	And the quality of the venipuncturist is that the diseases cease between your hands before the sun, and you lift the tongue, and look away on each side a black vein.
saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	Therefore, both are healthy and do not move too quickly, for they are the arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres:	The veins that are commonly treated are healed in two ways:
ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»;	either by pricking at all the fire with a wide needle, or with an oil lamp as thin as a thread, and is called "anevil".
et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	and are wide and thin according to the width and thickness of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The form of the flame mirror is very famous, and is as wide as you see.
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble;	And there is skill for opening the veins that are coarse and flat, which contain large clots and disturbed;
et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	and this is the shape of the thin needle fire:
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	And it is more subtlely pointed, and is for purifying veins that are subtle, where there is subtle blood yellow.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre;	The purgation of the basilicon, which is one of those veins, helps with diseases that are outside the neck, and where the shoulder, and where the arm, and where the stomach.
et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	And it is necessary for the purger to do so skillfully, and to avoid the artery that is outside.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit;	And if he pierces the artery, and blood flows out, then it is necessary to apply a compress as I have said.
et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	And he should not hold the fire, but cut as with scissors.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre;	And if the basilicon does not open clearly, then it is necessary to strain and change another one.
ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras:	where you want any pain from it, or you know how to put it back in place instead of the vein in the arm:
elle apert manifestement;	it opens clearly;
et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	and the copper to the fire as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz;	And if you see the limb of the injury, then it is necessary that you strain the arm, so that you touch the limb as much as you know the pulse;
puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil;	then sign the wound with ink, and then tie the arm, and put the vein in the fire.
et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere:	and be careful not to pierce the artery when you see the limb swell, for it is the artery:
eschui la donques.	eschar the wound then.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere:	And if you see it protruding as high as the urine of a child, and the discharge is red and thin, know that it is from an artery:
haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient;	then quickly apply your finger over a long distance, then remove your finger over the discharge, which often occurs;
se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides;	tie the arm, and leave it thus, and do not move the hairs;
et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	and let it be in fear, and do not move it until it is healed.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient;	And if the discharge is not stopped, and it hurts, and the medicine is not present, then cut the artery open, for the head of the arrow may be drawn back;
et estainche li sans.	and stains the skin.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor;	And take a piece of bread, and tear it, and take one half and soak it well in the other juice;
se li sans estainche, c’est bien;	if the skin is not stained, it is good.
se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc;	if not, as we have said, treat with powders that stain blood;
et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	and the stains are not too dark in many positions for the small limb of the wound, and the position of the patient's arm.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit;	The cleansing of the vein in the middle helps that it treats blood above and below, because it is composed of basilica and cephalic, as we have said;
et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner;	and it is necessary for the doctor to stretch out for the limb that is dislocated, and if he does not do it too forcefully, and he finds the limb, and he inflates it and the wound is not healed;
et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil;	and this limb is often open many times, and if it does not open in any men due to its subtlety, then you must use the instruments of the doctor;
et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	and protect the limb from your power.
Et se il a voinne entre les II ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if he has a vein between the two nerves, then cut it long.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz;	The doctor of the head helps, that she draws blood from the head, and helps to those;
et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	and it is necessary for the doctor to prick with the oil lamp or the mint lamp, because it is the safest of all veins, because it has no joints or arteries.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence;	In all cases, one should seek the lightest limb, and not cause any harm if it is necessary for the first time, and then restart.
et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	And by chance, some men's limbs may swell up, but it does not cause any harm the first time.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of health depends on your thoughts.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir;	The first thing you should know about healing is that healing is not intended for any other purpose than to maintain health and prevent diseases from coming.
et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute:	And the healing should be done in one of the three veins that are open:
c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique;	that is to say, cephalic, median, and basilic.
et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent;	And one should begin to fasten in the beginning of the first ten days, and in autumn and winter after eating, when the sign of repletion appears;
et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	and one should begin to fasten the first day or the third, after two hours or three in the morning.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens;	The fastening that is administered for diseases has no determined time, but rather it depends on the hour or the food, in every hour and in all times.
et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	And one should not fasten children under the age of twelve, nor a woman who is pregnant except for low abdominal pain up to the seventh month.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez LX ans.	Nor should one heal the old who have passed sixty years.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz;	And when anyone wishes to purify themselves in any way that they may, it is necessary for them to cleanse their intestines from a light clyster, if they have much feces retained, so that the veins do not attract the excess and superfluous intestinal matter that harms the principal limbs;
ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques;	nor does one purify those who are too clean of meats, or those who are bloated, as much as they may be, nor hydrotherapeutic.
et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors;	And if one wishes to purify after colic passion, vomiting, and diarrhea, and frequently changing of habits, of traveling, of watching and fasting, and all the virtue, or by some means of the arm or body;
puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir;	then carefully remove the humors, if it is not too large, through food and drinks and through medicines, if you have the ability.
puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit;	then enter or bathe, if nothing prevents it, to thin the blood and cleanse the veins from the worst in the third, as we have said.
et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses;	and avoid that day of work, and pain, and luxury, and similar things.
et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans;	and be tied and joyful, and let the healer be higher than that one who is being healed, and rub the arm twice or three times, then restrict the movement of the joint above, for when it is too loose or tight, it cannot be corrected.
et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on;	And then rub the limb with hands, until the veins swell, and feel them.
puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	Then moisten the vein with a drop of old oil, then place his finger on the hand nearest to the vein where he wants to bleed, so that the vein does not burst and fail to draw blood.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus;	For there are veins that burst as if they were strings to the bleeding, and some are so thin in flexibility, that when one puts on the fire, they withdraw from the flame, and cannot open the vein, and thus are those.
et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	And if he opens the vein, if the wound is too narrow, because it is necessary that the bleeder be aware of these things.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin;	And if you see this work for the first time, it is good.
se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	If not, then restart a little below or above, if the part is not inflamed.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras:	And if the part is inflamed, and the pains subside, then leave it for a day or two, and do not bind the arm tightly.
par aventure i venra apostemes chaus;	Perchance I will bring abscesses afterwards.
ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait;	Do not enter or take a bath, then restart the cleansing if it pleases him.
et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement;	And if the pain is small, or if you doubt that it will not bleed as much as you have seen, then apply heat directly to the wound.
et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez;	and the work is done rather harshly, as long as the patient's breath is not held;
car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	for this often happens, when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile;	If you see the limb swelling, do not start again with the wound cleaning, and put a little bit of oil on it, because it soothes the pain of the stone, and is more effective in this limb than the oil.
et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc;	and thus administer the oil remedy in each cleaning to stop the flow of the stone.
et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu;	And this itself causes a tracheotomy and suffocation when put on the limb.
si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	if subtly, separate the teeth when it is too large.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre;	And if there are large abscesses that often occur, specifically when it is not cleaned except at this time or the opening of the vein is small, then hurry, and place an absorbent sponge soaked in boiled and strained vinegar on the limb for an hour;
et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie;	and it is necessary to do this after the discharge of the blood from the vein, and if it remains on the limb for any days without any blackness or greenish color, then it does not need to be removed.
et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	and if you see, place anything of aloes or of mustard mixed with juice of camomile, monsterwort, or similar.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique:	And often appears to be an abscess at the base of the church:
met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	So put your hand on it, and if you feel the bone moving under the pressure of your hand, then that appearance is bad.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere;	Therefore do not put anything on it that we have said, because accidentally you might cut the artery;
mais li fai I emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	but rather apply a dry bandage to harden the bone, then treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And follow each vein according to the quantity of its virtue and the color of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges;	For if it is not black, let it bleed as long as it is red;
et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez;	and if you see that it is thick, let it bleed as long as it becomes thinned out;
et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	And if it is too hot, let it cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges;	And it is appropriate for the one who is skilled and experienced, and has the task of extracting arrows, to make a larger wound, and to use wide flames;
et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant;	And for the one who is weak, do the opposite, and it is appropriate to bandage often and little, and it should be bandaged by cutting across, not by pinching;
et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	And this method of bandaging is safe from the corrosion of arrows and the compression of nerves, and it is better than long or wide bandaging.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates;	And for the one whose body needs bandaging, it is appropriate to give bread soaked in juice of green grapes;
s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	If it is hot-tempered, take three or four bloodlettings with warm blood; and if it is of cold complexion, change the bread before the saint's day into a moistened, sweetened bread in a musky syrup, or an aromatic honey syrup with spices, such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and coriander, and a strongly scented syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	And if he palms the wound after much bleeding of blood, it is necessary that he drink broth of char, and sweet-smelling syrup, and use other things that we have said in the division or chapter of syncope, for the evacuation of blood.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he wants to strengthen an arm, and wound again, it is necessary, when he is weakened by much bleeding, that he bandage gradually and gradually, according to the amount of its continuous virtue.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine VII houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And if he wants to wound again an arm after the first bleeding, and he has great pain, he should bandage seven hours after the first bleeding, or after the second hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And whoever wishes to heal on the other side, they should heal according to the second hour or the third.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre;	For it has much blood within the body that is already hot, and causes fever;
si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson;	if it is necessary to draw a great quantity, and widen the vein until it bursts;
puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens;	then you must restore all the conditions of health, and place your hand on the pulse when it is healed, so that many die in place of the vein, and this often happens when the healer is neglectful;
et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus;	and it does not matter whether you see the shoulder sliding out of its place, and making a cut again, and the wound is closed, that you press firmly on;
ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz;	and if it is crooked, extend the arm quickly, for this would be bad;
mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois;	but let it rest until it heals the second time;
ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	or you have not at the tip of the flame, until the uncongealed blood flows from the wound, and put on a small piece of cloth to stop the bleeding, and press lightly.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if it flees, let it go and do not hold it until the abscess is calmed.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if necessary, draw the blood from another vein, or from the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein in the arm is safer than the main one because it is composed.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges;	And the way of healing is that the hairs put their hand in hot water until the wound is red;
puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc;	then tie it gently, so that the vein appears well, then clean it thoroughly, neither too narrow nor too wide;
et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez;	and let it bleed widely, and clean it well near the joint of the hand, and if none can come out, put the hand in hot water, and let the blood flow in the hot water, until you have enough;
et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit;	and if it is already in that state, do not put the hand in hot water again, for it will freeze more than it is already;
et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	and the cleaning of this vein is safer than all other veins, for there are no artery or nerve.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere:	The right hand's savior from all diseases of the liver is as follows:
estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie;	Strain the hand, and boil in very hot water until the vein is broken, if one can see it.
et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien;	And if the savior is crooked, and if you hold it with both hands, it will not hurt anything.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	Do not remove it too soon from the fire, for the nerves are all stripped of flesh, and then put the hand back in very hot water, if it is not frozen in the wound, and it cannot be removed.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have treated the arrow as much as is necessary, put oil and silk on the vein to sew quickly, and thus do for each part.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The right side of the hand is useful for the disease of the mouse, and do everything as I have told you on the right.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	The left side of the hand is useful for all diseases that are outside the body, such as diseases of the marsh, retention of urine, and diseases of the feet, knees, and old legs, and similar diseases.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet;	And the quality of its savior is such that the pains boil well in very hot water, and rub on the vein until it rots, and tie above the joint.
et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains;	and if the vein is at the elbow, and from above the flesh goes out much of rain.
saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	then give the larger or more water, or at the elbow, which is better.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant;	And if you give it above the flesh, then beware of the nerves which are dislocated, and give it across as in bandaging.
et soit li flaimes anesil.	and let the flames be extinguished.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if it cannot issue from the bone, reset the joint in high places, and let the vein well drain.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz;	And if the first giving is not enough, then start the second above a little, because the veins are salty.
ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	and do not doubt the nerve, as we have said, and thus give the other bandage equally.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The vein of the neck is at the elbow, and its resetting is equal to the pain of the back, when it comes to arrow removal.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne;	And the quality of his health is such that the hairs between or in the baths, and strangulate above the ankle four times in twisting, for otherwise it does not open the vein.
et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant;	and if it opens, then the healthy one in all ways that you can, and in crossing;
et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	and it is worthwhile to cover it, for the veins are dry, and it is very difficult to find.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners;	And if you do not cover it, then the vein of the one who opens or falls asleep at the little finger, and towards the little toe, and guards against the nerves;
et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint;	and make so much correction of the blood that you see, and then remove the sinew, and place it on cotton and hold it tight;
ele est maintenant sanee.	It is now healed.
des sainies de ventouse	of suction wounds
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre;	Vacuums are made of horns, or of brass, or of glass;
et ventosation si est faite selonc II manieres:	And suction is done in two ways:
ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	either by pricking and drawing blood, or without pricking.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres:	And this suction without pricking is done in two ways:
ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu;	either it is at full heat, or without heat.
et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief;	And suction done by pricking and drawing blood is done in twelve steps of the body, of which one is at the top of the head.
et li autres est emmi le col;	and the others are in the neck.
et II autres en II costeis dou col;	and two others in the second rib of the neck.
et li ventouse desoz lou menton;	and the suction from the chin.
et li ventouse des II espaules;	and the suction on both shoulders.
et li ventouse sus les crupies;	and the suction on the buttocks.
et les ventouses emmi les II bras;	and the suctions in both arms.
et les ventouses des II jambes;	and the suctions in both legs.
et les ventouses des II chevilles;	and the suctions in both knees.
et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne;	and the suction does not treat blood, but only the small veins that are scattered in the body, and because of this, it does not weaken anyone, as one does with the treatment of bloodletting.
et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	and it should only be administered, not at all times or in all fevers, in no disease that comes from repletion, until the whole body is emptied.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens;	And if necessary for diseases, it is recommended to ventose, or for customs, if you amnistron each hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and in every ten days.
car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief;	for there are some who, when they have business to ventose, have heavy heads;
et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz;	and if some have repletion and redness in their face, and in their head, and at the neck, and tormented by them;
et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc;	and some who have a drop of blood in their mouth, and have swollen tongue, and reach for blood;
et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	and if there are some who dream, and see through blood and nausea and death and similar things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés III houres dou jor.	When we see these signs, and especially when it is in the month of May, we order them to fast after three hours of the day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors;	The sweating of the muscle helps to ease the pain of the shoulder ... that comes from the eyes, and it should not be done except after the evacuation of all the blood.
et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement;	And this ventilation is in place of the sweating of the head, and it should not be done except for those of cold complexion or who have diarrhea, because this does great harm.
et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	And therefore it should not be done for those who are awake or have severe cold diseases.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who often have this, become forgetful, and for that reason, it is necessary to place the vacuum a little more below due to the doubt of forgetfulness.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion;	The ventilation of the neck is in place of the sweating of the shoulder and the basilica, and because it is good for the narrowing of the windpipe, and for the lengthening of the throat, and for all, and for repletion.
et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	And it is best to place it not too tightly, for if it holds too firmly, it may cause obstruction or stomach and intestine pain.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique;	The ventilation of the second costal cartilage of the chest is beneficial for head pain, obtunded and emaciated, and choking, and pain in the roots of the teeth, and it is in the place of the health of the basilica;
et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	And it is best that you command the healthy person to express his hand when placing it, so that he does not compress the artery, and does not cause blood to spurt.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche;	The ventilation of the lower jaw is beneficial for mouth disease, and decay of teeth, and similar diseases that are in the mouth;
et est en leu des sainies des II levres.	and is in the joint of the lower lip.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	The ventilations of the shoulders are useful for diseases that come from heat and overfilling.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes;	The winds of the neck are as valuable as three veins of the arm, for they draw blood from these large veins.
et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	and commands the patient not to fear too much in the presence of blood, for the veins are bare of flesh, and can be seen and arteries.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire;	The suction cup that is above the back is as valuable as emergency surgery at the foundation, and for diseases that cannot be seen, and it should be large and made of metal, so it can effectively draw out.
et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit;	And perhaps, if it is too fine, it would break.
et i fai grans plaies.	et il faut grand soin.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors;	Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles attirent du sang de tout le corps, et valent aux douleurs anciennes des reins, et de la marie, et de la vessie, et ramiennent les fluides;
et sont en leu des II sophenes, et des II chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	et sont en l'emplacement des deux sophénes, et des deux chevilles, et toute la vie elles affaiblissent le corps après longs usages, et font venir paumonie dans plusieurs conditions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc;	Le manière de mettre la ventouse est ainsi que tu la mettes premier vide, et succe temprement, et la met fermement, et remue igalement, et ne cesse de ce faire, tant que tu voies le lieu rouge et enflé, et apparait le rougeur du sang;
puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez:	then firmly, and reset the suction cups, and take care in the positioning of the limbs, for there are some who have tender skin and clear pores.
si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes;	if it is necessary to strike once only, and it is necessary to make large wounds and one deep one;
et suce legierement.	and clean lightly.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir II fois:	And if the wound is not large, then it is necessary to strike twice:
la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	the first time to puncture the path of the thick blood.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois;	And if the wound is not very deep, then it is necessary to strike the third time;
et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	and when we want to draw out a little blood at a time, then we should suck only once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent;	And if we wish to draw much blood, we recommend frequently.
et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif:	And if the blood is not drawn, we advise using a sharp, pointed instrument, and the ends should be well perceived, suitable for those who have thick skin and are tough, and who have hard pores, that you oil the mouthpieces of the vacuum with an appetizing and dissolving oil:
se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite;	if it is in this state, of purple oil, or of sweet almond oil, or of cucumber seed oil;
et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	and if it is in the other state, of lettuce oil, or of lily, or of chamomile, or another similar one.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the excess is large and cold, take oil of tamarisk, or balm, or aniseed oil, and similar things.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	And if the person who is to be treated with a hot bath and wide pores, then one should not put any oil, but it should be washed after the vaporization of high rose water, or high cold water, or marjoram water, or cucumber water, or porcelain water, or other similar things.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And those who have much moisture, if they rise from ash, or high mint water, and sumac, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans;	And those who have excessive fullness should rise from old wine, or vinegar, or decoction of anise or chamomile, or other similar things.
et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II;	and should not be immediately saunier of suction before the bath or in the bath, but after the bath for an hour or two.
et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	and should not sleep immediately after suction, and it is good that they warm up, when they should be sucked and when they are being sucked.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez;	And if those who are sucked are choleric, and if they do not have enough, they become too agitated and inflamed.
si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses;	if it is good that they take cold things, such as green apples and endives and leeks at the spoon, and similar things.
et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	And put on wet bandages, and charcoal from Chastelron, and moist meats.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons;	And those with a cold complexion should take honey syrup, and aromatic wine of medium age, which is between old and new, and put on a little, and wet bandages and moist meats and small birds and pigeons;
et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier;	and the day he starts walking, he should drink more than eat.
et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz;	And it is recommended to give some men once truffle or muscat wine before walking, or after, to strengthen the main limbs.
et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	And it should be made subtle for the sick, but only those who are strong should drink it.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne;	The suction cups that are applied to cause pain are those that are applied to the liver, and to the mouse, and to the gout, and to the belly and the buttocks and the rain and the waist, for these members do not suffer pain from other places, and no one does so except to draw blood from member to member, as we put on the breasts when the newborn cries;
por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre;	to remove the viscosity that is in the member, as we put suction cups on the belly and on the buttocks to soften the member;
et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu;	and remove the pain, when there is an abscess or stone, by its attractive virtue perhaps the abscess, or to remove the stone from its place;
et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement;	Then it is done like this when putting it above the liver and above the stomach when there is wind retention, and these vacuums are administered empty for suction only.
et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	And never are administered together with fire, and sometimes plain hot tea, as in diseases of the pleura, and in such a way that the vacuum is filled with hot steam, or hot water in which he has cooked poisonous herbs to this lung.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The form of the vacuum administered by fire is as follows:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre;	And it has two large and half-palm-sized openings and a cost of the middle I small perforation, as to put a needle, and if it is of silver, so that it does not bleach the wound when putting it above the limb.
et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent;	and have a long, thin rod of iron or wood, to put a probe in place, and it should be both large and small according to the diseases and age of those who take them.
car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	for the suction cups of children are different from the old, and thin ones are different from fat ones.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre:	And one should thus place this suction cup on the limb:
empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide;	take the probe of wax or liniment, and put it into the suction cup at the end of the rod that is in the suction cup, so that it clears the bottom of the suction cup so it does not burn the hair.
et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse;	then place it above the member, and you should be above the opening that we have said, so that when you want to, then the steam goes in, and open the vacuum.
et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	and grasp the line as before, and repeat often if you have skill.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement;	In the vacuum that is administered in the disease of pleurisy, at all sharp, does not have a rod or an opening, and is not administered until it is full of sharp, and is placed above the member alone.
et c’est li forme:	and this is the form:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus;	Noses are not administered until in members where one cannot place vacuums for their smallness, such as lips and gums, and similar ones.
et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans;	and when removing a horse's shoe, as with one or two nails, and other similar things;
et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren;	and the quality of the user is such that when you try to remove nails that are in soft water without any difficulty, if you can;
et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres;	and put them in soft water until they are familiar and have nothing in their stomachs;
et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues;	and then clean the vein and the wound, then rub the limb until it is red, and put the nails on top;
et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	and when they are flat and blackened, and if it is possible to put a vacuum where, then put it, for this is very good afterwards.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint;	If not, then lift the limb from below, and then from above, very well, and then wipe it.
et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés;	and if the limb is too clean after the wound of the sweat, then wet the linen cloth in cold water, and put it on, until the wound is cleaned.
et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez;	and if the wounds multiply, then put on broken glass, or salt, and similar things, until it is cleaned.
ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant;	or you put half of the crushed beans on the limb, and let them stay until they stick to the limb, then it will stop bleeding.
et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	and if you have more difficult ones, take other remedies.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent;	And if the remedies do not take effect, rub the affected area with fresh blood from a vein, or make a small incision where the arrow is inserted, and then place them on top, and as soon as they feel the blood, they will burn;
et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	and when you see that they have fallen off, powder them with a little bit of aloe and crushed garlic, or ashes, they will now burn.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	This begins the book of fractures
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and it is restoration of fractures and dislocations.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent;	Pay attention, young apprentice, that the foolish ones who read this chapter do not see any of the old books, nor have they ever read them;
et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin;	and for this reason, knowledge is lacking in our land, for I have never found any good.
et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie;	and I know nothing, except by the knowledge of ancient books, which I have studied so much that I have written about it, and by experience, and by the habit of my life.
et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	and I have described to you in this chapter what is contained, and I have abbreviated it at the end, and I have clearly shown the forms of the instruments that are necessary, as I have done in these two previous chapters.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	Therefore, we should say or prologue of this book the sums of the word and the chapters where the wise put his understanding, and stay on the truth, so that those who are experienced seek and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars;	I say that when a fracture or dislocation or twist or sprain comes to any one, it is necessary for you to hasten to treat the pain on both sides, if nothing stops you, as in weakness of body, or children, or old people;
ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois;	If the limb is not very warm or too cold.
et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre;	And use warm lard, that is to say, warm oils, and egg yolk and goose fat, and do not drink wine, nor use any thick broths, and do not eat too much meat that fills the veins with blood, until you have no doubt of abscess or spread of matter in the limb;
si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	if the hairs return to their previous government as they used to be.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when broken bones begin to heal, it is necessary to apply a thick mash of meat that causes swelling, such as cooked wheat, and risotto, and tests, and fish, and chicken, and eggs, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For the mash should be applied frequently and soon after the break.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans;	And know that the bones of old people and the elderly cannot be properly healed or sutured according to their nature due to the corruption of the limbs, nor the same as those that are too tender, such as the bones of small children;
mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant;	but do not treat, reset over the broken bone and large thick rods that support and join the limb together, until it is strong as it was before.
et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	and not at all in its work, and for this reason it must be nourished with large meats, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And the fractures are diverse in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the fracture of the head is different from the fracture of the foot, and I will tell you all the ways of fracture in this chapter.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there is a fracture that goes through the spine, and another in soaking, like the tip of a quill for writing.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if there is a fracture with a wound, and a fracture in a small cut.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu;	And in every way it should have its own willpower, and its proper tool in the restoration, according to what memory comes in its place.
et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main;	and it is known the breakage of the bone because the leg is twisted, and open well by default, and its pressure against the hand.
et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure;	and when there is no twisting and it is not against the touch, and the pains are not much, if there is no breakage.
mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	but it can also have twisting, or cutting, or small breaking.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	It is not necessary that you move it by hand, but place the remedies that come here after, and then gently restrain it now.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne;	and the break that goes into the spiral, and the two parts are dislocated, now you must put them back evenly, as if abscesses come alive;
et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez;	and if abscesses come alive, do not let any pus, until the abscesses are calmed.
puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces;	then put it back evenly to the muscle that you can lightly and safely, and if the restoration of it is lighter than the restoration of this one where there are pieces.
puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	then hold it as it should be afterwards.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main;	If the bone is broken into pieces, if it is two parts, if it is a hand or foot, or at your hand if it is small members, or to two strings, or to one string and at your hand;
et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor;	and put the limb according to its natural shape, so that when the parts of the broken bone are joined, it is reset by all means in their proper places so that you may not cause further injury or pain;
et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	and well support the two bones according to the best shapes.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien:	And feel it with your hand if it seems not quite right:
si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	If the dislocation is severe, and it is not pulled back too much, and not pressed as those who bring it by their work cause abscess and contraction in the limb, as we have experienced many times.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere;	And when the limb is in place, properly treat the pain so it does not move, whether awake or asleep, turning or in any other way.
et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	And make sure that the limb is secure so that it feels no pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor;	For when it feels no pain, it is not in place, and it should be put in the correct position so that it feels no pain.
et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez;	and ensure it is placed correctly, as twisting should not occur when it is returned.
et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	and the quality of the broken limb depends on what I tell you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	The quality of the limb broken is different in size and in greatness and in form.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans:	For there are small members, such as arms and legs and similar ones:
si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz;	so it is appropriate to wrap them with soft and thin linen cloths;
et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe:	and those that are large, such as thighs and legs:
si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche;	so it is appropriate to wrap with a wide and sturdy cloth, because the large limbs embrace the entire large member, and hold it evenly in all parts, so that there is no gap.
puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure;	then lightly tie it around the leg, three or four turns depending on the member, and hold your hand a little on the entire limb, then go above the fracture and hold it less than the fracture, then slowly move away from the fracture.
et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet;	and gradually soften the limb little by little, until you press a large part of the healthy leg, then take another limb and turn back around the broken leg.
puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus;	then return to the part away from the fracture and hold it gently, neither too hard nor too forcefully, as we have said in the first section above.
puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	Then place between the limbs wet linen or cloths, as long as they are even, then tie everything together with a bandage, and then put your well-made splints on top, if there is no abscess or swelling.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors;	And if there is swelling or an abscess, then place something soothing on top of the abscess, and what removes the swelling, and leave it like this for some time.
puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	Then strain over your splints, and they should be half of a wide bandage cut neatly, or of rope that is made into ropes, or of reeds, and they should be according to this shape:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres;	but the screw that one puts over the fracture should be slightly larger and wider than the others;
et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor;	and also as long as it is needed for the limb of small or great size;
puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure;	then screwed on the screws as you did in the first step, then tied with a thread evenly, as in the first step above the fracture;
plus estroit est ensus, adés moins;	the tighter it is, the less;
et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol;	and it should be that the thread is medium, neither too thick nor too thin, and made of flax;
car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	for if the thread is thick, as I have seen works of fools who make their bindings too thick with linen cords, and that is great error, because the bandage cannot be even if it is too fine, and should only have between each screw less than a quarter of an inch space.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the wounds are closed by the thorns after the straining in their place, put discharge from them with linen, or other clean cloth, so that it does not fester.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is with the splinter, and the stitches are broken, I will tell you the treatment here after.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And do not strain all the broken limbs on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant;	For when the members are large, one should not put splints immediately after 5 days or 7, or more depending on the safety of abscess healing;
et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion:	and see the manner of ancient plasters to restore fracture, dislocation, and twisting:
et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	and take some flour that is held in the walls of the mill, and knead it with abundant water, and put this mixture, not too clear or too thick, and use it, and this is the common method of the plaster restoring fracture to various positions, and especially to women and small children, for it is neither too hard nor too soft.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion:	Another way of applying plaster to restore fractures, dislocations, and twists:
pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana X З.;	Take alabaster, daniel, enule, asafetida, Arabic gum, and mugwort, of each equal parts;
mirre et aloes, ana V З.;	myrrh and aloes, of each five drachms;
alechil VIIII З.;	eight ounces of oil.
et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef;	and make a powder, and mix it with honey.
se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	If the patient's constitution is hot, use this plaster, as it is of good composition, and quickly restores broken bones to many people.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion:	Another way of applying plaster that is good for twists:
pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.;	Take a sharp knife and cut along the vein, at point X.
mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.;	Apply a bandage and ointment, at point VIIII.
acaice VI З.;	Apply pressure at point VI.
bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Grind up belladonna root at point X, mix it with either vinegar or plenty of oil, and administer it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure:	Another way to treat joints and bones that are damaged is to apply a poultice, ease the pain, and use a bandage to support the bone and the broken part.
pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	Take new linen, dip it in oil and vinegar, and place it on the wound.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	This plaster does not heal immediately, but it is good for relieving abscesses and properly treating pains.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez:	Another method of splinting to restore broken bones:
pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Take dry fig branches and earth pavement, grind them together, and make a splint.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	Another method to treat the break in the bone and to ease the remaining pain of the abscess.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie;	Take valerian root, chamomile, violet flowers, flour of each one in equal parts;
et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	grind and mix with wine, and if the limbs are hot, apply the mixture with fresh or dry coriander juice, and use it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	Another method of treatment, more suitable than the first, when an abscess is difficult to restore the member.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie;	Take valerian root, linseed, balm, melilot, and without wine, and violet and chamomile flowers, of all one equal part;
et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	And bruise, and cook with salt water, or sweet water, or with wine, according to the heat of the limb, and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Hippocrates said in his book that one should not put on a broken limb except for a plaster made of wax and oil, and nothing else, and said that it should be neither too soft nor too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems that Galen said that one should put on a broken limb to heal, dry things slightly warm, such as myrrh and aloes and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor:	Another way to treat injury and pain:
pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Take fly and horsehair from the eye, or feathers of an owl, and vitriol, and silk equally, and grind them, and make a plaster and apply it to the wound.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu;	And then remove it after a while, and be careful that the hairs do not cause any pain, nor move the bones of its limb.
si ne lou deslie par mains jors.	if not remove by hand later.
Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant;	And if pain comes to the limb, or itching, with rest or inflammation, then hurry and reset it, and remove the plaster now.
et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor;	And take light bandages, and wet seaweed, and soak in vinegar, and lift the limb, until the itching stops, and let the pain be relieved.
puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut;	Then let the limb rest for an hour, then apply dry linen, soak in vinegar or rose oil, and tie with a bandage, until you are sure of no abscess.
et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant;	And relieve the inflammation of the limb, and let the pain be removed, then begin the thin bandage and a little plaster, and do not strain it as much as before.
et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	and subtly until they are clean.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that the abscess is red and swollen and painful and inflamed, and you have knowledge of plasters and ointments, then apply them evenly as you did before.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII;	And if it does not come to the limb as we have said within three days or four or five or seven;
et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus;	and never leaves it for twenty days, as we see, until the fractured bone is set and approaches the position of the chariot above;
adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant;	therefore the splint is applied again, and it increases its flesh, as I have said before;
et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir;	and if you see the limb drier than usual, then no humor can come;
arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure;	then rub the affected area with hot water every time you dislocate it, and this should be done daily, and release the ligament a little;
par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement:	by this work, therefore, cut the broken bones of the limb, and quickly realign it as they do with the foolish, who twist the limb painfully:
c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	it is evil, and this work is not sure, and I see nothing but pain and the correct way of working.
des diverses manieres de brisure	of various ways of breaking
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees;	many ways of breaking are, and various shapes, and the causes are distinct:
car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust;	because it has breaks that are made by the impact of a sword, and the collarbone fractures the entire bone just below the bone, as if crushed or broken;
et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	and for this reason this type of break is called «crushing».
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»;	When the spearhead strikes the bone from above, piercing through, and is called this type of fracture "absolute";
et est li plaie de ces II brisures grans ou petite.	and is the wound of these two fractures, great or small.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is percussion from a fall, or a cut from a sword, or a break from a fall on stone, or from falling onto something else, and similar things.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if it is a broken bone that pierces through the skin, approaching the flesh on either side of the bone, or above the bone, and this wound is large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»;	And if the wound that is set in the bone as subtly as hair, and is the fracture small, and because of this it is called this type of fracture "hairline";
et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres;	And if the wound that is made by being pierced with an arrow, or by falling, or by something similar, and makes the piece of the bone enter below, and is the threads as when they make the stove when they strike above the stoves.
si entre li piere dedens.	if between the stones inside.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant;	And it has more in those who have or main moist bones, as of a child;
et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles;	and it has all these ways of breaking that small pieces are discharged as these;
et je em parlerai en son leu.	and I will speak about it in its place.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And we know all ways of fractures by the displacement above them, and the inspection of tents, and by the rotten char that is above.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The similarity of hair is known because when one has revealed the bone, and one rubs it above, if there is an open black fracture.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of fracture, be careful about the bad accident, and if you see no bad accident, such as vomiting of bile, and loss of understanding, and extension, and paleness, and fever ague, and the eyes issuing forth and turning red, and other similar things in many dispositions, it cannot be healed without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see any apparent injury, and you hope for recovery, then begin treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the broken bone comes first to you, and it is in the leg, then you must remove the bone before the fourteenth day or you will not be able to.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is in the arm, then you must remove the bone before the seventh day, provided that the flesh around the bone has not decayed, and the injury that we have mentioned occurs.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi:	And if the fracture of the bone comes just to the linen that covers the brain, then it is necessary that you cut the broken part as follows:
et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset;	and is that you press the head of the painful part, and uncover the bone in all ways that you can, and over the shape of the wound as soft as you can, and when blood comes to discover the bone, or abscess chaus, if it helps what it is necessary, and is that you fill the place with moistened cloths in rose oil;
et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc;	And let the wound rest until the abscesses have subsided, and ensure that there is no bleeding.
puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige:	Then begin around the bone to cut, and this is done according to two methods of surgery:
l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	One method is that you cut narrowly in front, and this is the shape:
Et puis i boute I autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	Then use another cut larger than the first one.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde;	And the second method is that you have many different cuts, some narrow and others wide, and they are sharp and made of iron.
et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	And work carefully, so as not to wound the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou I cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os;	And if the bone is hard and protruding, it is necessary that you drill around it, so that you administer cuts with targes, not until it goes beyond the bone of the test, and should have above the point a margin or circle, which does not let the point go beyond the bone;
et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test;	and you must have many, so that each comes in its own time of the bone's growth, so that you have splints for all tests.
et c’est li forme des III manieres de tareres:	and this is the form of the three methods of splints:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes I tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez;	the quality for piercing around the broken bone is that you place one splint on top of the bone and turn your hands so that you feel that the bone has been pierced;
puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures;	then replace the splint on another part slightly afterward, and thus do all around, then cover the incisions of the space of the bone between the pieces, and do it as subtly as you can, lightly, as we have said, until you remove the bone to your hand, or to any of the instruments that you have such as pliers, pincers;
et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	and beware of not touching the brain or the spinal cord.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire;	And when you have pierced the bone and treated it, it is advisable to close the opening that has remained from the bone with all other tools similar to an incisor, but it is necessary that it be thinner and more subtle than the other incisor;
et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens;	and if nothing remains of the small bones or scales, do not remove them gently with all the tools;
puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	then treat the wound with tents and ointments that we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus;	And the other method of work is this one that the Greeks say, which is more safe;
et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	and the pain is very strong, and that is its word.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is necessary first to remove a part of the bone where the fracture is open, so that when you have removed that part, then place the lens-shaped piece of this incision, which is the shape:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os;	And do not cut into one part, and it is the affected part in the second ribs, so that the cutter is towards the bone.
puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz;	then strike with a small hammer above, so that you can slightly cut around the bone, and be careful of the wire that is outside.
s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	if it is attached to the bone, then slightly cut around it, for one can cut well without hurting or fearing.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the fracture of the bone does not pierce through the skin, and the bone is only broken on one side, and there are small pieces, then you should smooth that roughness, and remove the scales with a thin razor that you should have in various quantities, to manage each limb as conveniently as possible, according to the work and the shape of the fracture.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If you have large razors before, and then more subtle ones, and do not stop doing this until it is well.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement;	In each of the other hair shears and delicate cuts, it is necessary that you anesthetize according to its advancement.
et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	This is a thing that cannot be answered by one who has studied this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie;	And if the wound is exposed, it is necessary to apply a linen cloth according to the size of the wound, and soak it in rose oil, and place it on the wound.
puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil;	Then take another cloth doubled in two or three, and soak it in wine and rose oil, and place it on the first cloth.
et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement;	And do this more gently than you can, so as not to irritate the wound, then administer from above another cloth, and do not strain it until it stains the wound only.
et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses;	and let it remain there for one or two days until the abscess is soothed, then release it, and administer medicines such as lis roots, flour of vetches, powder of incense, aristolochia, and similar things;
et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication;	and make a powder from these things, and put it on the wound, and administer mediocre medicines without causing pain;
et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice;	and make sure that the wound is kept clean, that you do not leave any pus in it, or any blood clot, because when a blood clot forms on the surface of the brain, it will cause damage and harm;
car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	For when one puts a sharp object on top of the wound, it does not bite from above.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Take precautions therefore, as no accidents come to the patient, as we have said, it is doubtful with doubt.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac;	And if no other means come except by the medicine that was put on top, which has virtue, then you must take a part of honey, and three parts of red oil and one piece of cloth, and put it on top of the wound.
puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat the wound with the appropriate methods until it is healed.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les II parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont II os;	It is said that never are both parts of the nose above broken, or one by itself, because they are two bones.
et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	And that one is cartilaginous and does not break, unless it is dislocated or twisted, and then it heals.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil;	And if one of the two parts is broken, it is necessary that you break your small nail or needle through the breakage into your index finger, and place it evenly within the breakage at the pouch by default, until the nail regains its natural shape.
et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	And do this lightly, and ensure that the hairs do not feel pain from your work.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the break is in the upper part of the bone, and cannot reach your finger, it is necessary that you place it at the top of a small stick or a slightly thick one.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues;	And if the breakage is of two parts, then repair the other part, and hurry to restore the first joint if you can.
se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	If not, after the seventh or eighth day, when the abscesses have calmed down, then poke at the tip of the nail with a piece of linen cloth, if the breakage is in one part.
Ou tu boutes I autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est;	Where you go to one side or the other, if the break is there.
et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	and if the tents are so large that they fill the nostrils.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	And they said no one should mash the tents in the fire, and each day.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin;	It does not seem to me that this is right, but it is necessary that they be ground in the making of an ointment from honey and powdered mille.
puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	Then leave the tent until the bone is iron and the cartilage hardened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a I souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi;	And never use feathers in place of tents, and if there is a soft cloth around the wound, and if the breaker holds it, and blows the pain away.
or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en I poc de dyaquilon.	And if abscesses come to the nose while you work, put clay or a cotton ball soaked in red wine or a little hydrogen peroxide on it.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis;	And if there are no abscesses, apply a poultice made of flour of mustard and powder of incense, confectioned with an egg, then place it on light bandages, and do not bind the wound tightly.
et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu;	And if the bone is broken into small pieces, and it is broken into smaller pieces, then remove them with suitable instruments, then cut away the fracture, and treat the injury with suitable remedies and bandages, as with plasters and ointments suitable for the wound.
et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If there is no wound in the nose, then treat with tents, and put in plugs until healed.
de la routure de la mandibule	of the fracture of the jaw
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jaw is fractured and there is no wound elsewhere, and the fracture is only slight, and not completely broken into two pieces, as can be seen if one looks carefully.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide;	It is necessary, if the fracture is on the right side, that you bite your own index finger in the patient's mouth.
et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	And if the fracture is on the left mandible, bite your own index finger with your right hand, and gently apply pressure to the fracture, and hold it steady with the other hand.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en II, si covient que tu aministres extension de II pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the fracture of the jaw is in two pieces, it is necessary that you administer traction of two parts, until it is even.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus I drapel double;	And if movement of the teeth occurs, or loosening, then strain them with a thread of gold or silver or silk, then place the fractured jaw on the broken jaw, and place it under a double cloth.
et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	Put a large, well-made cloth or a piece of evenly cut leather, long and wide according to the jawbone, on top of the blanket, and tie it securely with a rope that you have, and command the patient to rest, and give him light food.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet;	And if you see that the position changes, then reset it to the tiger's shoulder, and then put it back as it was changed.
et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote;	And put a poultice on top, with flour from the mill mixed with plenty of urine or semolina, after you have removed the crust.
et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez;	And put a lighter poultice on top of that, and if the poultice sticks to the patient, and the position of the patient does not change, leave him until he is healthy.
maintes fois est sanez en III semainnes.	Many times are healed in three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if an abscess comes, follow what we have said many times.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee;	And if there is a break and wound together, do not touch any part of the bone that is fractured.
si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	If too subtly from the fracture with instruments to the mouth.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	If the wound is narrow, then enlarge it according to your need.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus I des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have removed all these pieces, and there is none left, if the wound is wide, then apply wound dressings to it, to drain pus until it is healed.
de la forcele	of the forearm
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc III manieres:	The forceful break several times before, behind the shoulder, and the fracture is in three ways:
ou elle est brisie et desevree en II, et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer;	or it is broken and separated into two, and there are pieces, and it is the most light to restore;
ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	or there is a break with wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies II ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie;	And the work is that if the fracture is with wound, that you have two assistants, so that one treats the help that feels the forceful broken.
et li autres estende lou col vers la partie;	and the other extends the neck towards the affected part;
puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	then make even the fracture at your fingers, so that it forms as it should be, and there is no appearance or movement.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit;	And if you have the skill to extend further, put a round, cloth or linen ball under the shoulder, according to your needs;
et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	and extend and relieve the tendon, and hold the ball in your hand, so that you make even the fracture as it should be.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule I oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot pull the shoulder of the arm out, because it comes from above, then it is necessary that the hairs be pulled evenly over its surface, and move the shoulder outwards, and bend the minister's elbow down, until the bone of the arm is raised.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus;	Then bring the fracture to your fingers, and if you find the pieces scattered, it is necessary that you cut across;
et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as;	and try to find the lighter pieces, and if the bone cannot be joined due to any obstacle, then use one of the incisors that you have.
mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	but put the forceps of this instrument out of the way to avoid the sinus:
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre;	and it seems like a spoon, and is not too tight, and should be as wide as it needs to be, according to the size of the bone and the skill of the workman;
et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os;	and it should have two prongs, as you see, and one wide and the other narrow, like the edge of the wound that you made when you cut the bones;
et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	And when you are sure of an abscess, if the wound is bleeding, and if the tear is small, or you doubt an abscess, apply the wound with bandages and tents, according to its size.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille I drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if an abscess comes, if it is soft, then soak the cloth in rose oil and in vinegar and in wine, and put it on.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier;	The stripping of the bone, when it is sensitive to pain and cutting, is that you place on the bone the plaster from the mill and some flour, and put light dressings on, and put a sphere outside the wound, if you have the skill.
puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre;	Then take a very wide bandage of a palm's width, then put the bandage doubled over the dressing and plaster.
puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant;	Then take a thin stake three fingers wide and long, and wrap it around the dislocated joint, so that the head of the dislocated joint is suspended;
et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide;	and place the stake on the broken part, and turn the joint back into its place, and dislocate the healthy shoulder, and dislocate the injured shoulder;
et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint;	and reset each part, and when you see that the injured part holds the broken part evenly, and you clearly see that the stake does not move over the broken bone, then reward it every day, and when the joint is released, then hold it;
et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut;	and place the injured limb on its back, and put a small pad under the shoulder to raise the dislocation upwards;
si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors;	if the fracture of the humerus is aligned by aligning the shoulder, or you tie the arm to the neck, and it does not dislocate if no bad accidents occur within 20 days;
puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez;	then restart the bandage if you see that there is a need for it, and hold it and let it be thus until it is restored;
et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	and it is restored within 28 days, and less to some people.
de la brisure de l’espaule	of the shoulder fracture
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement;	Few have had their shoulder broken or the arm torn from its joint, except by violent means;
si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	if the fracture follows the shape of the break, and it is reset according to its natural form, in all possible ways that you can;
puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double;	then put on the arm powder from the mill with plenty of honey, and light bandages, and place above the sling double;
puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment;	then place above a wide and thin board, somewhat larger than the shoulder, and do not let the board touch any part of the shoulder, so that the board is evenly supported by the bandages made of linen;
et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor;	Then tightly bind it with a thick bandage so that the joint does not move from its place, and examine the injury every day.
et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit;	And whenever it is displaced, tightly bind it and put the joint back in its place if it is out of alignment, and reduce the pain on its side.
et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en XXV.	And the shoulder is restored in 20 days or 25.
Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	And when these numbers are completed, reset it and be careful, for it is not bones that move lightly.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a piece of the bone is torn off before the wound is opened, and not removed from the surrounding area, then cut through it, and the bone, and do what we have said in the breaking of the splint to alleviate an abscess.
de la brisure dou pis	of the breaking of the splint
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc;	The foot is never broken in the middle, but this rarely happens.
mais il brise sovent au defuer.	but it often breaks again.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	And when it is broken in the middle, it declines towards the outside, and the patient feels great pain, and lack of movement, and everything, and possibly vomits blood, and the wound opens in the broken bone, and the smell is bad.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met I cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des II costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient;	And the restoration is such that the dislocated joint is often pushed back up onto its place, and the arm is placed between the shoulder blades, then press the shoulders, and bring together the ribs of both sides to your hands, and subtly put it in place in all ways that you can, until the shape of the bone is as it should be;
puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en I drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve;	then put plasters and suppositories above the bone of salt, or another light one, and wrap it in a bandage, and tie it to the broken bone, so that it does not move;
et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint;	and turn the bandage around the back, and tightly bind it, and reward every hour, and if it dislocates again, then bind it;
et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures;	If it is necessary to slip it off due to corrosion or pruritus that comes to the limb, or pain or abscess, if you hasten, and slip it off, and scrape the dressing, and address what has come from methods of treatment;
puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	then reset the bandage, and hold it until it is healed.
de la brisure des costes	of rib fractures
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses;	Note that the rib breaker only comes in the large gross after the back, and at the top, and does not press unless because they are sharp;
et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	and the smell is good at the inspection as it should be.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And the remedies are that you set the fracture as it should be.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	Then apply the plaster and the bandage of a splint if you know how to do it.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile;	And if the rib fracture is leaning inwards, it causes great pain and sharpness, as if from weeping, for the bone does not touch the skin.
et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	and there is much swelling and blood, and it is a great sickness, and the ancients put great effort into it.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if among those who say that it is necessary to administer foods that swell the stomach, to push the broken bone into place.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not make this mistake, if pus does not come, unless it comes.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if it has come, then cleanse it.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison;	And they said none of those who put suction cups on the limb, to draw out well, and it seems reasonable;
toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	nevertheless, doubt and because the suction does not draw out the excess from the limb due to its weakness.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And they said that among those who must cover the limb with linen oiled high, and one puts tents between the ribs to keep the lung evenly inside, then treat the care of pleurisy, food, and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac;	And if the pain is so great that it cannot be borne by the bone that does not touch the skin, and there is doubt, then it is necessary to cut across the rib on the side of the fracture, and it is necessary to place a probe to ward off the pus.
et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then one must drill the bone, and gently pull it, and then sew the two lips of the wound, if it is large, and treat them with ointments, until they are healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu;	And if pus comes out, put moistened cloths on it in red oil, and put on the limb;
et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and treat it as needed for the abscess, and lie down near it on the side where it should be, until it is healed.
de la brisure dou col	of the broken neck bone
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie;	Never come breakers to broken bones of the neck, and only a little blood comes out;
et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	And also at the spine of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	And when this happens to anyone, and you want to know if they will be healthy or not, if you see their hands softened and swollen and dead, and they cannot move or extend them, and when you touch them with a needle, they do not feel.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	It is fatal in many conditions, and if they move and feel well when you hold them and do not, it means that the bone joint is saved, and the pain has been cured, if you put care on it.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit;	And if a similar thing comes to the spine of the back, and you want to know if it is healthy or not, take note whether the feet are soft, and if the accidents that are in their hands are present, and above the back there is ventosities and involuntary egestion;
et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	and when it is laid on its stomach, there is involuntary egestion.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	And when it is placed on its back and it wants to sit up, it cannot.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz:	It is deadly.
si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	if you do not labor in its care.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this accident does not come to it, it is the lighter thing.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez;	And the care is that you reward if there is an abscess clean, put on the spine rose oil or chicken grease, until it is calmed;
puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer;	Then place one of the comforting and drying plasters on top, and tie it with a bandage, and command the pain to rest.
et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And do not sleep over that part where he feels the pain, until it is completely healed.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur;	And if any bone becomes dry, it should be covered with oil.
et oste l’os, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And break the bone, then bring together the two edges of the wound, if it is large, to one stitch, then apply the healing ointment with charcoal, until it is completely healed.
et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier;	And if the fractured bone is called the "crossbone," take your right hand's fist and place it on the other hand to your power, then place the plaster and the splint on top, if you have skill.
puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	then restrain it, and if there is bone deviation, do the same, and the bone, and heal the wound until it is healed.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	of the fracture of the ribs of the back
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief;	It rarely happens that the ribs of the back are broken, and if it does, there is no great harm in a slight reduction at the neck;
et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	and then extend it long, and incline to the shoulder, and come to the painful limb, and swelling, and that which is broken.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure;	And the restoration is that you extend your hand above, as high as you are above the breaker;
et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li;	and squeeze those which are broken and the shape of the bone;
et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	If the fracture is only at the head, then set that fracture until it is in its natural position.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	If the fracture is long or it inclines towards the inside, place the injured limb on its belly until the healing of this fracture is complete.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve;	And when you have set it, then apply the plaster, then place a splint of wood or cloth, and hold the fractured part so it does not move.
et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	And place the limb alongside the ribs, until the ribs are even.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	Instruct the patient to lie on their uninjured side or back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit;	And if an abscess comes, do not touch it until it is calmed down, and then follow what we have previously said.
et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident;	Then return to the resetting, and hold it as it should be, if there is no bad accident.
et c’est li maniere.	and this is how
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	of the shoulder dislocation
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des II manieres:	The auxiliaries are the part between the neck and the top of the shoulder, and if it is broken, one should restore it according to one of the two methods:
dont l’une est que tu pren I fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	one of which is that you take a piece of gristle of equal size, in this form:
Et lie as II chiés II liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus I siege;	and tie the two ends together, and raise them up, and cut off the pain above the seat;
puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval;	then pour the broken arm through the sleeve, until it reaches its ease, and has in its middle a peg of wood, then raise it above any heavy thing or the nurse extends below;
puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	Then place the broken bone fragments together with both hands until the broken bone returns as it should.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a II ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout I liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And the other way is to place the dislocation above its shoulder, and hold the hand on its collar, then command two ministers that one ties what is above the breaker at his hands, and the other ties behind everything, and stretches each to its part.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	And if you see that the extraction is too far, then hold the rope outside the breaker, above the breaker, and stretch each of the ministers to its part.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure;	And if the broken bone is near the shoulder joint, then it is necessary to place the middle of the arm away from the shoulder, and the other towards the ribs, away from the broken bone.
et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute;	And if the broken bone is towards the ribs, then it is necessary to place the middle of the arm gently, with slight pressure, until the broken bone is even with the shoulder and the ribs.
puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	Then place the broken bone evenly as it should be, and hold it in place if there are no complications.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a VII jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez;	And if abscesses come, do not restrain it for seven days, and place on it a poultice of linseed and rose oil, until the abscess is soothed;
puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein;	then restrain it, and the way to restrain it is that you place the bandage on the fractured part, then bring the arm over the dislocated joint, and place your hand on the shoulder or on the chest;
et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	and place the bandage, and restrain over the dislocated joint, and on the arm, so that the arm is in its place, unless something prevents it, or if the bones are not moving.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele I doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure III dois de chescune part;	And if you doubt that the bone does not move, use splints, and place a wider and stronger splint on the fracture, and have two spaces between each splint, and each splint should be so large that it passes the fracture three inches from each side.
puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	Then strain against the splints, as I said at the beginning of this chapter on the fracture, more strongly and less with each distance.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit;	And if you see the position of the splints and the strain, as we have said in the hour that you restore the broken member, and you doubt the abscess is not healed, leave it to lie for seven days, as we have said.
puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	Then examine every three days the joint, that the pricking does not come to the bone, or the inflammation cannot come to the limb because it is too tight.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	If the dislocation, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac;	And if no such accidents come, then wait until after three days or more, and let the pain lie on its back, and have its hands on its stomach;
et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens;	and apply the cautery to the joint flat on a piece of cloth equally, and examine every hour of the day or night, that the broken limb does not move, or the ligaments are not softened;
si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz;	If the patient is encouraged by the power of medicine, and the meat that we have placed before, in a manner that the meat is at the first subtle;
et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	and when he begins to eat again, it should be thick.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout;	And it is customary that the shoulder and leg should be eaten in forty days after all;
et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	and then it must be peeled and administer the balms and medicines of ointments for the limb to increase.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	If its structure is crooked and swollen, it may take 1 or 2 months to reset.
de la brisure du bras	of the broken arm
Li bras est compos de II os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet;	The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the "foscile", from which one is small and is the one that teaches the pouch;
et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi;	and the others are great, and is the one that is dislocated, near the small bone;
par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	by chance the large bone alone breaks, or the small ones, and by chance together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations;	When the small bones are broken, the restoration is light, and the healing;
et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	and when the large bone is broken, then the healing is bad, and more painful than when they are broken together.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	If it is only the small bones that are broken, then it is necessary to extend them slightly and align them evenly.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort;	And if it is the large bone, then it must be strained more strongly;
et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor;	and extend it over the wrist, and tie the pouch of the hand higher than the others, and the small ones lower than the others, and let the pains cross over itself, and the wrist in front of it higher, so that the pains suffer no labor.
puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	Then extend the ministers' arms to the part below the shoulder, or to the elbow, and other ministers to the upper part.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And then set the mirror evenly, according to its best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if it breaks into pieces, put each in its place, and if there is no piece that can be held, and you cannot restore it to its place, then do as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler;	And if with the broken bone, I have spoken of it in the chapter on singularity;
si pren la cure.	if take care.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz;	And if at the beginning of restoration, abscesses occur, then apply a poultice made of red oil and white wax, which is not too hard or too soft;
et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	and bind the poultice gently, until the abscesses are relieved.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres;	Then remove the crust, and put the plaster of powder from the mill with abundance of honey, then place the splints, and let the splint of the broken part be slightly outwards, and a bit wider than the others;
et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions:	and let it have six splints or arms in many positions:
soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II;	so that the broken part is in one of the bones, or in two;
et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre;	and held higher than the broken part, and always less far away, as I said at the beginning of this chapter.
et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres;	and let the cloths that are on the broken part be soft and moist, and not too hard or rough;
et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	And let the son, from whom it is strained, be of linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	Reward the limb and the joint after some time.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez;	And if any accident comes to the limb, such as itching that comes to the limb, then you must raise the limb with hot water, until those itches are soothed.
et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	and let the limb not be too tightly rested.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	Then continue the strapping, and if the joint is dislocated and the bones are broken, or similar things, then address it.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses I poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if the swelling cannot come to the limb because it is too tight, then you must soften it a little, and let it rest for some time, until the swelling has passed, and then strap it.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	And if none of these things we have said come to harm, then let it wait for 20 days.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos;	or inquire within, then let the hands to his neck, and let his neck be even, and guard against movement and degumming, and sleep on his back.
et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	and let it be known that this fracture is restored in thirty days or thirty-five, and perhaps in twenty days, according to the compositions and complexions of the virtues.
de la brisure de la main	of the broken hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	After the back of the hand and to us there are few breaks, and it only happens many times.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement;	And when the bone of the hand is broken or splintered, it is necessary that the hairs lie crossed and straight in front of him equally.
puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint;	Then place his hand on the extended table, and extend the bones broken by the ministrants, and put them evenly in their places until they are well joined.
et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu;	And apply the plaster and bandages, if there are abscesses not present, then place a splint according to the amount of the limb.
et soit envoloupee en I drapeil de lin.	And let it be wrapped in a linen cloth.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie;	And if the broken bone is on the outer side of the back of the palm, then make a roll of cloth, and instruct the patient to press it against his broken hand.
et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	Then strain a long rope, and place it under the knee as wide as the sole of the foot, and strain it as it should be.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the bone is broken in the posterior region, it is necessary to place a splint above and another below in the foot, so that the hand is open and straight, then tie it all around the hand, and stabilize the joint between the two.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient;	And if the broken bone comes to one of the ends, if it is the shoulder, then put it even, as it should be.
et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve;	And strain with the sole, and if you see that put a straight small rod to lift the broken bone, and do not move it.
et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés;	And if the broken bone is at other ends, such as in the index or the other, then put it even, and tie it with the healthy joint that is next.
ou tu les lie toz en I tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet;	where you tie them all together, as much as is necessary, or place them on a stick, like a bundle.
et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	and take care in the restoration and disposition of abscesses, and secure what comes to it, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	of the broken rib
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier;	The teeth of the jaw are often broken, and well seen when it turns in front and behind.
et li restauration si est c’on lie I liien desus la briseure, et I autre desoz.	and the restoration is as one ties them together above the fracture, and the other outside.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment;	And the hairs are cut across his face, then each assistant ties their cord to their equal part.
et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	and it is when the fracture is inserted into the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	And if the break is close to the root of the rib, then one of the ribs towards the base, and the other ribs outside the broken part.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval;	And if it is close to the groin, and then the tendons over the groin are stretched, and the extension downward.
puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	Then place the bone in its natural position with both hands, as long as it is according to its natural shape, and then apply the poultice, and tie it, if there are no abscesses.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure;	And if there is an abscess, let it subside first, then return to your work and treatment.
li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	The bandage is made in this manner.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus;	You should wrap the injured and swollen part in two or three layers, and let the excess remain, then bend the leg until the toes reach the base of the heel, and tie a long thread between the thigh and the leg, outside the groin, and bring the end of the thread upwards.
puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe;	then turn back up the leg and up the thigh the bend, then put on the broken bones, and put a splint on the bone of the leg.
puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure;	then apply the limb's own cloth between the leg and thigh to equalize the strain, then begin to bandage about three or four times over the broken bones.
et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint;	and as you go higher than the broken bones, and lessen the strain.
puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet;	then insert two of the strings that you have rolled between the leg and thigh, and bandage three splints that are above, then return to the outside at the top of the string, as far as you come over the bone.
et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	and the restriction, so that it does not move from its place, then leave it thus, then no abscess or swelling or similar thing comes.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois;	And if there is, dislocate it, and direct what comes, as we have said many times;
et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet;	and if it has pieces of bone that prick, it must be removed if possible.
et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer;	and if not, then it is necessary to cut the limb and draw out the splinters.
et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	and treat as we have said, until it is healed.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras;	And never break the ribs thus that one puts these, as in the shoulder or arm;
toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	Therefore, in this restoration made thus, it does not hurt the limbs.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en L jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And it is important that the ribs are restored at different times, according to the diversity of constitutions.
de la ruelle dou genoil	of the road of the gentleman
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	It is said that on the road of the gentleman there is little breakage, but it rains many times.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	And if it breaks, it is only a crack or a puncture, and it has to all wounds, and without wound, and this feels very bad.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet;	And the restoration is such that one puts together what is broken to its two, as much as it can be assembled together.
puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant;	Then apply the plaster, and if you have the skill, put on a round bandage, and stretch it as it should be, then warm up all the positions that we have said in other breakages, such as abscess and similar things.
si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And apply to each accident what it needs, until it is healed.
de la brisure de la jambe	of the broken leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»;	Note that in the leg there are two bones, one of which is called "tibia" on the right, and the other is called "fibula".
et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	and can break anything as it comes to the arm, and for this reason, the restoration is like that of the broken arm equally, and the work is all there. And if both bones are broken together, then the leg from all parts returns.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the small bones are broken, then it returns in front.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien;	And if the large bone is broken, then one feels great pain, and it can be seen well.
et torne desoz.	and returns dislocated.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement;	Then relieve the extension, and make it even, and tie the tendons equally;
mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere;	but anyway, it is necessary that the fracture is straight, and there are many pieces, so that the extension is less and lighter;
et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	And the physician according to your virtue.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren II faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz;	And when you have completed your work, take two strips of cloth that gird the leg on one side and the other, and be long enough to go from the knee down to the ankle.
puis envoloupe en II leus I bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien;	Then wrap them around the leg above and below, and tie it in the middle as well, so that the leg will not incline to the right or left, and thus it is good.
et aucun i aministrent I bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie;	And no one administers the long cloth of the leg, and it is of cloth, and put the leg for support to prevent movement, and properly done, they put it in the break or where he was wounded.
et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident;	and move each leg every day to see if there is an abscess or other accident;
si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	if the healer is healthy until then.
de la brisure des os dou piet	of the breaking of bones due to piers
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle, there is no breaking of bones, but in the case of piers, there is never breaking of bones and it is not necessary, and only a slight injury occurs in some cases.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus;	And if he has bones that are slightly broken, and you see these bones overlapping each other, if you put them on the ground like they want to walk, then put your foot on top of his, where the bones are lifted, then press them so much until they return to their place;
puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a II chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	then put the plaster and poultice on top, and put some cotton on the belly of the foot, then wrap it around the leg evenly, then wrap other cloths around, and other things that you know how to do.
Et quant III jors ou IIII seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when three or four days have passed, if the bone is released, you will find the bones even, whether they are broken or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main;	And if there are any of the two broken, restore them as we have said for the two bones of the hand.
puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment;	Then place a splint along the length of the broken bone, and make it slightly wider, then put the painful part of the splint that I mentioned, and tighten gradually.
et s’il en i a II ou III, ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en I drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet;	And if there are two or three or more broken bones, place a splint along each length, wrapped in a piece of linen, and tighten the painful part outside the splint.
et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	And make sure it is above the head of the splint under the belly of the bone, so that it presses well.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit;	And it is necessary that you do not forget the other things that I have said about other fractures, since we have already mentioned them.
et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	and treat each event as it should be.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	of the fracture of the finger bone
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier;	When the jaw of the woman is fractured, if the tooth is loosened, then incline it to the back part, and hold it from behind.
puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto;	then fill the cavity of the jaw with cotton, and put in as much as is needed.
puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto;	then lift the woman, and slowly raise her back, and then jump the cotton, until it reaches the entrance of the jaw, and then return the bone with the cotton.
et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor:	And when she wants to urinate, remove the cotton, and when she has done so, return it, and thus do this seven times a day:
si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature;	if she will be healed of the fracture, and if you see, take a bandage of burdock, and tie it around the wound, and blow all the bandage in its natural state;
puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens:	then blow into the bandage in a way that the bandage is inflated inside:
la nature si revenra li brisure;	nature will return to the fracture;
puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then it should be filled with cotton, and leave it in this way for some time, until it is healed.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche;	When the tooth of a finger or the woman's is broken, if it can be restored as we have said in the bone of the shoulder;
et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	and these broken parts are not hidden from him who puts his study and practice to it, and heed my book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration:	For the broken part means in many positions the right way of restoration:
enten le donques.	therefore understand it.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge;	In the tooth, when it is broken, take a goose quill and insert the tooth;
puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse III jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	then wrap it in cloths and leave it for three days or more, and it will heal quickly.
de brisure avec plaie	of fracture with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is necessary for one who has a fracture with a wound, even if it is large, such as the bones of the ribs or shoulder or similar, that they be cleansed immediately, so that the cleansings that we have mentioned bear witness.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound is clean, and if the dressing of vinegar, if you have nothing else, then begin to restore the fractured bone in the same hour, or the next day, if there are no pus.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if pus comes, then leave the restoration until the next day, as long as the pus is abated, and do not touch it on the following day or quarter, for you would bring about bad accidents.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the broken teeth appear above the gum line, it is necessary that you gently place them in your hands, with slight extension.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a VII dois ou VIII de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie;	And if the extensions are not equipped with you to make it even with your hands, then bend the arm at the elbow with this iron instrument, which is of iron, and has seven or eight spans in length, and the width is according to the amount of the wound;
et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne III ou IIII, selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure;	and because it is necessary for the mirror to take three or four, according to how much he has in each breakage treatment;
et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	and let it be round and a little thick, that it does not pour out at the compression above the member in your work, and let it be narrow behind, and thick in the middle in front, thus:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent;	And it is called "palainche", because it should be placed on the top of the head's bone.
et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	and it is applied once, as long as it regrows, and they should be evenly placed one against the other.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And if the fracture is subtle, and the splints cannot well hold the bone, then it is necessary to cut the head of the bone until the splints have hold.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir;	And if you cannot reset the bone, as we have said, then use an appropriate tool for this purpose, such as a saw or a chisel, to your power;
puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	then file away what is remaining in the bone of roughness and small scratches.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	And when the bone is returned to its place, and the pain is great afterwards, wait until it is not in its natural place.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit;	If you do this until it is in its place, then wipe the area with a sterile black vinegar cloth, and properly if it was in that state;
et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption;	and do not place anything on the wound or put anything else where there is oil, so that there will be no putrefaction and corruption.
puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure;	then administer elixirs when you have restored the bone, and leave the wound open, and cover the covering all around, according to the size of the wound, and be careful that the wound is not compressed with the break.
et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois;	and many times have done this to the foolish ones, and have caused the pain or death or corrosion of something every time.
et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	and let the binding be softer and more gentle than other breaks.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles;	And if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that no evil accident has occurred, as we have said, and you alleviate pain at the limb, then it does not matter to place leeches on it;
mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	but rather wrap around, instead of leeches, hard cloths, and tie them.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And when you see after one or two hours that the wound is bleeding again, remove what you have put on top of all the blood, and apply healing ointment, such as Tetrapharmacum and similar.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre II fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And it is necessary that you move the limb twice a day, in the morning and in the evening, as long as it is sound and healthy.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And it is necessary that the limbs be arranged in such a way that the bow can move lightly.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if they continue to protrude, and it cannot be healed but remains bent, saw off the small pieces of bone, because it is necessary that you sew the wound with a tent, and remove all those unnecessary pieces that cause pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	And if a fistula comes to the limb, or in any other way of corruption, then it is necessary that you heal it, according to what it says in its chapter before.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse;	And when the bone is broken, and open above the limb, as the bones of the ribs or shoulder, and other similar large bones, do not pull it out, for many times they die, but leave it until it can heal;
par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues;	perhaps it will fall off after 20 or 30 days, then treat the wound, if you can.
et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	and if you cannot, leave it.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	of blows that come from the welding
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre;	We often see after the health of the broken bone, especially near the joint, and it is a bad thing to see the shape of the limb;
et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	and perhaps cannot do its natural works.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres:	Then take care if it is fresh:
si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil;	if you administer astringent medicines, such as aloes, incense, and myrrh, and sarcocolla, and similar things, so that you do not use any of these things or all together, and mix them with stiptic wine or with abundant honey or with vinegar;
et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors;	and place them on the nose out of reach, hold them firmly, and do not let go with your hands for a while.
et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee;	then dislocate it again, and start another one until the dislocation is overcome.
ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite;	or hold firmly on a piece of wet clay well-made;
car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres;	because the property of clay is that it removes all swellings from the limbs.
et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent;	and if the dislocation has already become hard like a stone, and it is necessary to remove it, then the copper above, and making the excess apparent.
ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	or you cut it with any knife until it is removed, and the treatment until it is healed.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	a weak limb that is after the garrison
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes:	When the fracture of the bone is restored, and the limb remains weak and delicate afterwards, this often occurs for many reasons:
de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit;	because one is due to the fact that it was too tightly bound, and was not loosened as it should have been;
ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre;	or because there were too many bindings, and could not reach the necessary movements of the limb;
ou por multitude d’arosement;	or due to a multitude of swellings;
ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre;	or because of too great movements, and not enough rest;
ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	or because it has little blood in its body, so it is weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui;	And the treatment is that you relieve the pain, and make the body tense, until the swelling is not multiplied in it;
et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce;	and the assistant bathes, and gives joy and ease.
puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre;	then places poultice on the limb, so that the poultice attracts to the great swelling, and the heat often from hot iron, until the swelling is drawn out of the limb.
et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	and returns to its natural shape.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	a twisted limb after healing
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil:	When the limbs are twisted after restoration, and the bones broken open, and the shape of the limb is deformed, nevertheless it does not lose its natural work.
si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre;	if one does not believe the people who say that one should break the limb entirely, and many have done this in our land.
et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors;	And these works are blamed, and great harm comes from them, and perhaps the death of the patient.
toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses;	Therefore, if the dislocations and torture are severe, it is necessary to apply hot water, or mollifying herbs that are boiled, such as valerian, roots, and melilot, and similar things.
et li fai I emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus;	And the mollifying plaster is made as follows: with good adhesive, and you take valerian root and cook it with goose grease or linseed oil, and make a plaster on top.
ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	Or you take dried figs and grind them with linen thread, and similar medicines that soothe the pain.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	And never is it necessary to apply continuous and prolonged pressure with wet hands on the dislocation.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And allow movement in the limb every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement;	And if the deformity is awake and hardened, like stone, and it needs to be removed with the knife, if it fits just above the bone, with a slight incision;
et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	and put on a bandage and leave it to heal.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book of dislocations
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation comes to none, it must now be returned against the grain.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu;	For if it delays, the swelling increases, and perhaps if it is reset, it returns to the bone;
por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez:	therefore, it does not fit to move it to the joint where it swells:
maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors;	often causing pain and other injuries;
toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez;	therefore, when it arrives, if the pain is healed, then leave it, until the abscess is calmed;
puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	Then raise the limb with hot and oiled cloth, then gently reset it, and treat each member as it would be cured in its place.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have ordered the chapters on the dislocations of the shoulder joint from head to foot.
des mandibules	of the mandibles
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc II manieres:	There are cases where the mandibles are dislocated downwards, and the dislocation of both is in two ways:
ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc;	or they are slightly out of place but softened a bit.
ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	or they are completely dislocated, hanging downwards, and the tongue from the mouth cannot hold it, nor can he close his mouth, and his tongue is wrapped with speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is small, it often returns in many positions.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie;	And if it is completely and accomplished, then you must reset it quickly and not delay.
et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars;	And in such a manner that the minister applies pressure to the bad joint, and places his finger slightly off one of its roots within the dislocation of the mandible within the mouth, if the dislocation is of two parts;
et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal;	and the other hand is free, to make even.
et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	And commands the patient to relax his jaws, and move them from all sides.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And the mirror moves evenly, until it returns to its place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les II mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement;	And if it is not possible to reset them, immediately if they are both jaws together, then apply hot and oil-soaked cloths, until they can be gently reset.
ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	Do not delay in resetting, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens;	And when they are returned evenly, and the mouth of the misaligned joint is tightly closed to soften, then put wool cloths soaked in a thick paste made of rose oil and wax, then lightly bind it with soft bands.
et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules;	and let the misaligned joints lie on their backs, and their shoulders be between two cushions, so that it does not move to the left or right, nor strive to move, but take light food, until the pains are removed, and the jaws are healed.
et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	Then feed it lightly what it wants, and do not strive to open its mouth to eat and drink, until the jaw is well healed and healthy.
Et se les II mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two mandibles cannot be reset to their proper position within an hour, and they are not converted back to their original shape, then fevers and sweats become common, and possibly diarrhea, and possibly vomiting of clear fluid.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions;	And when you see this, then shave it off as it is deadly.
et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en VIIII jors.	and often killed those who had it, in seven days.
de la forcelle	of the forceps
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The forceps cannot be removed from the side without causing further damage, and it is not reset once dislocated, and one can feel it.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras;	And the restoration is such that the pain lies silently on its back, and extends its arms;
et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra;	and then press the limb firmly to your palm, and it will return.
puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint;	then put on the plaster and the bandage, and hold it in place.
et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer;	and the patient who is behind the back cannot evacuate.
se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit;	if not, and if it evacuates once, then reset the limb as we have said.
puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then place the plaster and bandage on top, hold it in place, and command the patient to rest until it is healed.
et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	And immediately bring back the dislocated shoulder when it is back in its place.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	of shoulder dislocation
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres:	It is not dislocated except by three methods:
de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz;	one of which is that it dislocates at the part of the shoulder blade to the outside.
et li seconde est a la partie dou pis;	and the second is at the part of the shoulder blade to the inside.
et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc;	and occasionally dislocates at the part above, and this happens rarely.
et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners;	and it does not dislocate behind the shoulder, and it does not dislocate inside for the nerves.
et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment;	and often it is reset incorrectly, especially for those who have little strength, because to these it goes quickly.
a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	to those who have enough strength, it goes slowly and returns slowly.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And sometimes happens to some people, a fracture or crushing, and the shoulder swells with an abscess, and they think it is dislocated by this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains;	Therefore, you must test it until you are certain.
et adonques encomence la cure.	Then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste;	And it is known that a dislocation occurs when it goes back to its place, and you will find between the sick shoulder and the healthy one a clear difference.
et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes;	and you will find at the top of the shoulder a hollow, and outside the joint, on the top of the shoulder, as if it were an oss.
et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens;	and cannot move its hand to its wrist, nor move from any movement.
et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier;	and similarly, if it is dislocated above, it is not hidden, for you see it clearly at the shoulder.
et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	and this manner of dislocation is only to be reset when it is new, or when the patient feels pain.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu;	And the manner is that the caregiver gently lifts the hand of the patient above, then places their fingers outside the shoulder, and resets the joint above to its place.
et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz;	And the caregiver gently lifts the hand, and stretches it upwards, then places it outside.
si venra hastanment.	If it comes quickly.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude;	And if it does not come as we have said before, then it is necessary to bathe the wound in hot vinegar;
et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree;	and the remedy should be softening and soothing, such as a decoction of salt, fenugreek, and melilot in hot water, and it should be applied.
puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide;	Then the wound should be placed on the patient's back, and a soft pad of even linen, not too thick or too thin, is placed under it, then the patient's foot is placed on top of the pad, and the shoulder is gently lifted, and the hand is drawn towards the wound;
et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval;	and other ministers tie up the head of the dislocation, so it does not move down.
celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere:	the shoulder is now completely back in place, and if you see if it stays like this:
et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides;	and that you make sure it is placed by someone who is stronger than the dislocation.
et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar;	and that he is on the right side of the costal, and below the shoulder of the dislocation, and lift the dislocation up, so that the dislocation hangs in the arm.
et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	and other ministers pull the hand of the dislocation down towards the stomach.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And if the pain is too light, then with it nothing heavy can be done, and the dislocation returns now.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere:	And it is also reset in another way:
et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile;	and is of a long, thin branch in the earth, which the patient should be as like the dart, and not too thick nor too sharp.
puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust;	then it should be placed outside the pain, but with a soft cloth underneath, and the hairs should be aligned along the length of the arrow.
puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment;	then it should be extended by the other hand in a different way, and the joint will return to its place quickly.
et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure:	and if it does not return for all these things that we have said, then perform this treatment:
pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	take a long, thick branch of about four inches wide, which has the top rounded to enter into the joint from outside the shoulder, like this form:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide;	then tie above the shoulder with soft cloth, which was not a remedy for the pain, then remove it from the side of the pain.
et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus I eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part:	and extend the arm above the long one, and tie the remedy on the long one, and the arm at the top of the hand, then put the arm over the edge of a wide shield, and let the hands hang down from the other side:
li jointure reva ens maintenant.	the joint is now healed.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when she is healed in any way, it is necessary to place a bandage of equal linen over the shoulder, then apply the poultice with powder from the mill, with incense and a little oil, over the entire shoulder and around, then remove the bandage from the shoulder evenly, and return the limb to the poultice, and embrace the hand at its neck, and let your hands remain thus.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost;	and it is better that he move little, until the limbs are comfortable, for it will heal faster.
et puis menjuce plus aprés V jors ou VII, et le mueve;	then move more after three or four days, and move it.
et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	If it is stiff and cannot be softened, then it is healthy.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint is very strong due to moisture that has come, or for other reasons, it is necessary that you administer cauteries at three points, as it is placed before or in the chapter on cauteries.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés VII jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis;	And if you do all of this, and after seven days it dislocates again, and the joint does not hold, and cannot raise the arm above, then cut the nerves at the head of the shoulder are torn or stretched or softened.
et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	and cut that the joint never returns to its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure;	The dislocation that is behind the knee and the buttocks, or behind, is made by impact, and extension of hands, and there is administered another oil.
et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and treat until it is healthy.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after healing the limb swells and moves poorly, then apply the hairs many times, until that swelling is relieved, and returns to its original state.
de la dislocation dou coute	of the shoulder dislocation
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient;	When the shoulder joint is dislocated, it can return to its place with points, and with points it returns.
et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien;	And it has been dislocated from all parts, and even in front and behind, and the dislocation is not yet repaired, for one can see it well and feel it.
et desalue selonc chescune figure.	And it becomes dislocated according to each shape.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	And when you join the misaligned ear with the healthy one, see it openly.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	For the joint is cut, and cannot bend the arm, nor touch its shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener;	And it is necessary that you reset it as soon as possible, for if it comes when the joint is set, it would be painful to reset.
et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier;	And perhaps it cannot be reset at all, especially when it is in the back.
si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	It is worse than other dislocations, and causes more pain, and perhaps it kills the patient.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes II mains;	And the restoration is, when it is such that one can bring it back, that you extend your hand to your two hands;
et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	and its arms are spread, and the hands of the master are held according to the direction of the wrist, back and forth, and press the joint at its root together, or at the base of the palm, until it returns to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is in front, it returns when he doubles his hand to his hand, and holds the root of the palm that is dislocated.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension;	And if it does not return to its place, administer strong extension;
et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension;	and that two masters extend the arm and hold it, so that it does not move during extension;
puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large;	then turn the arm from every part, then that you have wrapped a double cloth long and wide;
et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne;	When looking at the joint, if there is any oil to soften the joint, then apply it, and then gently move the joint until it returns.
et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	And when it is in place, apply a dry poultice with some urine, and then strain it, and put the arm on the back of the painful part, and leave it for some time, then release it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse;	And if the joint is firm in its place, then release the ligament, and leave it.
et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis;	And if you see that the joint does not strain well, then restart the poultice and the ligament, and leave it in this way for some time, until it is firmly put back.
puis le deslie.	then reset it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez;	And if he feels stiffness after the resetting of the joint, and it moves, then bathe and rub it well, and press until it is relieved;
ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain;	or you place a fat sheep's tallow on the joint, then leave it for a day and a night, then remove it, and let it enter or bathe in;
et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain;	and when he feels better, rub the joint immediately, then place the tallow again, and then enter or bathe in.
et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and thus do it two or three times until he is healed;
et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus;	and if you see, then place wet mud warmed with butter on it, and press it;
si revenra a sa disposition.	it will return to its proper position.
li dislocation de la main	the dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures.	The joint of the hand dislocates easily, and its return is lighter than other joints.
Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	However, it is necessary to return it to its place quickly, as soon as it is dislocated, provided the skin is not inflamed or there is no abscess forming.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne.	And the return is that you place the misaligned hand on a table, extend the injured hand, and hold it evenly so that it places its palm over the appearance of the joint, and push until it returns.
Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu;	However, you must check if it is properly aligned.
adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	Then place the misaligned limb on a table for extension and reduction.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	And if the dislocation is at the back of the hand, place the patient's hand on a table, and the other person places their hand over the appearance of the joint.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien.	If it returns now, that's good.
Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If not, apply soothing plasters and let it rest until it can begin again.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte;	And if it cannot be borne, and you cannot put it back in place after some time, the joint will remain twisted.
et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout:	and not move the misaligned part until the hand is wrung dry, and cannot strain anything at all.
adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere;	Then check if the tendon or artery is cut.
si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	If there is no other method, it is to cauterize the wound with fire from the outside, and perhaps there is nothing else that can be done.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse V jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hand is in place, put the poultice that we have said above, then strain and leave it for three days, then remove and leave it thus.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it cannot be moved well, and there is no swelling, then boil water and rub it until it is healed.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	of the dislocation of both hands
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre;	Never reset the fingers of the hand at any part, never to the back of the palm or to the belly;
adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins;	then the finger remains, and push the dislocation to your pouches as long as it returns, then support the head of the finger, and bend it towards the part where it is disjointed;
et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor;	and leave it there for two days, then put it back in place that day;
et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut;	and bandage it as we have said, and the dislocation from the day, and the movement, and the bandage again;
et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and do this often, until it is tight, and just as you did before, if it is dislocated in the belly of the hand, do as you have done previously, until it is healed.
et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	and do the same when it is dislocated elsewhere.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	dislocation of the spine in the back
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the spine in the back or neck is dislocated, and there are many dislocations, there is no cure, for the patient dies from the pain.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I.	And the signs are such that the excretion jumps out without will, and it cannot be held, and often the limbs become soft, or the two arms or the one leg.
Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars;	And often the neck moves to the four parts.
celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»:	That which moves to the back is called "gilbositez".
li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance:	The cure is such that you reward those who have it from childhood:
si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	if there is no cure or healing at all.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit;	And the one that comes from falling or from similar things, they said in ancient ways of healing with great words, or it does not help at all;
mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	but I have abbreviated it according to my intention, and I have formed instruments in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit;	I say that in the gibosity that comes from the worst part, there is no skill or health;
et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis;	and similarly that which comes directly in the second ribs, and one cannot heal except for that proper one which comes from the back, as I said.
et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece;	and let the hairs be stretched out over his face in an even line, and hold the eyes open so he does not blink.
puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles;	then apply the poultice to the forehead in a thin layer, and the other to the feet, and tie one bandage around the limbs outside of the joint, and the other around the hips, and the groin, and the knees.
et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons;	and both caretakers tie the bandages, one around the head and the other around the feet, among the two poultices.
et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	and they should be well tied, the poultice as we have said, and the blindfold places his palms over the spine, until he recovers.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee;	If it does not return to its place by this treatment, take a three-armed board, and lever it off, and the pain should be on the side, and push the chief of the board away from the pain, then put the middle of the board on the spine.
et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu;	and put the injured feet on the other end of the board, and press well, until it returns to its place.
et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	and if you see, do it to the thumb that turns to the hand.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc;	And it is that you fasten two bands at the head of the pain of an arm of great, and towards the feet two others, and between each band, outside and inside, a handspan of long rope.
et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent;	and say in each incision, "I turn you back, and let the incisions be firmly in the earth, so they do not move.
et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet;	and between each two incisions, make one turning incision, so that the wounds may turn back, and say in the two turning incisions, "two small incisions of a palm's length, to turn the turning.
et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	then bind the wound that is among the ribs to the turning towards the head, and the other wound towards the feet at the other turning, and each of the ministers turns their turning along the whole limb, and the masters put the needle evenly as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And when it is even, place a drying plaster with abundant honey on top, then apply compresses, and then the tip of a tablet of three fingers in length, which will hold the bone of the spine together and the part of the spinal cord intact, then tie it with a bandage as we have said, and use the subtle pressure of binding until it is healed.
et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant;	And if nothing comes in the end of healing, then medicines that are softening and soothing must be administered, with the remedy that we have said before.
et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations;	And never administer a piece of lead, and if it appears in the back spine of the back, then be careful that it is not a dislocation.
et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption:	and it is the bone that opens, for which we should not have presumption.
par aventure feroit venir la mort.	by chance it would bring death.
des dislocations de la hainche	of shoulder dislocations
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures;	It is known that the joints of the back and the joints of the shoulder come only in dislocations alone, and do not come like other joints;
et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc IIII parties:	and the joint of the back is dislocated into four parts:
dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier;	backwards and forwards, and front and back;
et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	and more inwards than that, and less dislocated front and back.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu;	And the knowledge of its dislocation inwards is such that when one joints the bad leg with the good one, it is longer, and more open than the good ones, and cannot double the bad knee to the fire;
et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	and is the joint which is inflamed from abscess, because the patient's chest is full.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of one who comes after this is that these accidents are contrary to those before.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement;	And the signs of those who have it in front, so that they can well straighten their leg according to the completion;
toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	therefore, does not double the groin with pain, and if they want to make it move, it cannot go forward, and it holds its urine, and inflames the ankle, and when it goes, it passes over the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of one who has this after are that he cannot spread his groin, nor double over, and that leg is more bent than the other, and the anger is softened, and the shoulder is dislocated to the side of the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure;	The return of this similar sign of dislocation is that you reward it with the ancient dislocation, and it stays according to its disposition, if there is no cure;
et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	and there is no need for him to have presumption.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des IIII manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre;	And in this case where the dislocation is fresh, and it is of four types of dislocation, if you have time to return the joint, extend and retract it, and move it to the left and right;
par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	perhaps it will return, and there is no need for other treatment.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil;	And if it does not return in this way, then you must apply a strong minister, and extend the leg strongly at two hands, or at one hand that is tied above the knee;
et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe;	and other ministers extend their hand above in a certain way that they bite their hands from their elbows, then squeeze it with a soft cloth over the knee;
et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien;	and others tie the head of the joint;
et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	and extend it up and down once, until the pain is lifted from the ground once and remains suspended.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as IIII semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This method of extension is common to four similarities, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is good.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance.	If not, then you must put care to its appearance.
Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele;	When the dislocation is in the shoulder, you must first put the pain on its healthy side, then place the joint above the root of the arm, and the limb that is outside the arm, then extend the joint above the arm and towards the forearm;
puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment:	then take other assistants to hold his arms, and grasp the thick arm of the painful shoulder, and extend it behind in a proper manner:
si revenra a son leu maintenant;	if it returns to its place now;
et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	and this type of dislocation is less severe than others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres;	And if you cannot close it in this manner that we have said, then you must tie the two hairs of the misaligned joint together with a strong thread above the two heels, and above the two ankles, and let the misaligned leg be stretched out two fingers more than the other;
puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc;	then it should be hung from the top of a stick, and let it hang two arms' length from the ground;
puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	then command the minister to grasp the back of the neck, and let another ministers hang with the misaligned joint, who grasps the back of the neck, for the joint is now returning quickly.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi;	And when the dislocation is in the shoulder, if it is pricked as we have said in the one with gout, and you hold the joint properly above the misaligned leg, and also above the foot.
puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme;	Then put two bandages, one at the top and one at the bottom, then fold the bandage between the ribs on the misaligned side.
et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	And place wet cloths around it, so it does not dry out, then extend each of the healers towards him, and let the patient hold the dislocation.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	If it returns, it's good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If not, place it on the table, and press it as we have said in the gilbosite, and grind the bad parts against the clean side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit;	And when the dislocation is in front, it is necessary to extend the misaligned leg quickly, as I have said.
et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	and place the painful part above the bad joint, then press with the other hand, and stretch it downwards towards the groin.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches;	And if the dislocation is in the shoulder, it does not require extending the joint downwards, nor lifting it upwards, but it should be as it was when dislocated from its place, as we have said for the position of the two shoulders;
et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table;	and it should be above its face, and the arm stretched as we have said before, and one must press on the joint at the table;
et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz;	and it will be fixed when the joint extends its legs, and they will be even;
adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve;	Then bend the knees, apply the ointment, and place a bandage on it, so that it does not move.
et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus;	And rest it for three or four days, then reset it, and apply the ointment again.
et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors;	And if you see that they are even, then reset the bandage as before, and leave it for three days.
puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	Then reset it again, and make it move vigorously, until the limb is comfortable.
de la dislocation dou genoil	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Li genous est desaluez selonc III manieres:	The shoulder joint is dislocated in three ways:
c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier;	That is to say, from inside and outside, and behind.
et ne desalue point devant.	and do not reset before.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez;	And the signs are that you command the patient to bend his leg at his hip, and if he does not straighten it at his hip, then you must reset it.
et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez;	And the restoration of all is that you make the patient sit straight, and extend his leg if he can, and put your back against his face, and his foot on yours.
puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment;	Then take his knee in your palms, and pull it towards you, then bend the two sides of the knee correctly.
et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement;	And other assistants extend his foot, until the knee returns to its place, and the signs are that he straightens his leg lightly at his hip.
et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie;	and apply the plaster on top, and make the leg stiff at the hip for three or four hours, then release it.
et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	and do not work the injured limb until the limb is comfortable.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	And if the member is not straight, administer strong extension, as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until it is healed.
de la dislocation dou talon	of the ankle dislocation
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The feet are never splinted and never fully dislocated, inside and outside.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee:	And the signs are that the knee is swollen, and test before the part where it is dislocated:
li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	the re-attaching is light, and one should gently extend it to their hands when it is only slightly swollen.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville;	And when it is dislocated quickly, then you should straighten the injury correctly, and hold it with one hand on the leg, above the knee;
puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut;	Then hold the string with your right hand, and then with your left hand twice, then stretch it upwards, and beat the string hard against the top.
et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet;	And do this twice, as we have said, by pulling and stretching the string;
s’elle revient, c’est bien;	If it comes back, it is good.
se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient;	If not, restart the work, for it returns.
et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide;	And if it cannot return in this way, then lay the injured limb on its back on the ground, and firmly fix a splint between its thighs, and wrap bandages around it, so that it does not bend the injured limb.
puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet;	then the servants apply the poultice to the chest, and other servants stretch the cloth to his hands or to the limb, that he may tie it around the neck of the wound.
puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent;	then each servant stretches evenly, and the bandages are placed between the ribs of the wound to retain the wound as it is stretched.
puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	then the servants place the hands evenly on the dislocation, and other servants apply the poultice to the sound leg at the side, and the dislocation will return quickly.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois;	And when it goes to the point, if the plaster and douche are applied above, and the bandage is formed, and the cloth is tied to the leg, and the nerves which are above the ankle behind, that the bindings are not too tight.
puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain;	then leave it for two days or three, and if its joints are weakened, strain them.
puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors;	then reset it on the third day or fourth, and let the pain last for four days.
et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	and if it goes before that time, it is not certain that it will not dislocate again.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if an abscess comes, it is necessary that you pacify it, as we have said elsewhere, until it is healed.
des dois	for two
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the two are dislocated, if they should be gently extended towards labor, and this is a light matter.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne;	And if the dislocation is in any part of the body or limb, it is necessary that you make the pain sit above one leg plain or above the table straight, and put your hand on what opens these joints, then press your hand firmly until it returns.
et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie;	and when it is even and there is no opening, put the sole of your hand on a flat table with two fingers, then strain it firmly and leave it for three days, then reset it.
et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and let him rest, until he is well.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	of wounds and of dislocations together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert:	When a wound comes with the dislocation, and one wants to restore it, often times it kills the patient:
si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis;	if you are not presumptuous in the cure, if you are not wise in the art and have not used it for a long time, and if you are not merciful and slow, do not be harsh:
et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit;	and at the beginning of things, use calming incisions on abscesses, and leave the wound in God's hands, if you do not see hope for health;
et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne;	and when you see hope, then reset the limb at once, as soon as the abscesses come.
et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis;	When the member is set, administer things that reduce inflammation and heal the wound, as it should be, with dry bandages.
et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples;	And if the dislocation is fractured and the bones are small, decompose them, and do what we have said in simple diseases.
et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	And guard against entering the path of fear, as I have said, for it is better for you according to your Creator, and by the knowledge of your armor and your body.
