O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	Oh, you most noble sons, I have completed this book which is the rear of the science of medicine, and have filled it with its contents, and have made the end by its explanations and by its declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came to me in a vision that I should complete it with this treatise, which is a part of the work of hands, that is to say "surgery".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of hands is fortified in our region and is held in high regard, it has perished along with the science and has been forgotten, and nothing remains of its outside of the small descriptions in books of the ancients that the hands have moved.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this comes the error and the vanities, and the minds are closed and the knowledge is distant.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	It seems to me that I can revive this treatment along with the order of exposure and declaration and abbreviation; and I will bring together the forms of the irons of cautery, and other tools of the work with the assistance of declaration and preparation of it, as it is necessary.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	Because no good master of hands is found in our time, the art of medicine is prolonged.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And it is necessary for one who undertakes this to study the science of anatomy, as Galen says, until he knows the judgment of the limbs, and their forms and conjunctions and separations of all, and has knowledge of the bones and nerves and sinews and the number of tendons, and the function of moving and resting veins, and the nature of their origin.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And because, as Hippocrates says, the not with the knife is much, and with the work is little; and equally in the art of hand.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	We tell you at the beginning of this book that those who are not familiar with the things mentioned before, if they attempt to do it, may cut in error and harm men; therefore I have often seen many times more of those who engage in this science and abandon their science and lack experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa I apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	For I saw a foolish man who lanced an abscess of scrofula or boil from the neck of a woman, and lanced the arteries of the neck; because so much blood came out that the woman died between his hands.
Et vis I autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens III jors.	And another miracle that treats a bone from a man's skull, and the bone was large; it took with it a piece of the bladder, and died within three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I had already been called for the trepanation, and saw the position of the misalignment and the size of the bone, and if it was cut, it would die.
Et vis I autre mire qui prist en cure I duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi I termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And I saw another miracle that took care of the Duke of our land who had a broken leg, and with the breaker he got a wound; and the miracle held the fracture above the wound as a splint for a long time, and did not let the wound open, and so it ended; and he commanded that it not be removed; and so it remained until the leg was completely healed and the foot and he came to perdition.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I was called to go to him, and I hurried to come to dislocate his leg; and when I saw it dislocated, it was in place and felt no pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	But all the ways of the corruption were already confirmed in the member, and it could not be healed; and the corruption did not stop spreading throughout the member until the member was completely lost.
Et vis I autre mire qui effondra I apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And I saw another way that would crush the abscess and become putrid, and then it would inflame due to the evil of its lordship.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For an abscess, when it is free from melancholic humor, does not need much more than to be touched with iron if it is in a place where everything can be removed that is corrupted.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en II divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	Therefore, dear son, you should know that the work of hands is divided into two divisions: that is, where it has danger in many positions; and I will show in each part of this book where it has fear and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	For this reason, it is important that you guard against it, so that the foolish may not speak evil of you if you take up your weapons firmly and courageously, and use the best means so that by the grace of God you come to safety and are healed; and leave behind diseases spreading grief and sickness; and remove your weapons from what causes you doubt, and be such that you may come from this world to the other of glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	Galen says in some of his admonishments: 'Do not take on the care of a sick person unless you are called a foolish nurse.'
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	I have devised this treatment according to three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapters are about fire cauteries and medicinal cauteries, and the chapters are ordered from the head to the feet; and about the forms of instruments, and the irons for cauterizing, and all that is necessary in the work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapters are about cutting and piercing, and about wounds, and about the extraction of arrows, and similar things; and the chapters are ordered and about the forms of instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	This third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things; it is ordered from the highest to the lowest, and the forms of instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Whenever we remember the work, it is necessary that I tell the quality of the help and harm of each kind of mixture.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the quality of help and harm is the longest and most subtle speech and the secret knowledge; and for this reason many wise men spoke about it and agreed on this; and I hardly use words, because I lengthen them.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que II complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that cauterization helps universally to all mixture where there is matter, whether the mixture is hot with matter, and dry without matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In hot and dry weather, they all agreed that the fire cautery is a great help; but the others said the opposite: that the fire cautery is only helpful for diseases that come from heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	For the nature of fire is hot, and should not be cured by heat or dryness; and those who said the opposite claimed that the fire cautery helps greatly with hot and dry diseases that come from within people's bodies.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you compare the body of man and its moisture to the hot nature of fire, you heat the body too much.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this word.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have found it once by experience.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And in all ways, one should not intervene except by those who have experienced it, and who know the chapter on cauteries from long practice, and the diversity of men's constitutions, and their dispositions and causes of their diseases, and the symptoms and space of time; for other constitutions we do not fear, specifically in cold and moist diseases.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all the miracles gathered together and agreed on the cauterization.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, my sons, that cauterization is a secret of healing, and has greater efficacy than cauterizing with hot medicine.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	Because the fever is simple, and does not come more than to the member that is cooked, and does not harm other members if it is not named.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	The hot remedies come from one member to another by removing them, and bring diseases of relief to the affected member; and by chance, they often find the evil. The fever does not cause harm because of its high heat and the goodness of its substance, if there is no excessiveness.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	And I have found this by experiment and by the length of service and study that I have put in the art, and it has been above the truth of things; and for this reason, I excuse the length of speech, because I do not like to give you the secret which is hidden or fire, and the quality of the work, how it disrupts the diseases of the body, as the philosopher says in demonstrating; now receive it in your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, my son, that they should be done at what time the cautery is made, and then pray.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And I say that the cautery is beneficial in all times, because the harm coming from it is removed by the help of the cautery; and even if it is for necessary pain, fors and hastans, that cannot wait until the time when greater harm does not come to the member.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And never think, my son, as the fools do; for the disease that is cured by cautery has no return; and they say it thus, but it is not so because cautery is only medicine that moves the complexion, and dries the humors that are cause of the pain, and is better medicine for its immediate value, and for the virtue of its work and its lordship.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	And the most important thing is that the disease comes at any time according to the nature of the illness and the body of the patient and its power; and they are gathered in him the superfluities by the acquisition of meats and similar things, if not cauterize administered in him where he has little superfluity and moisture, as cauterize for the pain, and similar things, and the pain does not return much; but this happens little.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And many people do not understand why cauterization is called the last resort of medicine, and it is seen; but they do not believe that cauterization is valuable after medicine, but their intentions are false, and cauterization is called the last resort of medicine because when we administer methods of treatment in any disease and they do not work, then we administer the cauterization, and it is worth it.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Therefore, make sure that cauterization is the last resort of medicine, not according to the intention of misguided people.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	The ancients said that cauterization with a gold instrument is better than iron, and they only said that because of the quality of gold and its high value; and they said that the wounds from cauterization do not putrefy, but I have found that this is not true, as I have experienced it, and I have found that it is true in some people; and cauterization with gold is better than iron, as they said.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	And in any case when you heat a gold instrument, you should not be mistaken about its color because of the yellow of gold, and it has already cooled somewhat; and if it is heated too much, they put it in the fire; and thus there is enough precaution.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And therefore we use the fire cauterization that we have already prepared for our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	I would order you to read this chapter about the shoulder joint from top to bottom, for it will be easier to find.
dou cautere olivaire	The oil cauterization
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	This cauterization is useful for moisture and coldness over the head, and it is done for two reasons: because of a disease called "soda", and because of many humors that descend from the shoulder joint to the ears, and due to numerous symptoms and pain in the teeth, and throat, and also for all diseases that come from coldness such as paralysis, soda, apoplexy, and similar diseases.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief III nuis ou IIII, selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The form of this cautery is that the hairs should be removed by a solvent medicine, changing the head III or IV times, according to its virtues and its age and its accustomed state; then repeat the process on the head of the hair.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses II eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	Then let him sit cross-legged between your hands, and place his hands on top of yours; afterwards put the root of your palm over the root of his nail between his two eyes; and when you feel pain, pour hot oil called "olivare", of which this is the form:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os I sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren I poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse III jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place the joint sign of ink on it, and do by gently pulling and gradually tightening your hand in turning; then remove your hand slowly, and reward the limb if you see the bone small; and if you do not see the bone, if you start the cautery again until you see the bone as I told you; afterwards take a little thread, and put in wet and soft cotton inside, and place on the limb, and leave it for three hours; afterwards put a moistened cloth on burn; and leave it until the burn is healed; afterwards cure the wound of the ointment which is called «tetrafarmaçon», as long as it is healed.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And the old ones said, the longer one stays open, the more it purges; and for this reason, it helps to heal.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And none of these said that one should cauterize so much that a part of the bone is burned away, and then remove what has been burned off from the bone, and let it heal.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme I vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And the others said that one should cauterize so much above, and if one removes as much bone as a quill wide, like the thread that women put in their hair to let the humors out; and the wound should stay open for a long time; after that, it should be cured and sewn up.
Et ces II manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And these two methods of cauterization do not seem to me to be entirely good in all cases, unless in some people where there is a way of fear; and it seems to me that I should leave it; for the affected ones are weakened by continuous solutions of nature, as we testify in other members; and indeed when the affected one is weak by nature, and the first appearance of cauterization is safer and milder for me, and of this use I operate in such cases.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	of the ancient greatest pain
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	When the main pain comes from chronic conditions and lasts a long time, one should use the years and pills called «cochie», and of cleansing of head and eyes and plasters; and if one does the cauterization that we have already mentioned, and it does not help.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Take care when dealing with the patient who has a severe illness, and do not make it too sharp; then cauterize with that fire we mentioned above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai I cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est I leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	After performing the cauterization above each of the horns of the head to the bone, as we mentioned before, and then perform the cauterization called "vasselz"; and place the leeches in the place where you put suction cups; and raise your hand so that you do not see too close to the bone: the pain is much greater than in other cauterizations, and I will speak about it later; and it is necessary that the cauterization of the horns be more subtle than that which is used to cauterize the middle of the head, and this is the form:
dou cautere dou chief	For the fire cauterization
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc II manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When a sudden pain comes to a part of the head, and the illness extends to the eyes, and the patient is purged by wet remedies, and the other treatments that I have mentioned in the division of diseases do not help: then you should cauterize according to two methods, namely with wet medicine and with fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope I poc as II chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi XII houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi II jors ou III; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	If the cauterization with wet medicine is that you hold a hot iron, and scrape off the skin and the scab, and apply it twice to the eye, and then make a mark on the temple where the pain is located in such a way that you can replace the iron outside the skin; and when it has been replaced, hold it firmly and steadily for twelve hours; then remove it and treat further with a bandage, and leave the wound for two or three days; then put on a cotton pad soaked in honey until it becomes soft.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the application of a poultice until they are healed; and if you see that some medicines are burning, then follow the instructions I have written or treat the burning medicines.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	The fire cautery is done in this way.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Heat the cautery according to this form:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait I poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And it is called "closed" because the head is made in the form of a cloak or it has a small hook, and in the middle a small appearance; and put it on the painful limb, and hold your hand and turn the iron slightly, until half of the surface is burned; and release your hand so that the artery does not burn, which is before, and there is much bleeding.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par III jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	After applying cotton on a thread and placing it on the limb for three days; then apply moist cotton with butter, and cure the wound with an ointment until it is healed; and if you want to cauterize this wound with the cauterizing iron called "cultellare", apply it at all points, and be careful not to cover the artery in this wound which is not ancient.
de emigraine	After applying cotton on a thread and placing it
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	When you treat the wound as we have previously mentioned in the division of diseases, and it does not improve, and you see that the cauterizing iron before mentioned does not penetrate much and does not suffocate the wound much, then it is necessary to quench the cauterizing iron called "cultellare" until it is cool; and also apply a line of half a finger's breadth of lard on the painful limb, and take your hand once, and keep it from covering the artery and from touching the bone; and be careful of the mandible that moves when opened, and the nerves should only see the movable part and not spasm, and be careful of the hemorrhage of blood from the artery when it is cut, or cut off, which causes great fear and immediately to the one who does not know, and who has not experienced; and leave the work in this way; but I will tell you how to stop the bleeding when the artery is cut, and I will show you where it appears in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait II coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	And if you see that this fire cauterization is not sufficient for the disease, and the patient is suffering, cauterize it in the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it is healed; and if you see, administer the cauterization that we have said or from the chapter of arrow extraction, with the cauterization that has two knives; and this fire cauterization is better than the other and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	of the pain of the ears from cold
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When the pain in the ear comes from cold, and medicines have been opened and other treatments that we have said in the division, and the pain does not move, then warm this cauterization called "poins", of which is the form:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les II se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait X poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After pricking all around the ear, where the pain is felt on both sides, and moving it slightly away from the root of the ear when you have marked the earlobe; then apply a pressure of X pounds around each ear; after healing the earlobe.
de la torture de la bouche	of the mouth torture
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	Torture that must be treated by cauterization is only those that move from saliva, as we have said in the divisions of diseases; and do not use cauterization for similar ones that come from sore throat and spitting up of blood.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de III cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des II levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When you treat this appearance of torture that prevents water from flowing through the ears and mouth, and it does not improve, then it is necessary to cauterize the pain with three cauteries: one at the root of the ear, and the other a little further back from the temple, and the third in the corner of the mouth; and put the cautery in the part that opens healthily, and make the cauterization above a little bit away from the horn of the ear, and another in the temple as long as a pin; and leave the cautery so high that half of the face is burned; and this is the form of the cauterization:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the appearance of this surgical tool is similar to what we have placed before, but it is a bit more subtle and requires that the knife be a bit larger; after treating the wound as I have mentioned earlier, until it is healed.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai IIII cauteres: II sus les II cornes dou chief, et I emmi le chief, et I ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When apoplexy is old and you treat it as we have mentioned earlier, and it does not improve, and the pain does not have fever, then apply four cauteries: two on the two corners of the head, and one on the forehead, and one on the back of the throat, which is called «vasselz» as we have mentioned earlier, and behind the cautery on the mouth of the stomach; and treat it as we have mentioned earlier.
de litargie	of laziness
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	For this disease, one should give the patient large and modified brain-altering drugs; afterwards, remove the entire head of the disease, and place the mustard plaster on the occipital lobe, as written in the treatise on plasters; and this is the manner of the fire cautery: if you do so as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai III cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere I doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai I cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, II autres sus les II cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If he is thus healthy, it is good; and if not, make three cauterizations of the head in descending order from the neck, with a space of one inch between each cautery; and the cure as for the others, and if you have seen that it has been stuck, and the diseases are suffering, make one cauterization in the middle; and if the work is, two more on the two horns, and the cure until he is healthy; and let the cauterizations called "olivare", as I have said before.
de la froidor dou chief	of the cold from the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et I derrier et III sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai IIII cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	It is necessary that the head be cleaned of years and of what we have previously said; then heat the head of the painful part, then apply fire to the head and over each horn, and behind and three times on the spine of the neck; and if you have more difficulty, and the body is moist and the pain is suffering, and the disease is outside, then apply four cauteries on the spine of the back; and leave it until the most urgent is healed, and remove your hand; after the cure as long as they are healthy, and those that are called "olivare" that we have previously said.
de l’epilempsie	of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	Those suffering from epilepsy should not use fire cauterization except for those that are fleamatic, and first modify the brain of years and other treatments that we have said in the division when the injuries are large and suffering from pain medicine.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai I cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et I cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if it is a child who cannot suffer, make him gargle and chew often with good meats; then relieve the head in the middle, and do the cauterization as we have said before, and the cauterization on the vessel, and on each horn; and if the injuries are outside and painful, do cauterizations as I have said to those who have paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and let the cauterizations be olive oil according to the manner that I have said.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai I cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the hairs are fine, then perform cauterization with this method:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When due to melancholy, there are excessive or corrupted moisture and flow is large, then use the cauterization of parts as we have said to the one who has paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if due to melancholy, there is excessive or corrupted moisture declining towards melancholy, and the flow is moist, then give him to drink something by which the mind is cleansed, according to what it is before in the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai I torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com I cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After removing the head of the shoulder; after making a well-made tortilla, like a circle, and putting it on the head; and if the hairs are curly, and they are held firmly from all sides; then present the liniment, and it is made with old bear's grease; and the heat is heated at a moderate fire, so that he can bear it; after emptying the circle by putting it on the head, and let it cool; and do this to the shoulder joint once a week with good government until they are healthy.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	Where you see cauterization being done by making many points all over the cauterizer.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	This method of cauterization moistens the brain and increases it; then place on top of it cotton soaked in butter and chicken fat.
de l’awe des eulz	of the eyes
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When the sign of dislocation comes first to the eyes as I have mentioned in the division, then begin and give the patient something to drink that is defecating the head, and keep it from all moisture, and make it sweat or bathe it several times a day.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai II cauteres sus les II temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as II eulz ensamble, ou en I se li dessendemens est en I; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	Then command the patient to bend their head, and make them cauterize behind the head, and make them cauterize on the two temples simultaneously, where one is below the eyelid and one is above; and cover all the cauterizer with veins and arteries that are outside the skull, and let the cauterizer be long according to the width of the temple; and keep from the flow of blood, and if you see too much blood coming out, then stop it with a piece of cloth.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les II os derrier.	And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and in the incision of the cauterization how you will do it; and never has been done or heated a cauterization or hatred from the two back bones.
dou cors des larmes	the course of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: I cautere emmi le chief, et II cauteres sus les II temples, et II cauteres ou haiterel desoz les II os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout I petit cautere.	When the tears of the eyes are old and accustomed and are above the veins or below the arteries that are in the appearance of the main deformed; and one sees that it is superfluous cold flematic, then one does the cauterization that I have mentioned at the beginning of this work: I cauterize the main, and two cauterize above the two temples, and two cauterize outside the two bones; and if there is more, if the sagely cauterizes above the sinus with every small cauterization.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	through the tears from within the eyes
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide III nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai II cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les II sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you treat according to what we have said in the division, and it does not help, then drink three bad herbs; after that, rub the head, and if necessary, cauterize with the fire cautery or a mixture of fire and oil; do two cauterizations called «clavilis» on the two shoulder blades, a little outside the shoulders; and be careful not to cover the artery.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the form of the cauterization called «clavilis»:
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	When the paper of the oil is softened by disease and moisture, then cauterize with the fire cautery called «olivare».
de coi ci est li forme:	of this form:
Et se tu vues si fai II cauteres sus les II sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you see that it is necessary to apply two cauteries on the two strips as long as the strips are; and do not leave your hand except until the third part of the paper is burned, according to the manner that I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	the hair that does not oil
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	There is no time when the hairs of the oiled are converted to the parched, and they prick at their base, and then cauteries are made according to two methods: that is to say, by fire, or by burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they grow and are even, then place the hairs in their natural position; afterwards, draw a line across the eyes with a figure that is as similar as possible to the shape of the eyebrows, and begin the sign above the hairs; then apply cotton soaked in oil and musk on the edge of the eyelids, then heat the cauterizing iron:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi III jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After cauterizing the figure that you have drawn a little and little more times, until the patient's health is restored; and the signs of the work are that the paper recedes, and the hairs stand up to the point of the oil; then remove your hand, and let it be so for three hours, then apply cotton soaked in butter until the burn is healed; afterwards, treat the wound as needed until it is healed.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if after this the hairs come back, and the paper is softened, then begin the cauterization on the same limb again, as you did before; and if the hairs are missing, then cauterize until the paper is raised to its natural position, and is even, and do not prick the hairs with it.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en I oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en I, et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse I poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The cauterization with burning medicine is that you command the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; then make a piece of parchment in the shape of a mint leaf; then take French soap and live chalk, one of each, and grind them together thoroughly; and apply it vigorously, so that it does not cool, then spread it on the form you have made like the mint leaf, and put it on the paper at the eyes; and if the patient only holds it in one eye, then cover both similarly; and put some soft cotton moistened with water behind it; and let the patient look through the medicine, showing his good eye above it, and press the pouch and move it every time the patient feels the burning sensation of the medicine, for he feels it as if it were fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done it for a long time, then take the medicine to your mouth.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	And when the blister is passed, lift the limb from the wound, and reward if you see the paper raised as it was raised by constraint of fire or by incision; and if it is thus, then it is good.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If not, still apply the medicine to the wound or where the medicine has not worked, until your work is even, and your eyes are steady; then put cotton moistened in butter on the wound until the curds are chosen, after care clean the limb which is called «diaphenius» and others, until they are healed.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	And if you have the task to stay well in your work, by great care that you do not cut into the medicine with those.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And if the paper becomes soft after, and the hairs prick in the oil, then start the medicine again on the joint that is softened properly with the paper, as you have done before; then cure until it is healed; and this is the form of the fuel of the mire:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And since the eyes of men are different in size and smallness, and according to what is your constraints; and do not reply the right way to that one who is the study of this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	of the treatment of a fistula by cauterization
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat a fistula as we have mentioned in the division of diseases, and your treatments do not work, then it is necessary that you cauterize it in this manner.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	Command the patient to place his head in your hand; and hold the other menstruum's head between your hands in such a way that it does not move, nor remove its head; afterwards put cotton moilliet behind the ear or on the side of the persillion above the oil; afterwards heat the cauterizer which is next to the head: and it is fixed to the head as if it were the form of a pen of vulture, together with the queil so that it be the cauterizer; if you see, if it is appointed from one head to the other, and if you see, if it is also like a tent; but in any case, this which is fixed is worth for your work.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	After pressing the fistula, it is opened, and the pus is removed and dried; and if it is closed, open it again, and remove foreign matter from inside; after that, apply the cautery hot and thoroughly, and hold your hand on the cautery at the part of the neck above the oil, so that your hand does not burn; and put the cautery into the oil grease, and corrupt it.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	If you come to the beginning of the cautery just at the bone, that would be good.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	If not, restart the cautery again, and if you have experience in this matter, leave it for three days; after that, put on a soft cloth soaked in warm oil, and use a desiccating ointment until it is healed, and if 40 days pass without being healed, then apply a corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed; and the doctor according to what he would have in his chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	And there is a certain method of cauterizing a fistula that none of the ancients mentioned.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	Apply it to the fistula, and fix the limb; after putting in the wound a subtle powder of copper:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	and they make of the quantity of a pound; and hold your hand firmly, and do not move the painful parts, so that the lead does not correct to its oil; and it is good to put above the pain on soft cotton cloth near the wound: the lead heals the limb of the fistula, and the healthy by a marvelous healing.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	And if the fistula is healed by the cauterization we have mentioned, it is good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	If not, then one must administer a purgative to the nose, and reset the fistula in accordance with what is proper for the limb.
des crevaices en levres	of cracks in the lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Often there are cracks in the lips that are called "hair", and also in the lips of children.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe I petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these cracks as we have mentioned in the divisions, and if the treatment does not help, then heat a small cauterizing needle of this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place the patient in those cracks until it reaches just before the font; afterwards, treat the limb with clay until it is healed.
de l’aposteme de la goule	of the abscess of the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies I cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou II, aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When an abscess comes in the root of the throat or mouth, or palate, or at the roots of the teeth, after it has putrefied and rotted and aged and become a fistula; and you treat it as we have said in divisions, and it does not help much: therefore it is necessary that you use cauterization according to the quantity of the fistula; afterwards, close or puncture the fistula, and keep your hand until the iron reaches the edge of the wound, and behind the limb; and do thus once or twice, after treating as we have said in treatments, until it is healed; and if it is cured thus, it is good; and if not, if necessary, reveal the limb and remove the corrupted bone, according to what you will find in its chapter.
dou movement des dens	movement of the teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicines but it does not work, then place the tip of the hot iron in your healthy tooth; after heating the cauterizer in a certain way, place a cloth over the tooth; then press the cauterizer firmly against the tooth, and hold your hand so that the pain feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth; then release your hand and restart the cauterizer as you wish; afterwards fill the mouth with salt water, and the gum one hour and then rinse.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in a similar manner, the tooth that was moving is confirmed, and the gum becomes soft by being held back, and the moisture is corrupted and dried.
de la dolor des dens	of the pain of the teeth
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc II manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When the pain of the teeth comes from coldness, or there is cold or heat, and medical treatments do not work, then it is necessary to use cauterization in two ways: cauterization with butter and cauterization with fire.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus I fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	Cauterization with butter is such that you take butter from a freshly killed animal, and the end in an iron or silver spoon; after taking cotton and wrapping it over the point of a tent, and moistening it in hot butter, and putting it on the painful tooth quickly and holding it until it is cooled; and thus do often enough until its effect reaches the root of the tooth, and if you see that moistened wool and cotton in hot butter is put on the aching tooth, and put on the heated iron until the effect of the iron reaches the movement of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	When the cautery is made with fire, it should be such that you grip a small iron or brass rod, and if it is too large so that the smoke does not reach the patient's mouth; after heating the cautery, because of which the form will come out afterwards, and place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery has cooled; do this often, for the pain will be as great the same day or the next.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it is necessary that the patient fill their mouth with good butter in the urgency of this cautery, and then spit it out; and this is the form of the cautery:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	And perform the fire cauterization on the wound that you wish, according to what you have available; and it is in this form of the cane:
des scrophules	of the cane's branches
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the cane's branches are wet and cold, and do not obey digestion with medicines, then heat the fire cauterization of what comes after this form, and have two openings for the fumes to issue from the other side; and place the cauterization hot on top of the abscess once, or as often as it is necessary, until it reaches the bottom of the abscess; and if the abscess is small, then place cauterization according to the quantity of the abscess, and leave it for three days; and place wet cotton moistened in butter on top until the burn is healed; afterward treat with ointments and bandages until it is healed.
Li forme de la cainne:	The shape of the womb:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	When the humors flow over the channels of the body, and especially when it comes from a cold constitution, then it is necessary to first clear the pores by medicines that dissolve; after that, apply cauterization at the root of the throat, and be careful not to come too close to the throat, and do not burn too much but with a little.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	After that, apply another cauterization at the junction of the collar and the top of the spine, and let the cauteries that are called "clavicles" because of which we have the shape in front; and cure the limb as we have said before until it is healed.
de la toust	of the mouth
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et I autre cautere emmi le pis entre II mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When all and disease of the mouth are caused by cold moisture, and the pain has no fever or sweat, and is an ancient disease, then make two cauteries on the forceps in their mouths; and the other cautery goes between the breasts; and let the cauteries be called "clavile" according to the form that is previously mentioned.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	And if you see, make a cautery by holding the entire cauteries called "poins" because of the form that is previously mentioned in the disease of the ears; and let the poins be just over 30, or ask within.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	After treatment, the patient according to what has been said before, and let the cauteries be applied at three points according to this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais III a cop.	And because the cauteries are lighter, because you make three of them.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners douqueil ci est li forme:	After, let the hairs be shaved on his back and on his sides; then relieve the pain that is within the tenderness of the two breasts with your right hand; and if the joint is misaligned inside, then heat the cauteries which have two needles in this form:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble IIII cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a III ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a III ners:	and cauterize the wound until it pierces just at the costal margin, and the figure of the cauterization is made with four cauteries; and because the cauterization is made with the cauterizer that has three needles, for this reason the figure of the cauterization is four cauteries; and the nerves are according to the subtlety of a tent and this is the form of the cauterizer that has three needles.
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce I nerf por coi il i a VIII cauteres.	And never is it placed above this one nerve because it has eight cauteries.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After place the cauterizer on the wound and press with silk; after rest the pain, and do not move the limbs by stretching for as long as it is well supported.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	And if it is dislocated above, this thing happens quickly, then make a cautery on the thick part of the cautery calve, or much of the cauteries in pricking.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	For the joint is closed, and it is bound with moisture and it is healthy from the pain.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	When cold and much moisture come into the stomach until it reaches its balance, and they multiply the diarrhea to him, and are usual ways of cures and he does not profit, then it is necessary that the pain be soothed above his back, and he extends his legs and his hands.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture; et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	After the first three cautery strokes with a spoon, as much as the quantity of one drop, to all the cautery knives, and two cautery strokes afterwards on the two ribs until the figure of the cautery is at three angles, and has equal space between them so that they do not join together when they rub against each other; and let the cautery be so that it does not press the two parts of the chest, and let the figure of the cautery be in this form without jostling:
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme; et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche; puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if you see that the cautery is too large in the stomach according to this form, and the one who has fear of this cautery, cauterize by pricking and holding steady above the stomach and point according to the quantity that you see of the needle; then cauterize the whole cautery which is called «point».
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the care of the cure that we have had before, as long as they are healthy.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez; et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil; et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient; et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi; et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere; et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez; et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais; et c’est li forme:	When the liver has pain from heat and moisture and great swelling, as long as it is not removed from its natural condition by excess; and the hairs are treated as we have said in divisions, and it does not help much, then the hairs should be shaved above their hairline; and the sign of three cauteries according to this form and figure and quantity over the liver, under the hypochondres, where the neck of the ox comes; and there should be space between each cauterization the length of a finger; and the cautery should be long like the body, and do not press much with the hand at all the cautery; and it should be applied only to the half of the forehead, and the hairs should be straightened above their feet; and if it cannot, then it should be laid down and extend its legs, and raise its arms; and this is the form:
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors; et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	And if you wish to cauterize these cauteries of the surgeon, if you are skilled and wise in the art, and that you do not burn too much of the flesh, for you would make it harder all over; and that it does not come near boiling, for the flesh is very delicate there, and the wounds to see.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile: s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort; et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	When he has an abscess in the liver, and you want to know if it is in the flesh of the liver or in the skin: if it is in the flesh, it does not cause much pain; and if it is in the skin, it causes great pain.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste; et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	And when this cure is complete, it is necessary that the wound be smooth over its head; then seize the limb where the abscess is, and then heat the cauterizer which is similar to a thorn, of which this is the form:
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers; aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez; et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	And cauterize the cauterizer until the wound is closed, and then apply it to the siphac, until the pus is all out; after the cure according to the cure of swellings as long as they are healthy; and it is necessary that this cauterizer be used by no one except those who have studied a long time in the art of medicine, and by whose hands these diseases have never been corrupted.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	Therefore, it can be boldly done, and in all ways, it seems to me that it is better to leave it.
dou cautere de pleuresin	For the breast cauterization
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize I cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et II petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et II cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et I cautere emmi le pis, et I autre sus l’estomac, et I entre II espaules, et II as II costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre II espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	The ancients said that one should use the root of aristolochia for breast cauterization in this manner: take a long root of aristolochia, the longest you can find, and dry it, and as big and long as your finger; and soak it in oil, and place it in the fire, and cauterize with the cautery between the nipple and the neck, and two small cauteries a little down from the beard; and two cauteries between the fifth rib and the spine, declining slightly behind; and one cauterie on the belly, and one on the shoulder, and two on the back, and two on the front, and one between the shoulders; and do not press your hand, but open it as if smelling.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	And no one has said that no man uses such fire-like cautery as the razor, and they scrape it and put it between the ribs, until it comes to the abscess; and when it reaches it, there is great pain, as we have said about the liver abscess.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	But in this work, there is fear or the pain kills now, or a fistula comes that cannot be healed.
de la mice	of the mouse
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent III manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the disease of the mouse as we have said in the divisions of treatment, and it does not improve, then they resort to three methods of cauterization that are all good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos; et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	When there is one method in which you make three or four cauteries, lining up according to the length of the mouse, according to the shape of the liver cauterization that we have mentioned before; and do not press your hand too much on the whole cauterization, and let the hairs be near its back; and another method of cauterization is that you heat the cauterization that has two needles, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; and lift the wound which is near the mouse, or the ear of the hurt side, and let the elevations that you lift the wound according to its curve, according to the length of the body, and the cauterization should be according to the width of the body.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	After giving the first two nerves, burn until the needle is perceived from the other side, and then remove the cautery, and thus enter into four. If you see, then cauterize with the entire cautery at three nerves.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After the cure when it has gotten purulence by long tension, and this is worth mentioning that the other cures mentioned above should be done.
de ydropisie	of hydrops
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	Cauterization is not good for hydrops, except in the manner which is called "asclytes".
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	When you treat it according to the methods that we have mentioned in divisions, and your treatment does not help, then it is necessary that you make four cauteries around the belly, and one above the stomach, and one above the liver, and one above the spleen, and one behind the back above the spine, and one at the worst place; and let the cauteries be very close to the surface of the skin.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les II ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	After the fire cautery is applied for purification long and tight, and do not leave the care of the wound after the cautery; and healing will be hastened, and together with God's help, the two intentions will be achieved.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The shape of the fire cautery for the belly is as shown before; and for the back, it is an olive branch, as it is shown before.
de l’enfleure des piez	of the swelling of the feet
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	When the feet are swollen to one who is hydroptic, and are plain of yellow bile, it is necessary that you cauterize above the foot between the auricular and annular; and let your hand with the cautery towards returning.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	And do not enter too deeply into the flesh, thus avoiding damaging the nerves, and let the cauterizer follow this form:
Aprés fai sus II jambes II cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After making two incisions on each leg at the tip of a sharp knife; and let the cauterizer place them longwise, one behind the knee in front and the other in front of the knee on the leg; and leave the cauteries hanging longer than necessary to cure the wound, which is in its place. After curing the other treatments that we have mentioned.
de la menoison	of the menstruation
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai I grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et IIII cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout I cautere clavile subtil, et II cauteres sus les hainches.	When the solution of the belly comes from cold and moisture, as long as the retentive and digestive virtues which are in the stomach and in the intestines are obstructed, and cannot be cured by other methods; and you see the pain is great and of great importance, if you make a large cauterization above the stomach according to what it has spoken of before or a cauterization of the stomach, the cauterization circulates; and four cauterizations around the belly subtly to all the sharp cauterizations, and two cauterizations above the hips.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et I cautere sus chaicun yle, et II petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see the moisture abundant and the pain suffering, then perform the fire cautery above the knuckle, and I cauterize above each rib, and II small cauteries above the stomach below the large one, for the cure is beneficial when it has good assistance.
de la cure des emorroydes	of the treatment of worms
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois; et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	When the worms are in the foundation, or one or more, and are ancient and are large humors cold and moist corrupted, and are treated as we have said in divisions, and it does not improve, then perform cauteries: III above the spine of the back, which is all before unprotected little by little in triangular, and I cauterize outside the belly II doses; and if you think that his stomach is cooled, and the food does not cook, and one sees the face swells, then the face I great cauterize above the stomach, as it is before said, and I cauterize above the liver, and I cauterize above the mouse all the cauteries clavile; and leave the cauteries open long tense.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After treatment, the limb should be kept clean until it is healed.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the charnosite which is called "thelul
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou II, et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you apply the "thelul", if the heated cauterizer resembles a razor, and then place it all burned on top of the "thelul" covered; and leave your hand so that the cauterizer comes to the beginning of the vein, from which the blood flows; do this once or twice, and if there is much "thelul", cauterize each one as we have said; after treating wounds until they are healed; and if you cauterize with a large cauterizer on top of the "thelul", it will have greater help.
de plaie mal curee	of poorly treated wound
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the wounds cannot be suffered by a surgeon or opening, as we will tell in its place, then comes an illness that cannot be healed except by cauterization.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	When any comes fistula, and is awake and poured with pus and corrupted moisture, then you must apply a thin tent to all of it, and guard that you remove the tent as much as it has decay.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	After heating the cautery which seems like a razor, and putting it into the fistula according to the quantity that the tent has entered, and begin the cautery as much as those corps are burned and corrupted, once, or twice, or three times, according to the quantity of the great need; and guard from burning the nerves which are near, and the large veins.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	If the fistula goes to the center of the bladder and the intestine, if you do not follow these rules, and only do it when the belly is full, and think that it is not necessary; after curing the belly as long as it is healthy, and if the rules are followed, and the matters are removed along with the tension, then wash that the belly is completely healthy; and if the matters are not removed, follow that the belly is torn, and corrupt the bone at the font; and thus like one of those that we will say in its belly.
de la maladie des reins	of the disease of the kidneys
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra III cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When pain in the loins comes, and with great swelling, and does not take a male form, then it is necessary that you do cautery on the kidneys on both sides with the clavile cautery that we have previously mentioned; and if we cauterize in the middle, it will have three cauteries in a line, and they will be greater help.
de la vessie	of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et I a destre et I a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais I cautere defuers le dos, ou II se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladder is small and weak from heat and moisture, and the hairs at its base retain urine, then perform cautery in the part in front of the bladder, on both sides where the hair begins, and each cauterization should be as long as a pin; and also perform cautery in front of the back, or twice if you have need; and let the cauterizations be clavile according to the form previously mentioned.
de la marris	of the marsh
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice III cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et II cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the marsh is cold and wet, and does not allow for conception, and the flowers are corrupted and their ends late; and when they come, they cause great pain: then it is necessary to perform three cauterizations around the belly, as we have said in cautery of the bladder, and two cauterizations in front of the back; and let the cauterizations be clavile as we have said.
de la hainche	of the hip
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a I cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When viscous moisture descends to the sacroiliac joint of the hip, and for this reason it moves out of its place, and the signs are that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and the legs are found to be bent, it is necessary that you cauterize the pain above the sacroiliac joint with a cautery similar to a circle, and sign before the bone around the joint so that it returns, so that the joint is within the circle; and if it is such a cautery as those that have been cauterized in the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai III cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if this cautery is not present, make three cauteries of large olives, and let the cauteries be made as all the others; and the cure until they are healed.
de la dolor de la hainche	of the pain of the back
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain comes in the back of the waist, and it is from cold and moisture, and the evils are cured by what we have said in the division and the cure does not work, and the disease is ancient: therefore it is necessary that you purge the evil of the heavy humors with bad-smelling pills, or other good-smelling pills similar.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	After the cauterization; and the manner of cauterization is as follows: it is to say together with burning medicines, and fire cauterization.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	Fire cauterization is in many ways, among which some are: that you cauterize above the back of the waist three triangular cauterizations according to this form, and do good depth and great, and there should be between each cauterization a space of one finger's breadth, and so the olive-oil cauterization; never done on the middle of the back, because it is four in this way:
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you see that the cauterizer uses the fire cautery in a circular shape as we have previously mentioned in the dislocation of the shoulder; but do it in a different manner so that the circle contains the entire shoulder, and all the tendons are properly treated.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	And this is the way it is done in surgery, when the pain remains in the shoulder and does not reach the thigh or the leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if it comes to the thigh and the leg, then make two cauterizations where the pain is located, and one above the ankle four times, on the right side a little; and let the cauterizing instrument be sharp, and treat the tendons properly; and if the patient feels that the pain extends to the foot or near the knee, then cautery where he feels the pain three or four times with the cautery called "points".
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	If the job is, do more; and if it is that the pain is from the groin to the thigh, do cauterization with a linear or circular cauterizing iron, and be careful in all your cauterizations that you do not leave the cautery so long that you burn the nerves and large arteries, and that you do not cause greater harm and contraction.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	I myself have seen many who have cauterized above the ankle of the foot, and left it so long that the leg was entirely blackened, and the foot also, and all the flesh was rotten.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	After a bout of vomiting that led to death.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	And if the pain is in both parts together, perform cauterization on one and the other, according to this method.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	And the wise say in the cauterization of the back, because of this method, use such a sharp iron and as large as a needle or a little less, and use it by crossing and use one crossing to cross the other at a distance equal to the quantity of a new piece of cloth; and the crosses should be over two parts, and also like that, and there is a good piece of iron.
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois I cautere reont et lou laisse III jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And heat it until it is completely red and glowing, then place it on the boil on the back, and turn it over to the healthy side; and cauterize once with the cautery and leave for three days; and then apply a poultice of butter, and leave the wound open long enough; after the healing process until it is healthy.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Albucasis says that we use this cautery little because of its fearful appearance, and few see those who use it; and nevertheless, it is a good cauterizer that can suffer it, and where it takes effect.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi; et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	The cauteries of burning medicine are such that you make a tool with prongs on one side of the door edge, and either of rain or iron at one end long, and in the high part have II of them, and each amount of the greatness of a doe; and they are open under and over, and join together according to this form:
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche; aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	After placing the board of the hipbone on the misaligned side, and quickly place your hand on the board of the hipbone; then pour between the II circles of the hot water which has been heated in the fire I poc, and let it stay for an hour, and suffer the hairs to be burned by the heat and the fire.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu; et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit; et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait; et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	For there is also true healing with fire as with medication; and when the mordications have passed, loosen your hand with the instrument and raise the back gently, and leave it thus for three hours, and put butter on until the blackened skin is removed; and let it remain for three hours that the wound may be straightened; and this would be the last aid after the cure of boils as long as they are healed.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument; et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	And if the pain has spread to the thigh or leg, use the instrument that tingles the back according to what you have done in the waist increased; and this is the way of the hot wound, and I have written about it in treating the correction of medicine.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	Take equal parts of quicklime and fresh charcoal, and grind them together, and put them in a new earthenware pot.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir; et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main; et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	And if there is a small hole from which the point of a razor cannot fill it; and put that pot in another well-pounded pot, and put on top of it lime and charcoal and add vinegar until it has the consistency of powder, as you will have when you hold it in your hand; and let it stand for so long that all the liquid has dripped out and the pot is no longer wet, then take all the liquid and pour it over lime and charcoal as before.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	And if it is very painful and is administered in the form of medical operations and cauterization of other members because it does such great work as fire, and if there are other medicines that are well-cauterized for the back, such as anacardium and chalk with soap, all these things mixed together.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	And Galen tells us of a cure where some were cured of the pain of the back and sciatic vein, and the loins much, and said that no other cure was made, and that they were healed once when this cure was made, and it was bathed as he teaches afterward.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie; et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	And in a similar manner, you should apply a fresh, green, and dry litargire very well beaten with a little grease, and place it on the back and thighs and legs where the pain is located, and tie it; and let it remain for three hours until the hairs no longer feel the burn.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	Then you should make him enter or a warm bath until the body is slightly heated, and then make him enter a bed, and the pain will disappear entirely and be healed.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	And it should be noted that no one should use such cauteries or medicines unless after the evacuation of blood.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout; et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	And Hippocrates said that when the vein of the arm is cauterized with burning lead, it helps greatly; and it should be done in this manner by the cauterizer.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	Take the other and beat it with old oil, and place it on the groove that is between the thumb and the other one called the carpus.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains; et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee; et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	Then take some burning lead, and place it on fire until it becomes charcoal, and put it on the cloth, and let it stay until it is soaked; and do this again and again, and do not stop doing this until you think that it reaches the back, and that the pain is stopped; and this method of cauterization is called "cautere de chievre".
de la dolor dou dos	of great pain two
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, whether from falling or by impact or from too great evacuation, or from similarly expanded cold matter, none of these cases is worth cauterization, because the one who comes from the infusion of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne V cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai III cauteres ou IIII au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	It is necessary after this that the painful spots are pricked with fetid pills or other similar things, which are placed on the back where the pain is, three lines deep, and in each line five cauteries or more according to the strength and quantity that the pain can bear; and let the cauteries be done according to the cautery called "poins"; and if you see, make three cauteries or four at the middle-sized cautery according to this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	Many times this disease comes to small children, and the signs of onset are that they have a stiff neck when moving, and fear; and you will find it in the last spinous process of the back and in the appearance that comes above the other spinal processes.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this and you want to cure it, if you cauterize with the fire cautery in this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	If the fire cautery grips each part of the spine equally.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	And if you see, then cauterize around the spine with the fire cautery pricking II lines or III, and the points close to each other.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	After healing the limb as we have said, according to what is healthy, and beware that you do not administer cauterization with a sharp instrument that is in spasm of the nerve.
de la dolor des jointes	of the pain of the joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When the pain of the joints is due to moisture that has spread to each member of the body, and when the pain comes in a foot, which is properly called "podagra", and when it is caused by cold and cures of medicines cannot cure it, then it is cured by cauterization in this manner: apply much cauterization around the joint of the foot, and let the cauterizing oil be applied in this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	And if there is a mark on the face of the pet that you should prick, then cauterize the entire cauterization that is called "point".
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if the pains come from the knees and other joints, and it happens often, then cauterize with three or four cautery irons on each part of the cauterization olive; and if you have more skill, do more, but do not hold your hand further than the edge of the curved iron.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	And if the pains descend to the knees and back, then administer the cauterization that we have said in its chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	If the pains are in the fingers, then make pinpricks two lines wide; and if they remain unchanged, make pinpricks above each joint and above the hair of the hand; and if the pains come from the wrist or shoulder, cauterize each part, and give good advice to the patient and apply appropriate medicines.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	For if you give good advice and purge the humor, it will be healed by the help of God.
de la routure dou syfac	of the tearing of the gums
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When tearing comes in anger, and the bowels descend to the thighs and this is new, then it is necessary that when you see him to heal, that he not move much that day; and that he use things that lessen the belly, so that the flesh does not fall from his belly; afterwards make him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to hold his jaw until the bruises are repaired, and the teeth in his hand, and sign with a seal of healing above the bone of the thumb, and at all signs that are similar to half a circle above the body; then heat the cautery with this form:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	until it is white and drips blood.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	Then remove the mud from the shoulder; and let the ministers stain their hands over it so they do not return; and work well on the thighs with the pain, and put disinfectant on him, the tincture and the sergeant on the thighs, and the other above the least that stains his hands; then put the cautery on the sign across your whole hand, and hold it straight and hold it until you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, start again with another until you come just short of the bone; and be careful that the mud does not come out while you are doing the cautery; that you do not burn it; and that by this way the pain does not die, or any other harm.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	And if you do not reach the bone with the fire cautery, your work is useless.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And the fire cautery for children should be applied subtly according to their measure, and for large people in proportion; after three days, care for the wound of the fire cautery until the scab is formed; then care for other inflammations until it is healed, and grind the hairs on his back for forty days until the wound is well healed; and it is necessary that their movements be restricted for a long time, so that the blisters do not form when they move around in rooms.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	And after forty days, when he wishes to get up, he should be given a well-made bandage, and wear it for another forty days; and he should have good rest, that he does not work too much and avoids too much drinking and eating, and too much high breathing; and if he follows this instruction, he is completely healed.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And I will tell you what to do after the cure of cutting into his chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	of the tearing of the belly
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	When tears come in other bellies and are known, and you see that they do not grow any more, then apply the fire cautery according to its quantity, and let the third part of the wound be covered; after the cure according to what we have said; and no one of the ancients has said that it should be cauterized with the fire cautery at three angles in this form:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	but the first sign is the shoulder blade and make a line across the width of the rent, and another below, and hold your hand over all the burns with the cauterizing iron.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But the first cautery is lighter and less painful.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	of old pain in any limb
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	When pain comes to any limb, or to fall or to wound, and this pain lasts long, and the cure of medicine does not help, then it must be cauterized with the cautery called "poins", and the cauteries should follow the length of the limb and its smallness and weakness and its power and its location of twists and its pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	If it is safe to perform the first cauterization, it is good; if not, begin another cauterization above that one, for it is usually customary that it must die to the member that is closest, because it is necessary that you perform the cauterizations until the hairs are healed.
de meselerie	from masturbation
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	Masturbation is never helped by cauterization, and at the same time the disease that comes from the putrefaction of fluids and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief: I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	If you see that the cauterization does not help, take care if the disease is at the beginning, and if it has been cured according to what we have said in the division, and if it does not spread or stay, and you doubt that the corruption will not spread throughout the injury, then make three cauterizations: I on the forehead, and the other towards the front at the end of the eyebrows; and II above the two corners, and I behind the temple; and leave as much hand as the cauterization comes just to the bone, and as much as the scabs come out so that the vapors of the large humors can escape; and cauterize on the mouse according to what is in front.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et I cautere en som lou neis, et II cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et VI cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et I grant sus la crupie et I autre delez, et II sus les II espaules; et II sus les coutes, et II sus les tendrons dou pis, et I sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et I autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et I autre sus lou foie.	And if the fracture is scattered throughout; and it is clearly manifest, so you must cauterize with these cauteries that we have said or chief, and the cautery in the back of the neck, and two cauteries above the spine of the neck, and six cauteries above the spine of the back, and one great above the buttocks and one other below, and two above the shoulders, and two above the elbows, and two above the knees, and one above each joint of the hands and feet, and above the wounds of the hands; and beware of the nerves that are above the backbone, that you do not burn them; and never make a cautery above the bone of the little finger, and one above the bone of the stomach, and one above the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	And the more you do cauterization, the less you help, and it harms him; and know that the hairs do not feel pain as the healthy ones do, because the body is already corrupted.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	It should be that the cauterization is large and small according to the members and the joints, as you will find in the manner of irons.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	After curing the wound with flour and honey and other cures until it is healed.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	When swelling comes in any member and is treated with medicines and oils and plasters, and it is not healed, then you should cauterize above the member according to its size and smallness; and let the cauterization be a little inside the skin of the cure; then the cure of ointments until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	And never cauterize with the hand and the foot and the back, at the end of the nerve that moves the member, and thus it is ossified the swelling; and all the while do not intervene if they are not knowledgeable about the members and the exits of the nerves moving the body.
de albaras	Et aucune fois fait on caut
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the disease called "albaras" is awakened, and medical knowledge does not help, then cauterize it with a cautery a little in front, according to the quantity of the curative bark, until the swelling is ossified and its color changes; then treat it with flour of wheat and lentils with rose oil and plantain leaves, and sand from colon and sand from almond, each part separately; and mix everything together, and bind it on the affected area, and apply it to the affected area until it is healed.
li cure de chancre par cautere	the treatment of chancre by cauterization
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	When chancre appears at the beginning, and you see it stopping, then cauterize it with a cauterizer that seems to be in the shape of a circle, all around the edge of the chancre.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	And all the wise say that one should also make a cauterizer in the middle of the chancre; and I do not think it is good, because I believe it will not become ulcerated and corrupted, and I have never seen it happen once; and a better thing is that it be cauterized all around, with the cauterizer that is called «circle», as we have said in many cauterizers.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	of the inflammation which cannot die
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi.	When anyone has a disease called "adubelati", and it is slow to die out, either due to the excess it causes or due to the sharpness of the pain when they are very old (that is, too old) and have little blood, or due to the tension; and you see it hastening to die: then cauterize around with many small cauteries, holding it; afterwards leave it thus.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	For it will hasten to die.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see it piercing the whole cauterization, then heat the cauterization from where this is the form:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	And place your hand in the middle of this disease called "adubelati" until the cauteries pierce the skin, and let them be such cauteries that the hairs feel afterwards in a similar way as the course of the pustule is alleviated.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	After the cure until they are completely healed.
li cure dou feu par fer	The cure of fire by iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	Another way of disease is called "corrodens", and is nothing other than a kind of member, for it bends the members as if the dry branches were bent.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	If you see this disease in the leg that can suffer cauterization together with fire, then heat the cauteries deeply and greatly, according to what is needed for the leg or the disease; after cauterizing all parts until you have eradicated all corruption, and nothing remains of it, so that everything that is corrupted is removed.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	And then leave it for three days, and put oil on the wounds, cauterize with suffering until the scorches of fire are removed, and all corruption.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	After the treatment of inflammations, they generate ulcers.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	And if you see after three days that healthy ulcers do not arise, it is good; and if not, if you begin the cauterization again on what remains of the wounds corrupted.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	And this method has never been cured by medicine in place of the fire cauterization; but the fire cauterization is always greater help, and I have already told the cure of the medicine ailment in the division: take it when you have business.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	of the pearls that come to the feet
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	Many times, when they come to the feet by mistake, a disease is born that is called "closed" according to our understanding, and it is a great thing that causes pain in the foot.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	And the cauteries of this disease are according to two methods.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	It is to say, fire cauterization, and ice-hot cauterization.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	Fire cauterization is that you heat the cauterizer as if it were a pen of ink, and it is made of good iron at the measure that it can pierce the nail from all parts, and that it has thin margins; then put it all hot on top of the nail, and turn your hand around the nail until it reaches the end of the nail; and leave it thus for three days until it begins to rot; then make an ointment of wild, ground spices with silk, and leave the ointment all night, and the nail will close and will be removed from its roots.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat the limb with a poultice until it is healed.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	And if they are converted by the horse's feet, and often in hands and feet, then it is necessary to apply cauterization with very hot iron; and it is done in this way: take an iron or iron needle, or a quill pen, and place it on the nail and the wart, that is, put the warts on; then put a little hot water in it, hold your hand well, and press your hand turning so that the edge of the iron comes to the root of the nail, and find the very hot water going deep into the root; and let the pain of the hot water for an hour; then leave it like this, and it will all fall out at its roots.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	Next do another one, until you have exhausted all those that are in the chest, then cure the wounds that engender char.
li cure dou trembler	The cure for trembling
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices IIII cauteres ou IV sus l’espinee dou dos, I cautere entre chescune espinee; et I cautere ou pez, et I sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	When anyone trembles from cold or from the fourth-day fever or other, it is necessary to make four cautery burns or four on the spine of the back; one cautery between each spine; and one cautery on the belly, and one on the stomach at the cautery olive; it will leave the trembling, and hasten the recovery from the cold illness.
des pustules puans	Of pus-filled boils
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	No case has ever been seen where the body, bathed in sweat, or covered in pustules, was infected by large corrupt matter.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	If it is necessary when they appear that one perform a fire cauterization above each pustule: a subtle cauterizing iron from mugwort, of which the point is grasped in the fire, or from the root of aristolochia, or with the lenticular cauterizer.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	And never cauterize them at the beginning when they appear, according to this method, and it cannot grow more, but is broken up the excess from which they come, and are healed; but it must be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	when the artery is cut
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	often there is great loss of blood from the cut artery at the wound that comes from the surrounding area, or at the incision of the abscess, or in cauterizing the member, and similar things; and it is a very painful thing to stop.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren I, ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	And whenever this happens to anyone, you must quickly place your finger on the wound of the vein, and hold it tightly until the blood is no longer flowing out; then apply the heated cauterizing irons in various sizes both small and large until they are all red; then apply a larger or smaller one according to the size of the wound and the part where the artery is located, and hold the cautery on that vein where you place your finger, and hold it there until the bleeding stops.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement I autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if you lift your other hand above the vein, and the cautery is extinguished, then quickly take another one that is at the fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des IIII manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And do not cease to do this one after the other until the bleeding stops; and guard that you do not burn the nerve which is nearby, and that other harm does not come to the wound; and see that when the artery is not cut, it cannot be extinguished directly when the artery is large, unless by one of the four ways that we have said: or by cautery, or by extraction when it is not yet treated, or by a very fine thread, or by medicines placed on which have power to stop bleeding.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Whoever administers tightly binding bandages or hot objects above, or similar things, does not benefit unless they do not.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And if this happens to anyone and they have no other remedy or medicine present, they should place their finger index above the wound of the vein as we have said, and tightly bandage it until it is stopped above the wound and above the vein; and they should not move it, but often dab it with very cold water until it is frozen and swollen and stopped; and make inquiries about what remedies and medicines are available.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	This begins the second book of remedies for wounds
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	We have told you in the first chapter all diseases for which it is necessary to cauterize with fire, or with burning medicine, and the symptoms and causes and instruments and forms of cauteries; and I will put this chapter about the shoulder joint just below, and I will go to this chapter by that same way in order to find out more easily what we want.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And therefore when I begin this chapter, it is necessary, dear son, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first of the cauteries, and therefore it requires greater caution.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	And I warn you that you should not undertake folly.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	For many ways of people come for treatment.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	if they come from such people who are so with their illness that they die immediately because of the harm they receive from their disease, and the greatness of its evil; and of these one must have fear.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse.	And of these, there are those who give you their meaning, and say: "wait, I am sharp"; and the disease is spiteful.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	It does not matter only that you allow those who come to you who have this way, but put greater caution in your honor than in your desire, and do not open rashly but wisely of what you are certain, and which you have taken and lost; and use prediction and indication in the treatment of your diseases for salvation to be converted; and this will help you to achieve good reputation, glory, and memory for a long time.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Very dear son, Our Lords give you good understanding and straightness, and if you wish to breathe from the holy inspiration of his hand, indeed.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	I have already ordered you this chapter by dividing it into parts, according to what is before a chapter on cauteries, which I have divided from the top down, so that you will find it easier to understand what you will have to do.
dou chief plein d’aigue	full of sharp
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	This disease often occurs in children when they are born, and when the midwife's hand is too tightly held, the child's head; and sometimes it comes from a reason that one is not aware of.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And I have never seen this disease except in children, and all those that I have seen died; and because it seems to me that it is better to learn the work in these treatments.
Et je vis I enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com II nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	I saw a child who was complaining of severe pain in the shoulder, and the head was swelling each day until it could no longer bear it; and he thought so much of the moisture that he died, and this moisture is assembled outside the bone above the joint, between the skin and the bone; and the treatments are such that if the moisture is between the skin and the bone, and the abscesses are small, you should make a wide cut on the head; and it should be as long as II, so that the moisture flows out; and then remove the shape of the spatumile.
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai II fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is more extensive, and the abscess is larger, then make two cuts in the shape of a cross, according to this form.
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief III fendures selonc ceste maniere:	And if the moisture is under the bone, and the signs that you see are the commissures of the neck opened on each part, and the sharp pain when you press it with your hand from inside, and it has not returned to you: then it is necessary that you make three cuts in the head according to this manner:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	And after the incision, extract all the moisture out.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	After extracting the cuts with gauze and powders, and putting wine and oil on it, leave it in place for five days; then remove it, and treat the wound with bandages and counter-irritation, and keep the head still, and give small amounts of dry food with a little moisture until the limb is comfortable and healthy.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	And another way of incision is that you look for the largest opening of the abscess, and the gathering of the sharp edge; for it is never in front, never behind, never to the right, and never to the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	Therefore cut where the abscess is open, and fill it with the sharp edge, and make the incision according to what you can; and be careful not to cover the artery; and if blood flows, then the patient may die from the flow of blood and the evacuation of moisture.
de reume	I'm sorry, I don't understand
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les II arteres.	When it has to do with one disease called "cataract" in the eyes or at the bottom, and the disease is ancient, and the medical cure does not help much, then the other cure is to cauterize with what is used to cover the two arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	Therefore, while you look at them, it is necessary that the hairs of their head be made to stand on end; then rub the affected area with a rough cloth until the arteries are visible, then hold the hairs against the entire cloth; then look where the vein lies, and the roots of both are behind the ears, and they are not returned; then sign the roots of the ears, then cover both with a two-pronged forceps until the wound comes just to the bone, and it should be through the width of the head.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com II dois au traver.	And if you see, push the two-pronged forceps away from the artery and cover it above, cutting as if it should go through the middle.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is cut, if blood flows out continuously from above.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And if the artery does not open when felt, then measure the quantity of the space of three fingers, then sign it and pierce into the bone; and what is necessary to put in the abscess is six centimeters, and perhaps a little more or less, depending on what the wound can suffer, and the replenishment of the artery; then look at the wound: if it remains above the bone point not deep, then cut the skin that we have sutured, and then close and bind the wound, and treat the wound with ointment until it is healed.
de emigrainne	of the head
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When the ancient headache comes, and the catarrh is severe, due to the moisture of tears and the chills in the temples and the old age and similar things, and it is treated with methods of medical cures and nothing seems to help, then we should cauterize the arteries of the temples, as we have said.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	And the method of extracting them is such that the hairs of his temples face backwards, and one listens to the artery that opens in the temple, because it opens well by its beating, and it is only slightly replaced in anyone who is too cold; and if it is replaced, then one strains the skin with some cloths, then rubs the skin with some rough cloth, and bathes the skin in hot water until the artery appears clearly; then take the spatula of which this form is made:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	Then lightly scrape the skin until you reach the artery, then cut it upwards with pincers, and remove all the webs that are adhered to each part; and if the artery is thin, turn it back to the tip of the scalpel, then cover that part according to the amount of the two incisions.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	For if it is not covered, it will not heal completely.
Et trai dou sanc des VI c/, jusc’a III; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en II leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les II liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And draw out a lot of blood from the sixth vein, just to the third; and if the artery is large, it is necessary that you tie it in two places with a strong silk thread, which does not allow any blood to come before the healing of the wound, and does not allow any clots to form; then cover the excess that is between the two threads in the same hour, and then, if you see, if the fire cautery is applied just to the bone until the incisions are covered; and this is the most difficult work, if the pains are not feverish and he is of hot constitution.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	Because the cautery is to finally finish the moisture: because it is of greater help to moisture.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de II pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	For the extraction of arteries, it is necessary to fill the wound with old cotton and place dry bandages; and when they are removed, take care of dry medicines that produce heat and bandages until they are healed; and if without cutting the artery as you have worked, then hasten to cover it with a cauterizer, or fill the wound with vinegar and apply it to your hand that the wound is not frozen; and if you do not have this present, then place ice on the wound for as long as the wound is not frozen, and raise the limb in cold water until it is completely healed, and it is stretched as it should be; and what is more difficult and lighter in the extraction of the artery is that you cauterize the vein with this cauterizer cutting from II parts, but the cuts should be well spaced to last longer.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	When the instrument is too tight, it holds less heat.
Et doit avoir entre les II coutelz I doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les II leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en II leus; et soient esloigniet entre les II chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it should have between the two knives a great space, and then when you have marked the two lines, and you melt the hot iron above so that it comes just to the bone, and cover the vein in two lines; and they should be separated between the two cuts because it is not known of this cauterization at all; and this is the form of the cauterization:
des larmes	of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When the tears of the eyes are dripping from veins that are above the skin of the forehead, and it does not benefit at all from medical treatment, and you see the face of the patient becoming twisted, and it feels as if it is shaking; and the hair is held and moist so that the hairs of the forehead are wet, and the papers are torn, and they are burned by the heat of the tears, if there is a need for this treatment.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins; et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	And they would call the ancient "cure of contusions", and you should do the following to the hair that has this disease, whether it is on the front or not; then make three cuts evenly along the length of the front; and one of the cuts as if two are completely through the front by going down from the nose, and the others two at the ribs above the papers, and be careful of the incision of the arteries that are at the ribs above the papers; and keep your hand away from the continuation of the two jaws, and let each wound have the quantity of three drops across the joins; and have a piece of sponge and much cloth ready to soak up the blood, then pour the herb in two parts where this is the shape:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les II fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	From the incision that is made from the temple up to the second incision; and scrape off everything that is between the two cuts from the top of the bone, then make another cut on the other side of the same incision, and then extract this bone fragment.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	If you insert the tool called "curette" into the first cut, which is very sharp on one side and blunt on the other, and it is shaped like this:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	And place the sharp side of the curette towards the cartilage and the blunt side towards the bone, and continue to scrape until it reaches the same cut.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And for all the vessels that descend from the chief as far as the eyes, continue the incision until the court is open, and then make another incision in the same place on the other side; then extract the blood equally, and press the wound for the blood taken; then put a piece of old cotton in each incision, and put moistened cloths with wine and oil and vinegar on top, and guard against abscesses not coming; and the next day remove the bandage, and apply a great amount of salted herbs, then the cure of ointment basilicon with rose oil, and other cures that are used to heal wounds, until they are healed.
dou reume des eulz	return of the eyes
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	When any come to cautery with custom, and you see the eyes closed and small, and weakened vision, and burnt papers; and the hairs are shaved, and where the shaving is done, it causes pain, and the hairs are sneezed out; therefore, by these accidents that those matters and cautery do not come from only many veins, and the movement that is there, if this is so.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	And whether you command the patient to turn his head back, then make a great cut across the forehead, and another wide down to the eye.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	And begin from the cut on the right temple to the left temple, and let the incision be just to the bone; and move your hand away from the nerves of the temples that move at the pain; and when the bone is exposed, suck out all the blood onto a sponge, and then clean between the two lips of the cut and put in old cotton, and cover with linen; then bind above with moistened cloths soaked in wine and oil, and guard against abscess forming; when it is removed, it is necessary to rub the bone until charcoal begins to appear, then treat with things that cause sweating, which are used to remove char.
En teil maniere: pren II parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine IIII parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In this manner: take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of collyrium, and make a poultice; and apply it to the wounds to draw out the charcoal throughout.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the ear deafness
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des IIII choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	All that sticks in the ear is one of the four things: either grains or wax or stone or similar thing like iron; or seeds, such as beans, peas; or things that run down, such as water and oil and similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	When it sticks in the ear or any other kind of thing that does not fit well in the ear, it does not grow in the ear, so put the ear to the sunlight.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus.	If you see the arrow, if any drops of purple oil or hemlock oil are distilled, then apply extraction; and this is to make him vomit of condition, and stop his nose when he sneezes, and put around his ear pieces of cloth or wool; and raise his ear.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	Often comes out by this cure; and if it does not come out, then apply extraction with thin needles, of which this is the form:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If it comes out by the needles, it is good; if not, apply extraction with a thin, double-edged needle; and if it does not come out by this, then take a rain-stick and fill the hole of the rain-stick or the ear canal very full of wax so that nothing can enter with the stick; then pull it out carefully, for often comes out like we have said; and if it does not come out in this manner, then take glue of which they take the eyes, and put it on some instrument that is sharp for this purpose, and put a little cotton around; then press the glue above the arrow or whatever, and pull it out.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if she does not jump from all these things that we have said, then quickly break the ear to stop the abscess and blood flow, and spasms; and the way of breaking is that you first make a small incision in the place of the pain, and extract the pus according to its strength, then place the pus between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and make a small incision at the root of the ear where the fat or flesh depends; and let the incision be as smooth as a moon, until you reach the bone, then remove it according to your ability, and suck vigorously at your mouth; and the cure until it is healed.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre I spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if it is small and swollen, administer extraction; and if it cannot come out, then administer the following subtle form of suction:
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	and make an incision in that grain.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	But do not make a large incision when you think the grains are moist due to earwax, until you have made many pieces; then extract them with small forceps and suction, as we have said, so that the extraction is aligned.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	In the case of an earache, it is necessary to use steam from a conditioned first, and widen the ear with old cotton.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	And let it lie across the very ear itself where the sharp point is.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	If it jumps out due to the wind, that's good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	If the wind does not, take many thin and light stones according to the length of your thumb, and warm them in the fire; and place the hairs of one ear, and move upwards from the other foot, and strike with another stone on the stone that is in the ear; and do not cease to do this stone after stone until the sharp point is all out, and thus it jumps out all out; and if you see, take the reed, and blow one of the hairs into the ear, and the other hair take with fire until the thinnest reed is burnt; then make the other side similar to what we have said in the stone.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	In the extraction of an animal, if it is small in size, such as a mouse and similar things, proceed as we have said in the division; but if it is large enough to be felt, then use pincers for extraction; and it is the lightest thing to remove that is in the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	In the extraction of worms in the ears, if you treat them as we have said in the division and if the treatment does not help, then it is necessary to look into the ear with the sun: if there are no worms, then use fine pincers to remove them; if there are none, then take the candle of this form.
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	And be narrow below and wide above.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	And use a more subtle chisel in the ear according to the amount of pain, then it is often successful throughout the bone; do this as often as all of them are seen.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And if they do not obey to extract, then bend the bone around with cotton as I have said in the stone; and if they cannot be extracted as we have said, then administer distillations that the ancients have experimented with in the extraction of arrows, and you will find them where treating distillations; and if you distill your oils and medicines into the ear with this instrument, of which this is the form as you see:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a I petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a I estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren I raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations I poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And whether it is of silver or lead, make small holes in the bottom and larger ones on top to pour through; and to press during distillation, use a well-made instrument of lead for this purpose, and if you see a razor and wrap cotton around its point evenly; then pour your oil or juice, and whatever medicine you see in the container, and the container should be in the ear; then squeeze through the razor all the cotton, and press your hand constantly until the oil is distilled or comes out of the ear; and feel the bad smell inside, and the distillation should be just slightly warmed over the fire, as it is distilled into the ear; and be careful that it is not too cold, for the medicine would not be good.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of ear congestion
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient I poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born without some congestion in their ears; and this also happens to men by ear congestion, or by a hardening of the inside of the ear, and this congestion never comes from within the ear, if one cannot see it; and it never comes from a lack of congestion, and one sees it well.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	That congestion which comes from within the ear, if one cannot see it, is due to great sickness in many positions, and in this one where one sees that you must put the ear with the bad pain in the sun; and look inside: if you see the opening, then the work of this length of time is the form of what is inside.
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	And it should be ausculted and percussed all around, so that it does not cause the ear to bleed; if the opacification is of charcoal or of the ear bone, then hold the ear with fine forceps, and the copper lightly, until that charcoal is completely removed.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	And if the opacification is in front of the ear, then take a fine razor lightly and heat it slightly over the fire, then put it on the bone of the ear.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	If you feel the opacification that causes the patient to have a gritty sensation in the ear, percuss lightly, and be careful not to damage the nerves of the ear; then put in the ear a tent according to the size of the pustule, and moisten it with Egyptian medicine.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Do not perform any action until the wound is healed, or take a tent and moisten it with rosewater, and powder it with vitriol; if you see pus flowing from the ear, then it is necessary to remove the tent and apply another tent made of rosewater and wax, until the discharge stops; then cure it as long as it is healthy.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if blood flows out, soak a sponge and wipe it with cold water, and place it on the ear, and use other treatments that stop the flow of blood, which are either to treat the distillations.
de la char des papieres	of the paper of the papers
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	This is the method for removing thorns from papers when they are wet and dry: you should stretch them with tweezers and pincers, and remove the root with a piece of glass; then apply vitriol to the wound.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And if they cannot be removed without cutting, then cauterize the wound with a fine lens caustic, and the cauterizer after incision is suitable; many times they repair, but nothing remains of their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
de la gresle	of the sand
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	Frequently, in papers, there are things that seem to be gravel in their form and hardness, and because of this disease is called "hail", and it is an assembly of large moisture above and below the paper; the work is such: if the hail moves from one side to another, and it is a light thing to know; then make the wound wide, then scrape each part lightly, then take it with pincers, and the cloth.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	If you do not cover it with a cloth without piercing the paper, it does not harm the wound; and if the wound is large, it should be sown up as soon as possible; and if it is small, do not force it, for the inflammation will return quickly and cause pain.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	And if the splinter is large and falls into the depths of the ear towards the upper part, turn the paper, and place the splinter in a pair of pliers, and hold and press it on both sides; and if the paper is moved by incision, it causes no harm; and when the splinter is removed, apply a drop of strong salt water to the wound, and cure the ear of any injury until the wounds are healed.
de la graisse des eulz	of the fat from the eyes
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	Exinach is a grease that is smeared on paper above the eyes, and it has more in children than in adults, and it causes much pain to their eyes, and they vomit it in the morning, and they cannot look at the light of the sun because their tears flow to their eyes; and because they lie on their faces, they sleep on them, and their papers are outside their eyelids moist, which swells and covers their appearance with the exinach that appears in the oil.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	And when you press the joint to your touch and feel the grinding between them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren I drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	And the method of the work is such that the bones put their head in your hand; then take a piece of linen, and make a tent in the shape of a circle according to the amount that contains the grinding from each part, then place it on top of it; and press from one side and the other, so that the grinding is assembled inside the circle; then cutting into the moisture at the edge of the blade a slit of a large width, and not any larger than the wound on the skin of the vein; and cut the skin until you come to the grinding; and in many positions of the slit, according to the shape of a piece of white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Extract the entire piece of cloth from between your two hands, and turn your hand to the right and left until it is spread out; and be careful not to insert into the wound, that you do not bring the whole cloth up to the oil, that you do not wound it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	And if it does not extend at the beginning of the wound, then slightly tear the wound until it opens; then extract it as we have said, then smooth the cloths in hot and cold water, and put on the limb, and spread it well with ointment.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	And if there are such men who breathe and put on them to corrupt the moisture that is remaining.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then the healer as long as they are healthy.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient comes with an abscess that is not yet ready, then the healer should apply wet compresses until they are healthy.
des poilz des papieres	of hairs of papers
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc IIII manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When papers are born with hairs that are not natural, and they are awake, if they harm the eyes, and bring on various diseases such as tears and softening of the papers and cornea, until it is the cause of the destruction of the eyes; and the cure is according to four methods: either by cauterization with fire together, or by medicine blister according to what is before or chapter of cauterization, and is done or by incision and stitching or by cauterization, according to what I will say.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai I fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai I fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	It is necessary that you place the head of the pain in your hand, then turn the paper of oil to your right hand; if it is converted, it is good; if not, if there is an arrow at all the thread above; and let the thread under the margin of the paper where the hair grow among these hairs, and pull the thread above the whole paper, and return to the razor; then in the part outside the paper, outside the hairs adjusted, all the skin painting, from the great calf just to the small; then stretch the thread, and place outside the paper a small tent of cotton and cloth, then above the paper a figure of an anchor, like the full moon, and in all cases it is necessary that the figure be according to the quantity that you saw lift the paper which is divided to all.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor; et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	And if it is a patient who has experience with great quantities of paper according to how the paper is softened; then make all the space above the two lines that you have marked, and start from the large calf downwards; and soak one of the wounds near the natural hairs in the root of a large one, then squeeze the ink into one of the two angles of the quill, then scrape off the skin; then gather the two lips to one seam of an needle with all the thin silk thread, and wipe the blood, and dry the excess hairs above the two sides in any way that you see fit; and if not, if you do not have care for it, then leave the seam and the threads for three days or four; then cure the wound from the sides of things that are dry and constricting, because the paper reattaches to the suddenness of the wound and the assembly of it, but the seam is dried (as they say of the ancients), and this is work without fear; and if in another way: and it is that you sign the paper in a figure that is as like the shape of the mirror as we have told, at three places according to the form that is here:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	then apply force evenly according to the form that is here:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans; et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	And if you cannot hold the needles, and the thing is not even, take a needle or have a thread, and bend it into the shape; and bend the other thread over the big arm, and the second thread over the small one, and assemble the threads equally between your fingers; then lift your hand equally, and lift all the skin where you have sewn, as we have told you, then assemble the two lips of the wound by sewing, and cure it until it is healed; and if an abscess comes to your incision, soothe it with carron oil and similar soothing ointments; and never once have the hairs of the skin turned: if you use what we have said about the incision, but sewing in one and out the other is more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai II caines par art, et II liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as II chiés de II pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les II cainnes des II parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	The care of wounds is as follows: and it is that you convert the paper and the bandage inside according to what I have said, and then make two wounds by art, and two subtle threads as long as the paper and the width of the space is; and cope with the two ends where you hold the threads; then gather the one and the other subtly above what is above the paper of the oil, and strain the two wounds from the two parts form; and leave it in this way for some time, and the skin that was stretched will die and rot and produce, as long as it falls by it.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	If it lingers, if the copper has some force, then cure it until it is healed; and when the wound has been suppurated, and if the paper has been lifted, and they will not grow back; and this is the form of the two kinds of plasters that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of length and width:
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute I fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse I autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a I ou II ou III ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	The methods are such that you grasp a fine needle, and pull the silk thread softly and finely; then assemble the heads and no the one and the other subtly, and let the length of the threads be a palm long; then order the other thin silk thread briefly, and do not tie the heads of the thread; then put the hairs on your skin, and so it is declined, for this is a thin and small bandage, then pull the needle through the whole bandage at the base of the hair raised, and pierce it into the paper gently until you draw it over the natural hair; then pull the hair up to the bandage, and pull in the bandage that hair, if there is one or two or three or more; then pull your hand so that the hairs come out all over the bandage with the natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo II jors ou III, tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne I poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	And if the patient is chased and treated, and the hairs do not grow back with it, then treat the chase with the discharge as you have ordered, until the chase comes out completely and you can see it through the oil; then treat the chase and the thread, and close the oil and let it rest for two or three days, until the hair grows back in its place and grows on the skin; and if the hairs are small, accompany one long hair from the goats naturally, and raise it with the one you leave, until it is lengthened and then lift it.
de la porriture de l’oil	of the purity of the oil
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	When this disease, which is called "aleacrati" or the "porridge", comes into the oil, there are two ways: one natural, and the other unnatural.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	And it comes by means of wounding, or cutting, or cauterization, and similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	And the method of treatment in this case is to break that suture, and dry the lips of it, and put in tents of linen, and bind it until it is healed; and you should only use in its care things that dry and restrict.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	For if you do this, the disease will become worse than before; but in the work of things that are softening, such as fenugreek; and the rose of sharp or high and seeds of linen are cooked, and pungent ingredients of quicksilver melted in any of the oils, and there is wrapped a tent, and the care of this.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the treasures of your cure are that you take care not to let them be spoiled according to their former form; and this work that we have said is no other than a guide against this disease, that it does not return according to its former form.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	of the chariot that comes in the oil
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	This disease that is truly called "axacrati", and is natural and accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	The accident comes from wound and cut and cauterization and similar things; and the method of the work is that you hold an needle, in which it has double thread, and the skein in the chariot, and make it pierce from the left arm to the right, so that the thread comes out in two threads of the chariot; then place the char above all the needle, and the covering wide.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the paper returns to its original shape according to what it should be, it is good; if not, take the razor and put it in the groove, and turn the paper, and make two cuts or corners inside the paper; and let the two wounds from the two angles of the incision you have made meet, and make a corner so that when they are assembled, the shape is as if it were a letter with no «Greek»; then remove that char, according to the quantity that its cost is not from, from what the paper teaches, then add the two missing parts, and sew them with a thread of linen; then cure as we have said about the medicines that soften, and tents, until they are healed.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les II leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	And if the disease comes from a wound or stitching or cauterization, it is necessary to make a plain slit between the hairs of the skin, and according to what has been said before; then cleanse between the two sheets of a tent, as I have said; and one must perform the work according to the form of the disease, for it is very diverse in form, and the wise masters apply various methods of all sorts to make the figure return to its natural shape; and the patients themselves, according to what is necessary for the work and tools in many different positions.
dou soudement de la papiere	The skin
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	When this stitching is done by unskilled people in a certain way, where the paper above is smeared with the white of oil, and cannot move or do their work naturally, then you should go outside the paper with the point of a razor, and lift it up; and extend it with pincers, until you scrape off what is hard to the subtle spatula, which should not be too sharp or too rough, so that the hairs cannot suffer that the spatula is too sharp or burns the oil; and your incision, from which you scrape off that assembly, should be lightly made, so that the paper regains its natural form; and that whole assembly is healed, and nothing is ever done in vinegar and salt oil, and lifted with vinegar and decoction; then place between the paper and the oil a linen cloth, and put on top of the oil moistened wool; and after the job use decoction and other healing things until it is healed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	of the elbow of the oil
Saiches que li ungle est selonc II manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a I dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	There are two ways in which the elbow is affected: one is nervous and resembles a hard, rough, facial skin, and another that is not nervous but resembles white frozen moisture, so that when touched with iron and heated with pliers, it cannot be removed; and both start from the large arm, grow slowly and slowly until they cover the entire eyelid and all the light and movement of the oil.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met I poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et I fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	And the manner of the incision is such that the hairs put their head in your hand, then work the eyes; and lift the paper to your hand, then bend the elbow with pliers of small doubled, and extend it above; then take a needle, and put the hair of a horse, or a cow, or a beef, and the thread strongly; and double the point of the needle a little and insert it into the elbow, and push the needle through the whole needle, and tie the elbow with a thread and extend it above, and scrape all the hair on the side of the elbow that extends to the prickle and the silk at the hair just below, then cover the remaining in the root of the arm to the most subtle spatula and with small forces, and leave the natural skin of the arm, so that by the incision does not come the usual tears; and once it was extended only to the elbow, and at the thread, as we have said; then scrape all the soft spatula of which this is the form:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	And guard that the spatula does not touch the charred flesh and break it, and that the prunel is not pierced; and after the incision pour a little bit of broken silk oil, and a collar made of litargire, and leave it just above the other wound; then care for the wound until it is healed.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And if the joint is not numb, and you cannot insert the needle, and the pins cannot enter, many times this resembles a joint of medicines; and they are born as I have told in the division, and if you see it covered, then work the oil of the pain, and take the spatula lightly with a sharp edge according to this form:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	And gently rub the joint above, and if you see that it does not ease and the pain persists, then pour from your mouth into the oil colier made of litargire and red oil and silk broth, and extinguish the oil just after; then start the other work according to this same method, until it is completely healed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing is contrary in the oil, as with an abscess, then milk it, and cure the abscess thoroughly until it is healed, then start the work again as before, until it is completely healed.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if the appearance of the flesh on the arm shows signs of great harm in oil by night, then soak it in vinegar and apply a part and not all at once, until tears do not come; then pour in oil a red wine colloid which is made from litargire.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	of the hair that grows above the pupil
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre; et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	Some men's hairs never grow red, and cover the pupil and restrain above the papers and turn back to the defense, and it seems like a baluster rose; and if the work is that the hairs put their head in your skin, then work the eyes, and cut all those hairs with suitable nicks to this, and support it at force; then cover the first hair, and go all scraping to the razor just to the end, and be careful not to wound the oil at the work; and let the incision of the spanish that we have said in the incision of the nail and as small forces of which we take the base, as the form after this chapter demonstrates; and when the incision is accomplished and all the hairs are removed, then use the oil of silk beaten or you distill red wine colloid and similar corrosive medicines, and put on the oil behind cotton with abin of wool, so that it is ensured not to have an abscess; and if nothing remains, and the skin does not cover, and you doubt an abscess, then leave the oil and cure the abscess with calming abscess medicines; then return to your work until it is healed, and thus make all the hairs that are adjusted in the oil by this appearance.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	But it is necessary that you apply the care of each weakness of the natural pathway; and of the accidental pathway, in iron work; and do not put your hand in any of these works until you see that this member suffers from that work.
des voines des eulz	of the eyes'
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	Red veins that are covered over the eye, and take away from the view their work and weaken the eye always.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	Therefore, the first thing you should look at in the eye is whether it is clear or not, and there is no other disease besides that; then prescribe the following remedy: command the patient to put his head in your safe place, then soak those veins all around according to their wisdom, and let the soaking be subtle double according to this form:
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en I cors selonc ceste forme:	And let there be two in degrees in one course according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	then apply those forces gently, and suck out the pus an hour after another, until you can remove those veins from the oil; and be careful not to prick the oil with the points of the spatulas, and do this work at noon in front of the sun, and be very fervent in your work so that you do not cope with those veins; and when you have done this, pour green and red wine distillate into the oil to corrupt what remains from before.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	And if you cannot collect all the blood in that hour, then apply a plaster on the oil of things that ease the pain of the eyes, and let it stay for some time until the pain is eased and you are sure there is no abscess, then begin again according to this method as long as it is healthy; and this is the form of forces:
de la fistule de l’oil	of the oil fistula
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	If the mirror is called "arissati" fistula: when you treat it with fire and medicine as I have previously said, and it is not healed, then make an incision above the abscess, where it must die, and drain all the moisture that is there, until the bone is revealed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a I chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bone is revealed, and you see the corruption and the blackness, then remove all the instrument that this is made of; and it is called "hard head", and make a new one from fair iron as from the previous one, and point it as a lime if it is in the present form:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And place above the broken bone, then turn it between your two fingers, and press your hand a little until you feel that corruption is removed; do this once, then restore the broken bone with drying medicines.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	If the bone is sound, and the flesh has grown, and the body of the wound is sound, and remains thus for forty days, and it does not reopen and is not abscessed, and no bad accidents come, then remove it when it is healed; if not, there is no other remedy than to bring the fistula to the perforation of the bone according to this form: and you should uncover the bone the second time by fire, and by wet medicines, and when it is uncovered, take the iron according to this form, and make it thin at the top as you see fit.
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	Then place it above the bone of the arm, and move your hand away from the oil and the pain, then return to the full extent of the forearm until it pierces the bone and the patient feels the pain if they hold their hand above their neck; and when the medicine is dry, as I have indicated, and when the char heals and hardens the limbs, then apply the matter to the neck; it is a lighter thing for the pain.
de l’issue de l’oil	from the oil
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil I liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en IIII, et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the eyes open widely and do not stir, nor are they disturbed or soothed, then you must bind the pain; then clean it, then apply leeches or a blister to draw out the poison, then put on the oil mixed with acacia, aloe, incense, and sarcocollis, and then strain the oil, and apply it with bandages and cloths; and the manner of the cloths is that you take cloths that are soft enough, and double each in four, and then place one on top of the other according to the quantity that the eyes have had; then strain it through a thick, strong cloth, and restart the leeches or blister to draw out the poison without causing pain; then remove the leeches and leave the oil strained day and night, and if the eyes are not restored, it is good; if they are, then remove the dressing and the oil and the leeches and the blister and start again with the bandages and cloths and the oil until they are healed.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	The breaking of a silk thread
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com I grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait I fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When disruptions come in the silk thread, then open, and come forth with force as if a grain of resin, and it is easy to see; then if you see it covered, the work is such that you would drive a needle into the root of the part below this above, then drive another needle or where there is double the thickness of the arm; and pierce it, and let the first needle follow its position; then cover the doubled thread and tie a part of the silk around, and hold it well, then extract the needle and put on the other side of the oil in abundance of honey; and let it stay until the silk thread has healed with the wound, then care for the oil of things comforting until the wound is healed; and never once does the wound need to be covered by a piece of cloth from a circle, until it is healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the eyes appear greatly distorted, pierce them with a fine needle that comes from the spine, and remove the moisture and drain it away from the eyes, and enter there at once; then extract them until they are healed.
de la bowe de l’oil	from the spine
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	This disease which is called "alcunnati" is nothing more than a bone that is assembled in the spine, appearing sharp and descending, but it is not actually sharp; and the manner of its appearance in the work is such that you make the patient sit with the misaligned part straight and high, then take the head between your hands from two parts, and move the mouth until you see the bone coming up to your eyes; then sew it, and do not drain it and let it be dissolved by light, and see the things as they should be; and if it does not descend, it is sharp, and if it descends from the bone, it is not straight as we have said.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If you place the painful part between your hands, then take the thin spatula and make it over the corneal thread and the crown, as long as the bow is released; and when it is released, then pour hot, sharp oil mixed with honey, or sharp or fenugreek boiled and honey, then cure it with other cures until it is healed.
des aigues de l’oil	of the sharp oils
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit.	We have similar sharp oils in the division, and what is necessary to pierce; so work according to health.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	It is necessary for you to make the dislocated joint sit between your crossed hands, outside of the light for the sun, and apply clean and tightly stretched oil; then place the oil paper in your right hand if the joint is on the left side, or in your left hand if the joint is on the right side; then take in your right hand if the joint is on the left side, or in your left hand if the joint is on the right side, the instrument called «almagda»; then place the point of the instrument above the crown by the thickness of a rat in the blenchor of the oil at the part of the elbow, then forcefully push the instrument called «almagda» until it pierces into the blenchor of the oil, and feel that almagda comes to the empty thing; and it is necessary that the measure of the way almagda be at the front of the measure of the space that is from the golden thread to the end of the needle; and this is the crown of the oil; if you see the bone in that paper for the clarity of the cloth, then place the instrument above it where the sharp is, then expressly remove one after another.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	If it is sharp now, then he sees the hairs in front of him and the tool in his eye.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	After resting a little, and if it is sharp again, go up the second way, put the forceps with the tool, and when it is well fixed and does not rise, gently pull around your hand little by little; then put a little thread gem in place, and leave it inside.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	Then put by default the eye is cleaned or in any way wet with rose oil and plenty of honey, and tie with clean oil.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	Now, and those who are our own, put on top with plenty of honey.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if the oil cannot enter due to its hardness, because there are some men who have too hard eyes, then you must use the instrument called "alberit", of which this is the form:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	Therefore, pierce only the conjunctive solely, and do not move too much in front, but make the eye subtle, then push the hardness, as we have said; and at the completion of the work compare to the pain and drowsiness occurring, in which it sleeps on its back in the dark room; and be still of all movements, and take light meals, and do not move its head to the right or left, and let it be tied according to its disposition just before this time; then release it in this same dark room, and prove its vision, and make it see some things, and then return the bandage after six hours; and you should not do this in the early morning of the cure or after the incision now, but it is necessary that you raise it, for that the sharp pain quickly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	When abscesses appear, you should open them before the seventh hour, and relieve the swelling with what suppresses the abscess; and when it is calmed, remove the bandage and put on a new one to cover any opening, and let it stay in that dark house.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	And then gradually leave the house little by little, and turn into your own case; and do not let any disciple intervene in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	Some came to us who were from the Yrach, who told us that in their country everyone gets sick with the disease, because of which the arrowhead is successful, but I have never seen any in our land, nor have I read it in any books of the ancients; perhaps it is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And these are the similarities of the forms of almadha, because those who do not know them see them as such; and they are made of pure tin properly.
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en III angles ague.	And the heads are made from the same subtlety, and the rear in three angles.
de la char sor le neis	of the horn for the nose.
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	Never are there any noses born or made that do not resemble each other, because there are some that seem like scorpions in the mouth of the feet; and if there are such ones, and if they have a horn enlarged of bad color, and if they have a nose of good color.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	In that one of those noses which is soft, and not enlarged, it is necessary that you make the pain between your hands against the sun; and work its nostrils, and pour the essence of those noses, and the tailors away; because it corresponds to what you have sustained in the subtle spasm of a part, until you know that that nose is completely hard.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout I des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	And if there is nothing that can be covered, then open it with all the subtle and light instruments, so that nothing remains; and if it is a pustule, then cut it out as it should be; and if it is malignant pustules, then hasten and cauterize it until the wound is clean and all the poisons are removed, then pour out or drain the pus and apply a clean and sharp solution of wine.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	If the wound does not open properly, and moisture enters into the palate, then it is safe; and if the moisture does not penetrate as it should, then there is a bone above, which prevents the instruments from cutting: therefore, you must use a piece of linen thread, and hold it with both hands, and space each needle between them as much or little as necessary; and put the hairs of the patient's head through the needle in their nostril at some distance, and pull out as much as possible through the nostril inside the mouth; and often they do this to children in schools, and it is a simple thing for someone who wants to do it; then hold the thread that comes out of the nostril with one hand, and the other thread that comes out of the mouth with the other hand, and cut them alternately as if they were the threads we use.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	Do this until you see that they have not corrupted that cloth, then remove the filth, soak the blood, and moisten the rag with Egyptian oil, and return it to the nose as before; do this three times or more, until the ointment has corroded all that remains of the cloth; then put or leave a plaster on the nose for several days until it is healed, and if there is need of dry medicines, use them; and this is the form of the instrument for purging the head, by which one distills oils and medicines into the nose:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait I mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	And it should be of silver or brass, shaped like an open lamp, such as a cannon, and the conductor is used in the same way; and if you see, then make a closed cannon, and let the instrument for purging the head be plain, and have one hand on the head to hold when heating the oil or any liquid.
de la char sor le neis	of the fire cautery
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	This disease often arises at the root of the nose and is called "telul", and it grows and becomes large over time; therefore, it is necessary to cover it at the beginning, and then apply the caustic or burning medicine; if it is difficult to cover it, check if it is hard, pale, and insensitive: if it is not touched by iron, it is a hidden abscess, for when it is covered, great harm comes to the patient; and if the abscess is softly touched, not pale, and you see that it can be completely covered, then remove the disease and cure the patient of similar and restricting things.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	when the bone is cut and sewn
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	When solutions of continuity come in one of these cartilages, it is of little use, because in some people.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore, if the wound is fresh and full of blood, and then close the two lips to a seam, then treat it until it heals; and if the lips are already decayed on one side and the other, then you must scorch all the parts that are not yet healed, then gather the two lips to a seam, and hold them together, and powder with powder of dragon’s blood, and burnt incense; and put the powders on a piece of strong or other plaster, and let it soak through, then treat the wound with ointment until it heals.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The way of the stitching is such that you gather the solution: either by needles, as we have said in the stitching of the belly; or by thread, as I have told you.
des apostemes des levres	of abscesses on the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	Some people have abscesses within the lips, hard and small or larger ones; therefore it is necessary to turn the lips, and cut under each one, and take out the pus with pincers and clean every part; then apply the ointment after the incision of broken glass, until the wound is not soaked; then apply the oil, and cure the wound with dry things until it is healed.
de la char des gencives	of the teeth's gums
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Many times, abscesses arise above the gums, which the ancients called "albulus"; it is necessary to hold them with forceps at their base and cut away the pus or blood; then apply a piece of broken glass powder, or other restrictive and desiccating powders; if the gum returns after incision and often does, then cut again and cauterize: if it still does not return after cauterization, these are the forms of instruments for covering.
des sordens	of the teeth
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	Sometimes they are assembled at the top of the teeth, between the gums, sharp and ugly scrape marks; and sometimes they are black and yellow and green, until corruption comes to the gum, and are black and smelly; it is necessary that you separate the bad between your hands, and its parts should be in your holy place, and cut the teeth or the scrape marks as long as there is nothing left; and thus make black and green, and yellow and jaundice and other stains, until they are cleaned; and if what is at the first level is good, it is good; if not, start again on the second day and the third, until you have removed everything; and know that the teeth have different forms of instruments for cleaning, according to what the work demonstrates, because the scraper used to clean between the teeth has other forms than those used to clean the teeth. And these forms and others should be with you prepared.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	When treating a toothache, you should draw out as much of the pain as you can, for no one should do this; for it is a substance very high, just like that which we do not have an excuse to remove.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	Therefore, when the tooth is painful from being drawn out, it is necessary that you be certain of the tooth hurting.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	Often the pain of the tooth is relieved, and one should check if it is a holy tooth, and draw out the bad tooth; and the pain does not depart immediately, because we have already done this to such saints; and when you are certain of the tooth hurting, it is necessary that you scorch around the tooth in all directions; then press it with your fingers or subtle forceps at the first and second joint, until it is well dislocated, then firmly hold the forceps; and let the one who is suffering from the pain in your holy mouth between your teeth, and hold it so that it does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	After straightening the tooth correctly without breaking, and if it does not jump out, take any of these tools and push it lightly into each part, and shake it as you did first.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	And if the tooth is perforated and broken, it is necessary to fill it with cloths where the pulp is; and if the extraction is subtly hooked, so that it does not break when extracting; and it is very important to cover around the gum to dislodge the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	And be careful not to break it, and if a part remains, it causes greater pain from the root of the first tooth.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	And beware that you do not act as the ignorant ones do, who, through haste and recklessness, break the cart once and for all, and never amend what we have told; but bring about great disease by the roots that they delay, or by the cart that they break, as often as we have seen; and when the dense matter is drawn out, wash the leg with wine or vinegar and salt; and if blood comes, which often happens, use the leg of glass; and if it does not work, cauterize.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The shapes of the instruments, by which one draws out the dense matter first, should be long and thick-billed, so that they do not double back when you pull out the tooth; and these are the shapes:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And if they are large members such that they do not bend easily, and if they are made of iron well-made, and if they are teeth to hold the muzzle.
de la racine des dens	from the root of the tooth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou ij.,	When the root remains when pulling, then you must put soft cotton wool on the bone or two.
tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	until the bone is softened, then pull out the hooks called "algefri", of which the patient seems to have a beak; and they are made inside as a lime and this is the shape:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not want to come out with all these hooks, then you must uncover the chisel completely around the root, and put the instrument called "althali", that is, the palainche, of which this is the shape:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	And it should be both thick and large so that it does not break easily, and if its root jumps out of the sky, it is good; if the sky does not, then with all the instruments, from which the forms come after:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait II rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if it helps, use this instrument that has two prongs, from which this form comes:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other tools that are before in the reason of the teeth, and of this instrument that seems like great tweezers, from which this form comes:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	And it should be other tools that cannot break easily, and sharp enough that many dental tools are; and also other tools, which are not counted; and the wise masters find their own tool, according to their work and the disease shows them, because there are some diseases where the ancients did not teach the tool for the diversity of the use and if it does not break the cartilage or the other bones, or if it hurts, if it searches for tools that it should, as I have said, and helps with gestures, from which this form comes:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And let the bones be large and well-held to keep them from escaping, but let him hold and remove; then restore the limb with appropriate medicines for this, and if there is pus in the bone, and it is small, then he should use all of this instrument:
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a I petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When the tooth appears not according to the natural course of the body, and its shape is ugly, and especially in young women, then it is necessary that you remove the tooth after the tooth, and it is not in the right place, and no one can be made or polished: therefore, the rake; and if it is also with the tooth, take this instrument which is like a small beak, and is made of iron and sharp on top:
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And the crown piece by piece in your hands for the hardness of the tooth, and because you do not move the others, and if it appears that you can remove it, then the crown is removed with a piece of cloth like this is the shape:
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	And it is also like the root of which we make arrows; and in the tooth, piece by piece in your hands lightly, so that it does not move until it breaks; then the plain at the end with any razor, and if the tooth is too sharp and it bleeds the tongue, then you must file the sharpness until it is even, so that it does not bleed the tongue or corrupt the speech.
quant li dent lochent	when they are lost
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	When they are lost, either by percussion or by falling out, and the teeth cannot be pressed upwards because of their position, and you treat them with restricting medicines, it does not help; then you should restrain them with a gold thread, for silver thread becomes green and rots, but gold never changes; and let the thread be neither too thin nor too thick according to the quantity of the space between the teeth; and if you see the teeth approaching each other, take the thread and double it between the two healthy teeth, then put the affected teeth between the healthy ones, as many as there are or more, until you feel secure on the other side; then begin again to cover the part where you started, and gently and skillfully press your hand, so that it does not move at all; and let your thread be tied to the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	Then tie the loose threads with a thread, and gather them together, and place them between the healthy teeth, so that they do not bleed the tongue; then leave them tightly closed for as long as possible, and if they loosen, or the threads break, then tie them again with another thread; if they still remain loose, and serve as such throughout their length, and this is the form of the teeth and the arrangement of the two healthy teeth, and the two upper ones, as you see:
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And when the tooth chips, if it is reset in its place, from the front to the back, as we have said; and there is no interference that is not wise and painful, and never once has the shape of a sheep's tooth been made, and it is placed in the place where the defect is, and it is tied on as we have said, and it remains and serves as such throughout its length.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	of copper the tongue of the language
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	There are no joints in the language that come out of the tongue or nature, which is born thus; or by accident of a wound, and the operations are such that you open the mouth with the painful tongue, and hold its head in your own, and lift the tongue; then cut the nervous branch of the large, until the tongue is dislocated from its place, and if it is hard or not, and it is from a severe wound, if you beat the honey and cut the large gently; and be careful that the wound is not too deep, for the artery that is out; and when you have done, lift the shoulder of high rose and oil, or high cold, then put out of the tongue a linen tent; and the painful tongues every night, so that the wounds do not stick.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	And if bleeding occurs, apply vitriol broken glass to the wound; and if it does not stop, cauterize with slow-burning fire, which is good for the skin; then treat it with other remedies until it heals.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see that the wound is of a yellowish or black color and hard, and it does not cause pain, do not touch it, for it is a chancre; and if it is inclined to suppuration and there is moisture, pour water through a thin sponge, and deliver from one side and the other; and if it does not stop bleeding at your work, apply broken glass until it stops bleeding, then return to your work until you remove all the blood; then lift the wound off the sore and the skin, and treat with other remedies until it heals.
des apostemes de la gorge	of throat abscesses
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	There is no time when boils that are called "godath" come from the throat, and they are properly called the second pustules, and when you treat them as we have said in the division, and they are not healed, then be careful: if they are hard to touch with a small sense and a brown color, do not touch them with iron.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	And if it is red and the root is large, do not touch it with iron, also for the escape of blood; but let it be as long as it is alive, and then you will break it, or it will break by itself; and if it is of white color and the root is thin, have prepared the instrument to cover, but first check whether the abscess has settled and is calm.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	Then make the patient sit with the pain facing the sun, and his head tilted to one side, and the instrument in his hand, pressing the tongue out of the way, and the shape of it; and it should be made of silver or thin brass like some knives:
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	If you press the tongue with this instrument, and you see the abscess, then take the hook and the spoon into the wound, and scrape it out as much as you can; and take nothing else with it, then cover the instrument, which resembles a forceps, and the teeth are bent, one on top of the other, and they are very sharp, and it is made of iron or steel:
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have this instrument present, if you have copper tongs, of which the form is like this:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les II amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les II amandres igament.	And on one side, it is sharp, and on the other side, it is blunt; and when you have taken hold of one of the tongs, take hold of the other in the same manner, and after the incision, gargle the sharp pain with hot, sharp, and cool water, and if there is blood flowing, gargle the sharp pain with hot water, or use pounded crab apples, or mint leaves, and similar things, until the wound is clean; then cure it until it is healed; and never do apostems grow in the throat except for the two tongs, so take them out in the same manner as the two tongs.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	And I treated a woman with an abscess that was lodged within her throat, namely a small abscess; and it had almost completely closed off her entire throat, such that the woman could not breathe due to the swelling that was occurring, and could neither eat nor drink, and died if she remained in this state for a day or two.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	And the abscess was so large that it had been pierced with two needles through both nostrils.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	I therefore quickly pierced it with a needle on one side, then removed the pus through the other nostril, and a large portion of the abscess; then I pierced the other nostril with another needle, and held the mouth open and pressed down her tongue; afterward I pierced the needle into these abscesses, and scooped out a part, and only a little blood came out; and thus the woman's throat was relieved, and she began to drink water and wine, and did not stop cutting away at this abscess for a long time; the abscess grew again and filled up the space that I had previously emptied, until it became very large; then I pushed it out through her mouth and cauterized it inside her throat: thus it did not grow back; and I left these parts and only God knows what happened to them afterward.
de l’uve	of the eye
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	When referring to the eye, and it is swollen and long, it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is not very large and round, it is called "uve".
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	When it is treated as we have said in the division, and the cure does not improve much, and you see that the pus has subsided, and it is thin, then you should drain it; and if it is round and not very long, and it is bloody or dark red, then you should avoid incision of it.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	For there is great danger from the pain.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	When you see it, according to the method that I have mentioned, of its size and length, that you make the pain sit in front of the sun, and press the tongue with the tool that we have recalled before; then put the needle in the eye, and pull it out, and cover it with one or two of the tools that I have mentioned in the incision of the two mandrakes.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And it is necessary that you do not cover more than the superfluity that is outside the natural term; for if you cover more, it will cause great pain to the voice and speech; and after the incision, use what we have said in the incision of the two mandrakes, and cure it until it is healthy.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	And if the pain is too great for the patient to bear, then it is necessary to use a needle for cauterization of the sensitive area.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	And the manner of the cauterization is sharp and quick.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	And the pain puts his head on the clean surface, and then presses the tongue against the instrument that we have said or chapter of cauterization, and confines with sharp and live fire, so that it is not too thick or too clear; and in using this movement of the instrument, from which is the form:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés IIII jors ou V Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the head has a hair or put the medicine, like the movements of a spoon, and puts the instrument on all the medicine above the uvula; and the pain lies on his chest, so that the saliva and muscle secretion from his mouth of the medicine insides, so that it does not fall to the throat and the blood; then hold your hand on all the medicine and press on the uvula, the quantity of half an hour, until you see the relief and the medication of the medicine is calmed; and if you see, take cotton and wrap it around any instrument, and wipe the cotton in the medicine, and squeeze the instrument to all the cotton on the uvula; and do this often, until the cauterization of the medicine is perfect, then let it dry, and after four or five days. And if you have the task of restarting the cauterization of the medicine, then restart it, and after the cauterization stitch around the uvula, with cotton in butter, and clean what is around the medicine; and be arosed by sharp cold, and be cured of garglings as long as they are healthy.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en I pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait I estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This cure is more reliable with incision than with cauterization; if it is treated with fumigation in this manner, take sage and hyssop and origanum and rue and chamomile and veronica and similar herbs, and all or some of them in a pot, and put honey in it, and let it boil; and the pot should be well sealed with strong earth, and inside the pot have an instrument like this:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	And it should be of silver or tin, and one of the prongs is stuck in the patient's mouth until the steam rises to the wound through the nose, until the wound is dead; afterwards, it is often repeated until the wound dries, and make sure you do not make steam at the beginning of the appearance of the abscess, for many things happen; and do not make steam except at the decline of the abscess.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	If this instrument is not present, take a cloth and put it inside the head to cover the mouth so that the steam does not irritate the mouth; for the cloth does not cause harm to the mouth, and it is good cure together with safety.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou I morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge I fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren I estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Often it is necessary to remove objects such as bones or fish spines from the throat, or nothing at all; therefore, you should remove what you can see, and press the tongue against the sun at all times with the instrument, so that you can see the thing; and what does not open and is returned to the throat, it is necessary to make the patient vomit the object as soon as the food is cooked in the stomach; perhaps if the object is forced out by vomiting; or the object swallowed a piece of sponge, or a piece of naval, or a lettuce root, or a small piece of dry bread; and tie the sponge to the thread, and then swallow it; and when it comes back to the throat, it will be removed, and then draw out the instrument; and if it does not come out as we have said, then use the instrument according to this form:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	And let the curved instruments be bent to the head so that they can more easily enter the throat, and have the head raised high; and watch that you do not touch the epiglottis, that nothing comes into it, nor push the bone in; and it is better that the hairs push the instrument, for it is more likely that the thing is as such; if the pushing goes down, or it pulls the instrument all the way out, evenly, until it is fully out.
de la sansue de la gorge	of the throat suture
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	There is no suture of the throat, as I said in the division, by the cure of medicines; and if it does not help, then look at the throat of the hairs to the sun, then press the tongue against the instrument that I told you.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	And if you see the shoe, then trace it with a small needle, or with fine needles that are suitable for this.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	And if it does not work, then take a hair-like needle, and push it into the throat of the patient, then push or move the needle through the flesh, and do this often.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	And if the wounds are too painful all day.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	Then take plenty of cold water, open the mouth, and pour it in the direction of swallowing, and move it to their hand often; and as soon as the shoe feels the cold, it will stop.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	And if it does not smell as we have said, of sulfur, with the instrument I mentioned in the fumigation of the grape, do this many times, for it will not disappear quickly.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	And the way of the fumigation is that you hold the pot or where there is charcoal visible, and place a cloth cover on it in the middle, and in that puncture the instrument; then pour your fumigation, and put the head of the cane in their mouth, and close the mouth, so that the smoke does not escape, but comes through the nose; and the nose will now clear, and if it does not, start the fumigation again many times; and let the patient suffer thirst, and eat salty things and others, and do not drink any vinegar; and then the matter is that it should go through this government.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	And the shape of the instrument used to treat the throat, so that when it can be seen, it resembles curved needles to enter the throat; and it has the shape of a beak, and it has roughness like lime, so that whatever it takes, it cannot slip.
li chapistres des apostemes	the chapters on abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	Many kinds of abscesses are, according to what memory comes after one and another in this book, and they differ in puncturing and cutting; and it is in two ways that the one is in its own shape, and because it holds moisture.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	And the second way is for the limbs when they are at the chest.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	For the abscesses of the main type are different from those that come from the base, and the abscesses of the neck are different from those that come in joints, and each has its own judgment in the work.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	And if abscesses are to be not pierced until the swelling is completed; and if of such that it is necessary to pierce when they are crusty, and do not die according to their completion, as abscesses that are beyond joints.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	For when abscesses come beyond joints, and it is left until it is swollen inside, by chance if the ligament and nerve of the joint are corrupted, by which this is the cause of contraction in that limb.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	When the abscess is located near the main limb, and if you delay puncturing it until it dies, it will harm the main limb; or if it is located near the base, if you puncture it too late, it will not be able to heal properly, and will remain open and infected for a long time.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	And it is best to clean the wound of the abscess puncture according to its completion, and this is when the pain is eased, and the departure of the fever, and the reduction of the pain and inflammation, and the relief of the main symptoms of the abscess, and the other signs; and it is best to make the puncture where the abscess is most dependent on the body, and where it opens most easily; and let the puncture be long and straight, and if the abscess is in the hands or feet, or in joints, nerves, and arteries, and in all cases where there is no bleeding.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	In such cases, according to the affected member.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	And when abscesses are in the gut, it is better to leave the puncture until it has healed and completed digestion, as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	For if you puncture it beforehand, the blood from it will flow along with the veins, and it is full of filth; and by chance they harden the lips and pierce through it.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	And if any abscess that is punctured according to the wide vein, as the member has need of it.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	And it is necessary to re-sew small abscesses, small perforations; and in large abscesses, large perforations, and many wounds according to the appearance of the size of the abscess; and if such abscesses or it is necessary to cover the cure, and cover; when it has become as soft as cloth, and is dead, then it should be done as one does with bubbles: and if such abscesses are cut in three angles, and if such abscesses are covered like the fleece of wool, as abscesses of arrows; and if such abscesses or you make a round shape, and other shapes and coverings.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	For those who do not have a head, if the pustule is superficial, it is necessary to lance it plainly; and when the pustule is large, and has a great boil, and you lance it, do not draw out all the boil in that hour, but take a part; then stop the pustule the next day, then take nothing else; do this by many times of great and great, until the boil is all out; especially if the evils are of weak virtue, or women carrying, or small children, or old infirm.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	Because the experienced never trust with the outflow of the boil, that by chance the evils die, and you do not lose.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Avoid therefore this chapter with great caution, and when you have perceived your abscess, dry the wound, and see if the wound of the abscess is small; and if a tailor complains, mitigate with tent of linen or wool cotton; and if there are large abscesses, and there is much pus, it is necessary that you stuff each one with an envelope so that they come against each other; and if you have cut into the abscess a part of the skin, and you have twisted it around, it is necessary that you fill it with old cotton or shreds of linen to avoid moisture, and bind it to the skin; then open, and treat the wound until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	And if bleeding occurs in your work, apply sharp cold and cooling, and wipe the cloth, and place it on the affected area for many times.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the bleeding persists, apply government and treatment, and the powders I have mentioned in this book, and if it is very tense, and if the wound or abscess is very nervous, it is recommended that you place tents and moistened cloths with wine and oil; and if it is in an estate, and the wound is charred, it is recommended that you place moistened cloths with vinegar and oil, or with wine and oil, as we have said; then drain the abscess, dress it, and treat it, as it should be, until it is healed.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	And it is necessary to know universally in the treatment of abscesses: now I have told you how one must proceed before treating abscesses, and see this chapter.
des soros	of sores
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	Or when small abscesses come from the chief, and there are ways that are in cloths, such as the lance of a goose, and very much like that.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	There are also fat and such abscesses that have moisture like chickens; and if there are some that are hard and rough to cut, and there is no doubt if the artery does not contradict.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	And the operations of the abdomen are such that you should try out all the tools called "entromissoire," which is shaped like this: a thing it contains.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	For if it contains moisture, it makes it from above down long.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	And when the moisture is drained, scrape off any hair that contains that moisture, for it will remain in place if you leave anything; then dip cotton in Egyptian oil, if present; otherwise, use vinegar and salt, and apply to the wound, and leave it there the next day; and this will continue what is left overnight.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then, as before, the second day, and the third, and the fourth, until you are sure that it will not remain overnight; then treat the wound with ointment as appropriate, until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	And if the abscess is not too large, cut it open along this form, from long to short; and pour in your pus, and scrape off all the skin, and put all your care into drawing out the pus from where it is. And if the artery opposes you, do as I have told you afterwards.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	And also do the same if it is pus-filled, and cut and treat as I have told you.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	And above the abscess, if it is moist and filled with pus, it is lighter, for it contains little blood.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	And if some of these abscesses or boils have no moisture, and are like the ones I copied from an old woman; and I found the abscess as hard and rough and white as a stone, and could not break it; and if one had tried to cut it, they would have made just as bad a wound as from a stone.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	In other abscesses coming or from the base of the ears, the opening should always be made at the lowest point, to let out the pus; and treat them as appropriate.
des scrophules	of goiters
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	Many times there are abscesses at the neck, and they open the jaws, and they become swollen, and sometimes they come from other parts of the body, and they are very painful, and they are intertwined with each other.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	And each goiter is properly within its side, like the neck and abscess of the head, as we have said; and the similarities of these goiters are many.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	There are some that contain moisture, and there are some that are malignant and do not wish to obey health.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	In that one then which you see of good disposition in the throat, and is similar to the color of the heart, and moves from each part and is not attached to the nerve or artery or conduit, and is not deeply rooted; if it is necessary that you cut it from above, and scrape every part, and stretch the two lips of the mouth as in opening, if you have skill, as we have said in abscesses of the head; and draw it out slowly and surely, and be careful not to cut the nerve or vein, that the hand does not slip, and do not look too soon, before you cut what you should not.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	If you cut the vein or artery, and it does not allow you to open it, put vinegar or some powders that stop bleeding into the wound, and close the wound; and leave it until the abscess is soothed, and the wound is softened, and then begin to poultice.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	And when the wound is cleaned, return to your work, as long as you complete it; then ask your judge if there are any small scabs remaining, and cut and remove them.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	And if there is a large vein at the base of the scab, it is not advisable to cut that scab at its root, but tie it with a strong double thread, and let it drop through, without harm; then fill the wound with old cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, then treat it.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	And if you have removed the entire scab, it is necessary that you gather the two lips of the wound and hold them together, then because there is no excess left due to the size of the scab.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	it is necessary that you cover the root of it and pull out the pus, and hold it as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Those scabs that have excess left, pierce where it opens and dies; and pierce thus as the one previously said, depending, then apply bandages and similar things, so that it corrupts what remains of the corruption; and when the wound is well dressed, if the cure of ointment encouraging char, until they are healed.
de squinance	of squinting
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	The ancients spoke and said of the throat-cutter; but I never saw one in our land, and this is their written account.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en II amandres.	For those who have squinting, it is necessary that the edge of the throat which is called "epiglottis" be avoided; and this cannot be helped because all the veins and the mouth of the evil are in those who have abscesses high in the mouth, or in the throat or in the tonsils.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the disease is in the mouth of the evil, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to avoid the danger of strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige; et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	Therefore, when we want to cut the epiglottis, it is necessary that we cut it out in three circles or four, with a small cut across between the two circles or by the amount of the cut through the soft tissue, not into the cartilage; and those cuts are suitable for the section of the epiglottis that there is no danger, and the vessels are long and can be tied.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit; et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix; et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	And if the master is not afraid, then it is necessary to stretch the skin of the neck all around, then cut the throat until it reaches the windpipe; avoid the blood vessels of blood, if you see anything, and then cover the wound as we have said; and it is demonstrated by the section of the stream of the windpipe that jumped through the bone that was broken, and by the lack of voice; and leave the wound open for a piece.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les II levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the hour has passed for which we doubt strangulation, gather the two lips of the wound together, and hold them all in place without the cartilage; then administer medicines that cause the birth of heat, until they are healthy.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Albucasis says that one should not do this as long as the throat is completely stiff, and the hairs are judged to be dead, and the defect does not return.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort; et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee; et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	Then one should remove the epiglottis for this reason that the hairs cannot remain, and he breathes through the wound, and thus is kept from death; and because they commanded the ancients to leave the wound open until the malice of the disease had passed, and it had passed in three days or four. And then they commanded to sew the wound and cure, as long as it was healed; and I will tell you what I saw.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon; et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	I saw that a young lady took a knife, and stabbed herself in the throat, and cut part of her windpipe; and I was called to cure her, and found her as if she were dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I discovered the wound, and found the arrow that had come out of it, and although she had not bled much from the vein, the blood was coming out through the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee; et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition; por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	I hastened, and sewed the wound, and cured it until it was healed; and she did not die, but only lost her voice, and returned to her usual state; because I know that there is no fear in the healer of the epiglottis.
de la grosse gorge	of the large throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes; et est selonc II manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	This abscess is called "hernia of the throat", and it is a great abscess in the color of a yolk, and is very common in women; and it occurs in two ways: natural and accidental; or naturally, without cause.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere; et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire: se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point; et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And the accidental way is in two ways, one of which is similar to a large goiter, and the other way is similar to an abscess that comes from us through an artery; and there is fear, and it should not be opened except by a small incision in the chest, and the proof and search are made throughout the neck: if you find it as in a large goiter, and cannot be removed at all, if it covers, as one covers a large goiter, and remove it completely, if there is none; and search well and treat it as necessary until it is perfectly healed.
des nous	The fire cautery in
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances; et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	There are many ways we have, and I will tell you all the similarities; but now it is necessary for me to say all the difference between us and the issue.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that the issue is cold and fever-causing, until the boils have passed, and it is accompanied by the purgation; then the fever and the cold rest.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros; et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	With our way, there is neither cold nor fever nor pain, and it contains the syphilitic pustule, which is its own disease and is according to the color of the body, and begins like a small boil, and becomes large; and they are similar in two ways, either dry or moist, and many colors are as I have said in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	When coming to the care of a new patient, it is necessary to first test and inquire about the instrument called "entromissoire", according to its form as described in the following chapter.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme; puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	And the method for inquiring about abscesses is that you press or slightly wet the finger that you will use to probe into the abscess, and gradually return it, until you know that the instrument has reached the core, according to the size of the abscess; then remove the entromissoire, and be careful not to let it slip.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes; et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout; et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	If the running wound is red in color, make it as I have described for other abscesses; and if after using the entromissoire there is no more running, know that it is thick, then cut it in a cross shape, and take pincers, and scrape lightly from every part and remove the cloth where it lies, that you may take it out with the new patient; and if you cannot take it out whole, then tear it into pieces so that nothing remains.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois; et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	If nothing remains, it returns to us many times; and if it lingers a little, and does not bother you, apply some corrosive powders to the wound, keep the wound clean, and apply soothing remedies to the abscess, and treat other cures until it is healed; and if it is great, cut off both lips of the wound, and treat what remains with char.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet II jors ou III, tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	And if it continues to beat against you or other things, and hurries you, apply the broken glass of vitriol to the wound, and let it remain for two or three days until the wound heals, and rest the abscess of the blood; then return to cover what remains of the wound.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule; et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule; et sont de III manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	Here are the forms of the instruments used for extracting stones, and there are three kinds: large, medium, and small; and there are three quarters that are called "albarret", and one that is called "breb", and there are three kinds: large, medium, and small, to extract the stones of fistulas; and they are also like the needles that one uses for sewing, and they are made of gold, or iron, or silver, and they cost as much as those that are already yellow, and they are more useful for extracting the splinters of fistulas; and they are three kinds: large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the width of the fistulas.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi; et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	The forms of the nails are of many similarities, as you see here: large, medium, and small; and if there are nails that have two thorns in three ways; and if there are nails that have three thorns, and are also in three ways; and if there are nails that have two thorns, and a single thorn nail, and are also in three ways; and all this is necessary in their place.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf; et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes; et sont de III manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois; et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus; et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	The heads of these that are used to make them are sharp, and there are some that do not cut except from one part, from which we remove the skin, because they do not cut the vein or the nerve; and of these intruments are the needles placed in sheaths, so that the pain does not persist at the opening of the abscesses; and there are three kinds: large, small, and medium, as you see; and one never uses more than one sharp instrument like this, except in the hollow parts, such as legs, arms, and breasts, and in similar places.
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	And it is never placed back into the joint that should be aligned with veins, and arteries, and always returns according to this great form:
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme; et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	Never inflate the breasts of some men when they begin to rot, as they seem like breasts of women; and they remain swollen and inflamed, and whoever wants to cure them, should follow this form of this line b. until g.:
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures; de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.; puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif; et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	Then scrape off the fat, and fill the wound with medicine mixed with charcoal, then stitch together the two lips of the wound, and treat it until it is healed; and if the breast sinks down, and is softened by its great size like in women, then make it into two pieces above, by similar cuts; so that one holds to the other at the end of each, so that the largest line contains the smallest according to this form, from this line b. to the line g.; then scrape off the skin that is between the two lips, and remove the fat, and apply what we have said about stitching and powders, and what is necessary in the cure, until it is healed; and if it is not healed, or the incision is not made completely, because the pains do not want to rest, or due to the flow of blood, then it is necessary to fill the wound with cotton moistened in a corrosive ointment; and leave it until it melts the remaining fat, then treat it until it is healed.
des apostemes des asselles	of abscesses of the knees
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	These abscesses that come from the knees are ways of hard scrofula when there are lumps, and they contain moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Therefore, those that contain moisture should be cut according to this form, from the line b to the line g:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when all the cavity that is in the abscess is emptied, then apply old cotton to the wound, and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton, and treat the wound with ointment until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscess is similar to scrofula, then make an incision as we have said for cutting into scrofula, and if the wound opens again, then cauterize as we have said before.
de la routure de l’artere	of the tearing of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme; et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont; et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans; et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	When the artery is torn, and the flesh above is hardened, then often abscesses form, and also blood and pus flow; and if you know it is for the artery, then make an incision long and parallel; and when you feel it with your fingers, it is stretched; and if it is for the vein, then make a long incision below; and it is foolish to cover this abscess, and especially when it is outside of the bones and angles and neck and mouth of other wounds, and it is very large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc; puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte; puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples; puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme; puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient; puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit; puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil; et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus; puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez; puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	It is therefore necessary to use the iron cautery, and the one who is at the head should also use it, and in the one who is swollen due to an artery bleeding through the long skin; then open the belly as much as possible, and tear the artery from the cloth until it is exposed; then remove one needle, and pierce the other on the other side of the rib, and hold the artery with a double thread in II loops, according to what I have shown you in the extraction of the two arteries that are in the temples; then do not remove the flesh that is between the two ribs of an intercostal until the pus that is inside is removed, and remove the abscess; then remedy the care that has been injured, as long as the rib is healed; then cure what is related to ointment for this, as long as it is healthy; and if the abscess is in the belly of the vein, if you dip your hand in the pus that comes from the abscess to all the skin, then remove the needle from the hand that you hold, and pierce it, and there should be a double thread, so that you can pull it from the other side; then tie the abscess as I have told you, or the thread of one of the two parts of the question as the thread of the first needle; and if you doubt that the thread will not hold, then remove another needle from all the abscess to the incision of the first needle, and hold the threads in four loops; then cover the abscess until the excess is removed, then cover the excess of the wound and leave what is attached; then put a piece of moist linen cloth in wine and oil, then remedy the care of tents and ointments until it is healthy.
des apostemes des ners	of abscesses of the neck
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	Similarly, abscesses come in the artery and vein, abscesses also come to the neck when it is cut, or from too much work, and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor; et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur; et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction; et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	And they often occur in the helpers and the doors and in all the places where there are joints, and that is very painful, and its color resembles the color of the blood, and it is in many different positions with pain; and when it is stretched, it causes great pain, and does not remain in place, but outside the skin; and it moves from all parts, and does not go forward or backward, or outside or above, and those who are in the joints do not need to cover with iron: perhaps they cause contraction; and those who are at the top or front, make the skin thin.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine; et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the abscess is small, if it has a point to a needle, and the copper at its root; and if it is large, if it hangs by the tip, and the skin, then the bone and assemble the wound at the seam, and the cure until it is healed.
des grosses boces pendans	of large swellings hanging
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans; et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	There is never any in the belly and not in other parts of the body, and it is a disease called "funge" by its resemblance to mushrooms, and it has a subtle root, and large and small; and I saw the man who had two or bellies that were more like funges than anything else, and there was no difference, and they were white, and had a thin root, and they were torn, and they bled with moisture.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine; si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	I copied and found in one XVIII ounces heavy, and in the other VI З., and the works in the incision is that you look if the hairs are moist, and the color of the arrow is white and moist and of subtle root; if the copper has a wide spatula, and they are in your presence the fire cauterization.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer; et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors; et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	For in cutting often comes too great damage of blood, and if you see the hair is spouting and dangerous from the incision of the iron, then take the thread of good quality, and tie the arrow as we have said, and leave it II hours; then restrain, and do not cease to pull the thread of good quality until it copes the arrow, and cut through it with work; and if the roots are large, then use the copper itself for the belly, but you must well copper the other half, then cauterize that it does not revisit; then care for the wound, and guard that you do not copper the thread which is of pale color and poor sense and of lait regard.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For these infected abscesses, and I will come to treat sores like this afterwards.
quant li boude ist fuer	When the shoulder is bruised
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit; et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	If the appearance of the bruise comes from fire wound or cut of the gangrene, and is above the belly and in some of the sores, as it has in other wounds, of blood which cut veins or arteries according to what is before, or of swelling; and if it is from the cut of the gangrene and from the issue of the pus, then the color of the abscess is like the color of the flesh, and it is a light thing without pain, and open from various issues.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is due to the issue of the intestine, then it is more diverse, and when one presses it at its two ends, and it returns, and perhaps it tears, and greatly enlarges at the entrance of the bath and for great labor.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit; et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	And if it is due to moisture, it is a light thing, and opens well when one presses it with their hand, do not force much; and if it is due to arrows, it is large and hard, and is like a pustule in quantity; and if it is due to windiness, it is soft to the touch, and the signs are that you look to see if it is for the blood of the artery, or of the vein, or windiness.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	If you must leave, let the care be done by someone else.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	For in the work of this chapter, there is often doubt and fear, such as I have told you about abscesses, for the artery and for the vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude; puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine; puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz; puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine; se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre; et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit; et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier; puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi; ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit; et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	And if the appearance is for the intestine or the bladder, it is necessary to command the patient to dye his clothes, and be extended straight out, then seize all around the belly; then command him to lie still between your hands, then go around the limb that you have designated as the great sinew; then extend half of the abscess above all the large sinew; then tie it tightly with a strong silk cord, and so be the other half of the abscess lying flat; then cut through the skin, and withdraw the intestine; if you pierce the great sinew, remove it, and draw out the intestine from behind the belly; and if you pierce the bladder, take it at the base, and cop the excess; and if the artery makes you go against it, or the vein, go around it slowly, then return to your work and take two needles, and cut off two pieces of thread, and cut through the skin as you have done before; then pierce the abscess in four places above the needles, and if you see, remove the needles, and leave the limb as long as it can bear, and let the dead flesh die by itself; or you take it when it has become thin and ready to die, then treat the limb as we have said; and strain out the pus or moisture that you find, then treat the limb as it needs, and soak the limb.
dou chancre	For the fire cautery, instruct
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	We have mentioned in the division the similarities of chancre, and how to treat it with medicines, and how to avoid the cure of iron; and we say that chancre occurs in the mouth, and great caution is needed in its treatment, and the ancient one says that when chancre is in a place where it can be removed as if it were chancre which is in mammary glands, and in the breasts, and in similar places, and it should all be removed when it is at the beginning; and when it is large and old, if it does not matter that you approach it, for I have never been able to cure any of them; and no one has ever cured any before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide I boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the surgeries, when it is in the place where it can be removed, as we have said, is that you remove once the pain of black bile; then clean it if it has obvious repletion, then wipe the pain on good flesh to do the surgery; then pour your instruments or poison, and the hair from all parts, and the bone from all parts without leaving anything; and let the blood flow fully, and well wipe the wound with your hand or something, and if the bleeding does not stop, it is contrary to the incision of the artery or vein, so cauterize until the blood is stopped; then treat other treatments until it is healed.
de ydropisie	of dropsy
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer: lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	We have said in the previous division the similarities of dropsy, and how the assembly of the swelling is made, and the signs of each similarity, and the cure that is made by medicines, and that which is cured by iron: if it is only swollen; and one should not touch with iron in these two similarities: that is to say, tympanites and hyposarche, for it is a fatal thing; therefore when you treat this similarity of dropsy which is called «eclites» by medicines, and the cure does not work, if you look at whether the pains are weak, or if he has another disease besides dropsy, as all and solution of vomiting and similar things; then do not touch with iron, for there is doubt; and if you see the patient of great virtue, and he has no other disease except dropsy alone, and he is not too young nor too old, then thus proceed: raise the patient upright over your hands, and the assistants press the belly pushing the swelling to the lowest part of the worst, then take the spatula in this form:
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	And be cutting of two parts.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier; puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu; puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	And cutting at the tip, and ensure that no part is too thin so that it can reach the intestines when thrown, and cannot be bleached; then check if there is hydrops towards the intestines: if it is necessary to make an incision III dozen straight down from the side of the belly; and if it is for the liver disease, then your cut should be on the left side of the belly III dozen; and if it is for the mucus, then it should be on the right, and it is not necessary that the hairs grow over the cut so that the excess does not run to the weakest limb; then pierce the skin with the instrument, and push, and lift your hand from all the space between the skin and the stomach as if scraping at the quantity of an angle or around; then pierce the stomach until the space reaches the desired length, and this is the legs of the needle, then remove it, and it is bent in this instrument with which this is the form:
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus; et II d’autre part, et I d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	And it is similar to a thin silver chain, and it is of light rain or light rust, and it has a small puncture on its part; and it costs one third on one side, two on another side, and one on the other; and it is the same as the one that is cut as a pen, and it is the form of the incision that the scribes make the pen:
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort; mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit; fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	At the top of the instrument is the alarm, so that when the instrument comes to the tip, if you draw it now above the instrument; voiding the half or the third part, because if you void more than it should be in that hour, by chance if the pain dies from the resolution of its spirit of the arm, or it hits palm, or it approaches to death; but in voiding according to the quantity of its virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the virtue of the pain mean, and its pricks; then remove the instrument and retain the tip, and it is retained now for the one who pierces the puncture that is above the tongue, of which I have spoken, that you perforate in this manner; then restart the instrument the next day, if you see the pain suffering thus, and take a small quantity from the tip; do this every day, and guard yourself from following as long as it does not delay but a little bit of the tip.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	If you doubt the pain and leave it for a long time, the cure of the sepulture or sandbath, and by much sweat or bath and in the sun, and if it is tainted with drinking; and the cure of desiccative medicines as long as it is healthy, and cauterize above the stomach and above the liver and above the spleen after the extraction of the sharp object, as I have said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	of the removal of the staff
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	No child ever is born without a sharp object in the staff, or the sharp object is small, or it is not in its place.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	If it is necessary to prick quickly, do not pierce at all points with great subtlety according to this form:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	Then put or puncture the subtle needle deeply, and hold it and him thus three times or four, and when he wants to make urine, if it is not convenient, for the urine that comes forth does not leave it closed.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	If the one who is punctured is small, it is treated with a subtle needle as we have said, and it will expand.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	Those who do not have the puncture in their own flesh are blinded, for no one is born with the puncture at the top of the staff, because they cannot urinate before they leave their staff high; and they cannot urinate because the matter cannot come to the marrows, and it is a very bad disease.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the manner of the work is such that the hairs lie evenly on their backs, the head of the knife and the coping are as wide as the tail of a quill, so that when the puncture is made in the middle, it is done as it should be; and guard against bleeding which often comes, and if it does, stanch the blood with the same liquid that stops blood, and treat the wound until it is healed.
des pustules de la verge	of the pustules of the knife
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a I oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	often come worms in the knife, and it is an ugly appearance; and there are malignant and non-malignant ones; if you should prick them with a fine needle, and cut and clean all of them, then put on moist cotton bandage; then treat the wound until it is healed.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	And if the wound is malignant, with a putrid color and foul smell, then you must cauterize it with fire.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	When you have cleaned it, and if the wound is deep into the flesh and partly inside the skin and partly outside, then you must first remove the part that is inside; and when it is clean, then treat the part outside.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	For when you treat them together, do not be sure that the arrowhead is not piercing, and if it becomes black and corrupt inside and at its base; then remove everything that is black and corrupted, then apply a poultice made of honey and flour mixed with ground peach and almond kernels, then treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	And if there is a flow of blood, then treat the lunar cauterization according to this form:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars; et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	The cauteries aid in two dispositions together: that is, at the flow of blood and at corruption; and if the patient's penis is corrupted and retracted, it is necessary to apply a cloth soaked in piss to the wounds and urinate on them; and when the skin has erupted at the head of the staff that has not yet been circumcised, or for a wound or abscess, then it is necessary to scorch it with the instrument of hair, until the flesh is separated, and deliver the patient from all parts of the staff; and if it is a difficult matter to devise this cure, then it is necessary to scorch it at the head of the staff and the skin, and apply a subtle cloth of moist linen, cold, so that it does not erupt again.
de la circoncision	Of circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Circumcision is not different from other wounds; therefore, when we perform this work of our will, and properly with children, it is necessary that we do the best work, and the least harmful to health.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancients did not direct circumcision of their children, because they did not use it in their law, and we have only what we have acquired by experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor I dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a II toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	Because I have seen the greatest part of the masters and the wise men who performed circumcision around the time of the Deluge, and at all ages; if it was the best because it had two layers, and perhaps if one coped with the other above and delayed the other below.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	Or the recovery is prolonged, and the pain is doubled, and the wound healing which is done with the point of a member is not assured; and the healing of the wound by chance may escape the iron, and corrupt the work, and many times it happens that they are born in such a way that they have no need of healing and I have seen it.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	Of the wound healing which is done with force throughout the entire length of the thread, I have found the best of the experiment, for the forces cut just as well above as below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien; et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge; puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	For when you press your hand, it cuts equally throughout the entire length; but that the thread be well stretched around the skin; and in the manner of the first work is that you make the child think that you are only tying the thread around the stick as much as possible, and then throw the force between your hands or away from your feet so that the child does not see it, nor any of the instruments; then close your hand around the stick and blow gently, and take it up as high as the part of the stick is whole; then clean the dirt that is gathered there, then tie the limb with a double thread, then tie the other end to the other thread; and hold the two threads together with the second piece of cloth and the index finger, and press between the two threads, then lift the force gently and take the head of the stick; then let the blood flow little by little, for it is the most dangerous; and put powder on top and on top of the powder a plaster made from a piece of raw fat cooked with rose water, confit with rose oil and fresh, and leave it there until the next day, and cure the other wound as long as it is healed.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The form of forces for the mummification is as follows: the two heads should be tight and sharp, and the two hands should be equally large.
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	The error of mummification is when the knife is too short for the incision; therefore, you should extend it to your elbow, and similarly, the copper, and if you cannot hold it at your elbow, then use tongs and then the copper.
Et s’il trespassent III jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	And if they have passed three hours, and what is outside the rod is swollen, let it remain until the abscesses are calm, and scrape lightly; and if the copper, as you can move it, and keep it away from the part of the rod, it will not harm them.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore, treat the limb of things that are dirty wounds from powder, which we have said or treated for powders, and if you exceed measure, it will not harm; therefore, treat as we have said until they are healed.
dou retenement de l’urine	retention of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division; et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e; et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	Retention of urine is due to obstruction of the stone, or of blood congealed, or of bowel, or of a charred, or of similar things, which we have said in the division; and if the urine is not released, and you see that the retention by the stone which is hanging or collapsing the bladder, then it is necessary to raise the legs above the back, and put the feet on the back, and extend the belly from the part above the back, and restrain the legs as much as possible; and therefore, the neck of the bladder is pressed against the stone above, for which reason the urine is released, and if it does not come, as we have said, and the legs feel great pain, then you must administer extraction with all the instrument called «siringue», of which this is the form: and it should be made of thin silver wire, like the quill of an egg; and it should be made of a palm length and half, and it should be thin at the tip.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede; puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine; et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	And the manner of the issue of urine is such that you take a double thread, and tie the head of the thread to the top of a piece of wool or cotton, and bore the head of the thread into the tube; and wrap the excess wool and bore it at the head of the tube, then oil the tube with oil or butter and eggs, and make the patient sit on a stool, and the urine and the cloth moistened with warm oil and olive oil and vinegar; then put the tube lightly in the cloth, until it reaches the root of the cloth, then double the cloth over towards the bottom; then bore the tube forward just before the cloth, and the patient feels the urine coming near the empty thing, and this is not made according to this order except for the reason that the conductor or she goes is twisted; then stretch the thread all along the wool piece by piece, and the urine follows the wool, then extract it forcefully, and correct the urine; and repeat the tube until the bladder is empty and aligned with the patient.
des maladies de la vessie	of diseases of the bladder
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When scarabs or blood come into the bladder, and putrefaction is present, and you see it dripping watery and medicinal substances, then use any instrument called "clepsydra", and this is its form:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus: II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est; et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	It is closed, and has three holes: two on one side, and one on the other, as you see; and the threads are passed through it so that the medicine can penetrate well to the end of the catheter, so that the moisture can be drawn out, and put back when necessary; and when you see your medicines entering the bladder, place the tip of the catheter in the moisture, and pull the tube out; then draw the moisture into the catheter, and plug it strongly; then the moisture will enter the catheter, and come to the bladder now, so that the patient will feel it; and this is the form of the subtle clyster which is used to clysterize the bladder: it is thus:
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie; et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	And it is of silver or of lead, and it is the highest of the bones; and it is removed from the side where the tendons are; then take a sheep bladder and put the moisture that you see clisterizer the bladder, then tie it between the two breasts with a good wool thread doubled, and heat the moisture above the fire; then pour the head of the clistere into the staff, then hold your hand on the bladder all around the moisture, until the pain feels that this moisture has come to the bladder; and if you do not have the bladder, take a piece of parchment, and make a circle, and pierce it roundly around; then tighten the thread strongly in these holes, then assemble the circle as one assembles the dal, and put inside what you see oil and moisture and vinegar, and tie it in the tool; and do as you have done with the bladder, to press your hand until the moisture comes to the bladder.
de la piere	of the stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have already spoken in the section about stones, and their extraction together with medicines; and I have mentioned the difference between a stone in the rain, and all the signs, and which kind of stone one should open with an incision; and in the bladder, and in the staff; and I will tell you clearly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont IIII ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I say that the stone which is embedded in the bladder occurs more often in children, and this is a sign that the sharp pain of the bladder, like a sharp sting in its subtlety; and it opens hair, and gives great pain to the staff, and can happen many times, and then it returns; and at too many of these jumps, the foundations; and it is light to the healing of children up to the age of four, and is very painful in old people, and is constant in those between middle age and old age; and it is a lighter cure for those who have large stones, than for those who have small ones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	And when we come to the treatment, it is first necessary to cleanse the wound with a poultice, to draw out all the matter that is in the intestines.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	For it never clogs when seeking the stone.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche dedens; se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	Then take the wound by the feet, and make it stand upright and move away from the opening, so that the stone descends to the edge of the bladder, and does not once rise above the thigh; then place it between your hands and clean it, with your hands away from your thighs, so that the bladder is completely drained below; then grasp and touch it inside; if you feel the stone in the space, then hurry now to cut across the stone.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	And if she does not chew at all, then moisten your index finger of your right hand with oil, if the hairs are fine, or your middle finger, if they are coarse; and place it on its base, and press against the stone, and when you feel it at your finger, then wet the neck of the bladder; then press upwards towards where you see it cut.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	And command the minister to press the bladder with his hand, and command him to extend his right hand towards the testicles, and his left hand to remove the skin which is outside the testicles in the part where the incision is made; then cut the spongy tissue, of which this is the shape:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans; par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	And making between what is between the ribs and the foundation, not in the middle but on the right side of the naval; and the straightness should be above the stone, and the breadth should be at the foundation or the base, and the thickness should be at the traverse so that it is wide by lack, and narrow inside, according to the quantity of the stone, not too large; perhaps the pressure of the knife that is at the foundation, that it does not tear off too much; and if there are pieces of stone or angles, and margins: if it is greasy to issue; and if there is a piece that is soft, similar to a cloth, and rounded, from which the issue is light.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole; et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	When there are angles and margins where it is, make the incision larger; and if it does not jump, then you must strain it with pincers that are like a lime at the head, to prevent the stone from escaping; or you beat out of the instrument subtly curved at the head; and if you cannot engage it thus, enlarge the point a little, and if there is no decortication, then strain it with vinegar; and if there are more than one stone, first take out the largest at the neck of the bladder, then cut above, then remove the small ones afterwards if there are more.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	And if it is very large, it should be made larger, and a larger wound should be made.
Car II choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces; et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	For two things happen to the wound: either it dies, or the urine comes out through the place where the sutures cannot hold; but nevertheless you must try to draw it out, or to tear it with pincers, until you pull it out in pieces; and when you have completed your work, fill the wound with incense and aloe and dragon's blood, and bind it, and put a moist cloth over it with oil and wine, or oil and vinegar and cold rosewater, to soothe the inflammation; then replace the wound on its back, and do not leave the ligature until the next day.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you reset it, the joint should rise very well with oil and vinegar, then treat it with ointment and basilicon until it is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit; puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	And if abscesses come into the wound and corrosions, and clots of blood in the bladder, and it is retained by urine, which is known in a certain way as without leakage with urine: then treat the wound with vinegar and salt and honey, and extract that blood, for if it remains, it will rot the bladder and cause it to burst; then lift the wound with vinegar and salt and honey, and assist in all ways that you can until it is healed; and it is necessary that all the ointments that you cure it with, that you bind the two thighs together, and gather the medicines above the wound.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	And if the arrow is small and is conducted with a rod, and is pierced through, and urine cannot issue; then as I have said before, you must cut it many times, or excuse the cutting for this cure.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	I have experienced this before.
Pren I foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a III angles fichiees en I tison:	Take iron in this form and be three corners pierced through with one thread.
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	Then take a thread and wrap it around the rod outside of the arrow, so that it cannot come back into the bladder; then lightly press the iron into the rod until it reaches the arrow; and slowly turn the iron in your hand on the other side of the arrow, as much as you can pierce the arrow from inside the rod. If urine comes out soon, then press your hand above what is left of the arrow that is inside the rod.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides; et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is currently broken, and has jumped with the urine, and is sharp to the hairs; and if you cannot do this for any reason, then tie a thread below the stone and another above, then make the rod in the middle of the stone between the two threads, then pull it out, and release the thread, and clean the clotted blood that is in the wound; and treat until it is healed.
de la piere des femmes	of the stone of women
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por III choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	There is hardly any stone in women, and if it ever happens, the treatment is difficult, and it is forbidden for three reasons: the first is that perhaps the woman is a virgin; and the second is that one cannot find a woman well-knowing who will undress herself, specifically when she is chaste.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere; et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	And the third way is that by chance one cannot find a woman well versed in this art of hands; and the fourth way is that if the woman's stone is larger than the man's, it is necessary to make a deeper incision, and there is great fear involved. And if necessary, it is necessary to grab a woman who is very skilled, and point out where the truth lies, and if you do not find it, then it is necessary to use a very subtle mirror; and present a wise woman in the life of women, or a woman who knows part of the art, and command her to do what you command of the examination of the stone; and look very carefully if the woman is a virgin: therefore it is necessary to put her hand on her belly and ask for the stone; and if she finds it, she must hold her hand outside her belly, and recommend that she put her hand on her belly and press firmly.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite; puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	If she finds it, it is necessary that she moves it from great to great from the entrance of the anus until it reaches the root of the thigh; then cut across the bone at the root of the thigh against the middle of the bone where it is muffled and feels the arrow in that part; and do not move her body above the arrow or below, and let the tailor make a small opening in the first place; then push the arrow through the opening in the belly until the arrow can be removed, and there are many ways of arrows: namely, small and large and sharp and blunt, long and round and rough and smooth, and those that rain.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	if you know the similarities to know the outcome.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre; et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	And if you do not know it, put the reed of vinegar on the wound, and keep it there for an hour until the pain is gone; then return to your work, until the arrowhead is softened, and have the instruments that I told you about in the extraction of the arrowhead to help you in your work; and if you do not know it, and it is the artery that has been cut, put powder on the wound and bandages and bandages, and do not start again, and leave the arrow and do not pull it out, lest by chance the patient might die; then cure the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of the blood is calmed, and the wound has stopped bleeding, return to your work, until the stone is fully formed.
de hernie carnouse	The text you provided is in Old French, which is a language that was spo
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit I autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	The text you provided is in Old French, which is a language that was spoken in France during the Middle Ages. It is not a language that I can understand or translate.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	The text you provided is in Old French, which is a language that was spoken in France during the Middle Ages. It is not a language that I can understand or translate.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus; et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	And sometimes it comes from percussion on the teeth, and this moisture has many colors: whether it is declining to yellow, or without red, or black, or watery white, and so on; and these are the signs to recognize this assembly, because if it is white or facial as we have said, then it is the abscesses we have mentioned, I.e., long and shaped like an egg, and does not open the gums, because it has moisture all around.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef; et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	And if it has moisture in its own cloth, then it is the abscesses we have mentioned with part of an egg, and because people think it is another egg; and if the moisture is between the skin of the teeth and the white facial, then it feels bad; therefore when you see the color of the moisture, try all the surrounding parts to know its form as before.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to what comes after the introducer, judge what is inside.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz; puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions; puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir; puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue; et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when we treat it with iron, it is necessary to clean the hairs according to the power and replacement of its body; then place it on its back, on something a little high, and cover it with much cloth; then bend towards its right side, and command the minister to bend towards the left, and extend the rod to one of the two ribs near the kidneys; then take the spatula and scrape the skin of the kidneys from long to over the sharp edge, and scrape the skin subtly according to power; then pierce the white plain of the kidneys with a sharp and wide cut, and remove all the sharpness, and then put your forceps, and press the kidneys back; do not touch the ribs except the kidneys; scrape the entire costeit of it subtly, if you do not scrape it well, it will return to sharpness; and if the kidney jumps from your work, then reset it in its place when you have completed the work of the kidney; then gather the two lips of the kidneys at a seam, then treat it as the other wounds, until it is healed.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	And if you suspect that the wound has become corrupted with another disease, it is necessary to bind the vessels that are suspendable, doubting the flow of blood; then cut the cord at all the suspendable parts, and extract the wound, and treat it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset; et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	And if the bone is assembled in two parts together, which are two branches; then treat the other part as you have done the first evenly, then suck out the blood, and put on the wound some linen moistened in rose oil; and put on the other linen moistened in wine and oil, and place it above the two cords, and place doubled cloths on top, and tie it above the limb that is according to this form:
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier; et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers; si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	Then take two cloths, and place them with linen bandage according to this appearance and be assembled by sewing in the neck of the breeches, and the one of the injured person above the buttocks, and the other at the part of the elbow; and the other head above the two angles, and all assembled the restriction in the loop of the breeches; and once this branch of cautery in the shape of an iron tail, and is that you take one cauterizing needle subtle, and cover the skin of the wounds, and be heated as we have said, so that the white pus that contains the acid is discovered; then take the cautery according to this form, and perforate this pus with small holes, and the skin with this subtle cauterizing:
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille; et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	And in all ways that you can, until you remove everything; and guard that the blade does not touch the bone; and make sure this work is safer; and keep from bleeding, and make sure the incision does not become infected; and if anything goes against you, such as an abscess or bleeding or infection, cure what goes against you according to what has been said before.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit; pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer; puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee; et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	And if the wound is painful and does not want to undergo this work due to its horror, then use perforation, as I have told you, and it is that when you are sure by the signs that we have said that the sharp object is in, then sit the wound on a raised seat; then pierce the abscess at the part farthest from everything wide, and place the perforation down the long axis of the body; and make it wide enough so that all the sharp object comes out, then put cotton on the wound, and tie it, and let the remaining sharp object drain, then treat it until the wound is healed; and if the white cloth does not allow the sharp object to come out of the wound mouth, then you must insert a pen or the instrument used to remove the sharp object from hydropiques, because its form is as before; and enlarge the wound slightly, and make sure the sharp object returns, and is assembled after six months or within a year, and when it is assembled as before, and so on the sharp object will pass.
de l’aposteme des coions	of abscesses of the joints
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse; et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	There are many positions in this section of the branch that cause fear to many, which seems to me to be better left alone; and I will tell you about the work and similar things of the abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	Therefore, many abscesses come from wounds and immediately to joints; and this is often the case.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion; et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief; et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	It is to know from excessive sharp and cold, which is spread in joints, or from impact; and the color of the abscess is according to the color of the wound; and it does not cause pain, and it is a grievous abscess; and perhaps some greyish, pus-filled, and foul-colored abscesses come from a vein or an inflamed vein.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois; et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	When it is due to an artery, it is known by the position of the abscess, when you press it with your fingers; and you should only touch it.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars; et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	He who is made of opening a vein is known by its position at the expression of gentle touching with the fingers, and can well make the incision on this resemblance, and on the other parts; and you should cover the wounds, then the wound in the top, and the tail of the white fac, and deliver the suspensoire from all parts of the wound.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope; et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	If the wound is already sewn with these needles, then you should make the incision, and cover; and if it is in the white fac, or in what is inside the vessels, then you should deliver all that is held, and cover it roundly.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the arrow's head is behind the shoulder, then it is necessary to cut off everything, and extract the arrow, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your surgeries are completed, apply the wound with a soft cloth soaked in rose oil and wine, then treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the groin
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait; et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	This is an abscess surrounded by a pus-like envelope, with the softening of the groin, and the pain is severe when it moves; and the treatment of this disease is just as difficult and dangerous as the previous one, and we will tell you about its surgery, according to what the ancients did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment; puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples; puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief; puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues; puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions; car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz; si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	It is necessary to seat the misaligned joint on its proper seat, then lift the suspensor muscles with your fingers to the verge of the tendons, and stretch them evenly; then cut the spatula widely across the traversing part of the tendons, until they are exposed, and then scrape each part, as we have said in the extraction of arteries which are in the temples; then take a needle or double thread, and tie it to the first limb where the blood came from, and tie it to the other end; then stitch them straight in the middle, according to the length of the body, and cut the corrupted veins; then cure the wound as in the others, so that none of the tendons are damaged; for by this no harm comes, and if the blood comes from all the tendons, it is necessary to remove the tendons from all the tendons; so that the joint does not lose its norrissement through the incision of the tendons, and they dry and cannot be helped.
de la routure dou syfac	of the toothache
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions; et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses; et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement; et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	The causes of this branch are by the section that comes out from the toothache, or the extension over the belly in the part of the gums, because the intestines descend from that section to one of the sides; and this toothache is either from the section itself, or from the extension of it, and these two methods of many causes are: by percussion, or jumping, or shouting, or lifting heavy weight, and similar things; and the signs when it is the extension of the toothache, is that it is little and little, in long tension, and does not come suddenly; and it is the abscesses equal up to the jaw, because the tooth is close to the intestine.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs of a sudden gum cut, which brings on sudden pain at the beginning, and has various abscess appearances, outside the skin, and it is for the end of the intestine and the heart after the cut of the gum.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And never the intestines with the worms, and they are retained inside, and cause great pain to suffer from the wound, especially when it is pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these iron treatments of fear, for which it should be avoided.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir; puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes; puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc; puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir; puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars; puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille; et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement; et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz; puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz; puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars; puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne; et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi; et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant; puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	And the way of the work is that you command or let the wound open inside the intestine with your hand, if it can be pulled out; then place the curved part of a spoon over his neck between your hands, and loosen the jaws; then place the crown of the spoon above, and cover all the skin of the belly with oil; then put your index finger in the opening of the wound, in the place where the intestine is between the white gum that is outside the skin of the belly, and between the second gum, and behind the belly, and between the second gum; and push the white gum up with your left hand, and loosen the belly to all the gum; and command the assistant to stretch the belly up, and remove what is behind the skin; and if you find anything, if you find any intestine or white gum hard, and if you find anything, put it in the stomach outside; then take a needle or a thick thread made of 12 threads, and put it in the back part of the gum, which is after the skin of the belly; then cover the threads with oil, and tie them together in the form of a cross, and fasten the gum, which we have said is outside the skin of the belly, with a strong thread of 2 parts; then cover the threads with oil, and tie them together in 2 parts, so that none of the vessels that grow there can enter into wounds, that aposteme does not come; and finally put the first thread according to the first thread, and after these two threads leave the gum which is outside the belly the great of one finger; and then the other according to the roundness that the belly carries; then cover in the part which is outside the skin of the belly, as we have said before; then moisten linen with oil, and put it on the wounds, and moisten the thread that we have said.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And never cauterize the white swelling that we have mentioned after incision, due to fear of bleeding.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece; puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	For this often happens, and leave the wound as it heals through him; and if it takes a long time to settle, then roast with sharp hot iron, and put on what we have said, until it heals; then treat the wound with other treatment, until it is perfectly healed.
de hernie carnouse	of hernia, carnal
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this branch, I have never seen anyone dare to perform the cure by iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz; puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the ancients said that it is done as in the branch that is together with the viscera, in a manner that you tie the veins, after the groin slightly open; then cover it, and treat the abscess of what works, until the veins heal; and the treatment as we have said, until it is perfectly healed.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres; et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent; et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert; et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere: et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois; et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac; et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre; puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines; puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	Never does the rip occur due to anger and opening the wounds; and no one should pull out any of the intestines from the wounds, and if they do, it is rare, and they should be repaired every hour; and in any case, if it remains too long at this point, the wound or the abscess believes that the intestine is being pulled out; and this happens due to the extension of the syphac which is at the rip, as we have said, because it is stretched, then it is softened and inflated the wound and opened; and the cure is by cauterization, as we have previously said; and never is the cure done in this way: and it is that the painful parts are laid on top of their back between your hands, then cover the wound of the rip enflated with a large cloth according to the quantity of three fingers; and then pull out the syphac which is outside the skin that covers it, then take the knife and put it on top of the wound of the syphac; and press against the front of the belly, then cut the two wounds above the head of the knife, and both; then pull out the head of the knife, and do not cover the syphac or stretch the belly or anything else, as I have told you in the treatment of the intestines; then cure by the treatment of wounds.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when you cut the strings, if you defend and heal the wound, until it is healed.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The sutures are tight, and do not appear in the tear, and the cauterization is silent in this place, and more likely to save.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	of the softening of the leather of the shoes
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a III costures ou IIII fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Often the leather of the shoes is softened in some men, because the charred parts inside are softened, and it can be seen; and it is necessary, when one wants to cure, that one makes the patient lie on his back, and cut the softened leather over the natural leather; then gather the two lips to one seam, and if you see, first remove the excess softened leather at three or four seams; then stitch between the seams, and cure as with other wounds, until it is healed, and cut the thread.
dou chastrement	with great care
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	It is not proper to speak of cauterization in our law, and therefore I do not wish to mention it in this book; and it is only necessary for two reasons: one is that the patient should respond with cauterization when asked, and be cured by cauterization; and the other is because we often have to use cauterization on some animals to help us, such as a goat and a sheep and a pig and others.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	I say therefore that cauterization is done in two ways: by attraction or by cutting.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	In that which we do by attraction, make the animal sit in high heat, until the hairs are softened and while they are still hot; then take them in your hand, until they are returned and you no longer feel them.
Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	For the proper treatment of the waist: it is necessary to tie the beast, and press the leather of the codpieces with your right hand, then hang the suspensor, and cope over each eye at the cop, when you have them well cauterized; and leave no pore of the sensitive skin and the subtle skin that is on the vessels; and this method of cauterization is milder than that made by attraction, for the reason that by attraction something of the codpieces remains, by which the beast desires luxury; then cure the wound until it is healed.
des hermofrodites	des hermaphrodites
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	Hermofrodie is according to two methods among men: one is that between the two legs open wide as the figure of a woman's nature, with hair, and sometimes cutting the urine.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	And the other method is in women, and has above the penis like a penis and two legs.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	And the treatment of the male and female is that you cut off all the foreskin stumps, and treat them as other wounds; in the second method, of men whose urine sprays through the skin of the legs, there is no treatment.
de la tentigene	of the tenting
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	Tentigene is a device placed above the natural part, as long as it is too ugly to see; and some women have had it as big as a hand, and that is the cure.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	It is necessary to clean the excess of the tentigene with your hand or a cloth, and wipe it lightly; and do not move too much, as there is no blood coming out, until the other cure is healed; and for another char that is born at the mouth of the marsh, and use it, and perhaps it will jump out, and it is according to the appearance of a cow, and because of this they called the old "cowdisease".
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If it is necessary to perform the procedure as we have described the traction, and care until it is healed.
de erratique	of error
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	Erratic is when the nature of the woman is not perfectly known, or the cause is small; and it is natural by birth, or accidental by disease that has come, or it is caused by artificial means, such as a sharp needle or subtle suture, and it is made in the marriage bed, or in the cost, or elsewhere, and they do not conceive, and pregnancy, and possibly the flowers to have; and the knowledge of this is by the appearance of the baby.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	If the swelling appears near the surface, it is best to apply your two fingers or a spoon.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	If it is a subtle swelling under the lips, and it is near the surface, then hasten, and do as follows: place your two index fingers together, and let the woman lie on her back, with her legs spread; then stretch the lips forming a tube, until the subtle swelling is drawn out, and is over the swelling; then take linen, and dip it in oil, and place it on the limb, and bind the woman to a bed every day, so that she cannot move.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	And if the swelling is hard and sharp, it is necessary to apply a poultice similar to a leaf of myrtle.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the swelling is from a horse bite, hang it up and cover it with a cloth; and have the medicines steeped in blood, such as dragon's blood, incense, and abundant wine; then apply a large piece of wet plaster, so that the wound cannot heal; and thus keep it long, and then cover it with a dry linen tent; then treat other treatments until it is healed.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	And when the horse bite occurs in the marsh, cover it according to this method, unless it is an abscess.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	For the abscess that forms in the marsh should not be touched with fire.
des emorroides	of hemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	Hemorrhoids are openings of veins that do not usually bleed, and when the hemorrhoids become old, they become thrombosed; and we have already said in the division the similarities of them, and the signs, and I will say here those that require treatment.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	I said that hemorrhoids and thromboses, when they are newly formed in the marsh, and do not appear until felt, are not treated by fire.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	Those that can be felt at the edge of the marsh are those that can be treated.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	Therefore, it is necessary to put the woman in a cold house, then stretch the thrombus with tongs, and cut off its roots, then powder medicines that stop bleeding such as acacia and sulfur and incense and similar things; then bathe her feet at the door for an hour, then put her in very cold water; if blood comes out, sit her in a decoction of sumac and skin of green apples and gall and similar things, and then take wheat flour, and knead it with honey and oil, and make a poultice on her back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	And if he is sated, it is good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	If not, make him inhale smoke through his back and breasts without causing injury; then take the limb, and soak it in juice of plantain or of agrimony with old wine, and make him inhale the smoke on the affected area.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the abscess is ready to burst, treat the limb with poultices until it is healed; and the one called "albathir" is red, and resembles a sharp thorn, if it should cover it as I have said of the thelul; then treat the wound until it is healed.
des apostemes de la marris	of abscesses from the marsh
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	Many kinds of abscess come from the marsh, such as chancre and pustular abscess and herpes and esthenia and fistulas and hemorrhoids and pustular abscess chaut, and many other diseases that I have mentioned in the division.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	It is therefore necessary to tell in this treatment of the abscess chaut that comes from the marsh, which is not one of the abscesses that come together; and if you know how to use the iron, look at whether the abscess is agus at the beginning of its appearance, and with fever and heat, and if it becomes red, then see it.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	Therefore do not rush to pierce, but make it wait as long as the pain is eased; and then place the sore on its seat, and have two small seats where it bends, and lean against its back and gather its feet at the parts beyond the leg; and let its knees be spread, and put its arms away from its hips, and tie them firmly with a good bandage; then apply the splint to the left side of the body, and make it comfortable; and when you see this instrument being applied, that you check the depth of the wound, so that what comes out of the instrument does not go further than it should, and does not cause the sore to bleed; and if the instrument is larger, it is necessary to cover the depth of the wound with cloths, so that the instrument does not hurt it; and it is necessary to put the horn of the instrument on top, and stain the instrument.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.	When the abscess is opened and they do it by hand, if it needs to be covered at the head, cover it with spatumile leat; and when the boil is emptied, it is necessary to put in the wound thin tents soaked in rose oil or green dry oil; and place the tent from the wound to the edge of the marsh, and place above the marsh and above the other clean thin tents soaked in hot water; then after two hours of ointment applying to it, as long as it is healed; and never lift the marsh and the wound by a poultice of hot water and honey, and then of hot water or roots of lis and aristolochia are cooked; then reapply the ointment.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	And if the wound is stitched in the marsh, it is necessary to avoid cooking with iron, but treat it as we have said in the division.
de l’enfantement	at birth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	The midwife is first to the birth that she knows the figure of the natural childbirth, and the signs as you see the woman approaching, and desires to smell the ar: then hasten the child to come out; then cleanse that child according to the natural figure, and it is the issue with its head, and the second with him; and when you see these signs, if it is necessary to press lightly on his belly, so that the child comes out quickly; for when he goes up to his head, it is the second with him, and it is washed in the marsh of its superfluities by good cleaning; and this that comes otherwise does not come naturally.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	It never comes up from its feet, and it comes far from the body or the back, and the hands, or it comes up its belly, or sometimes, and is twisted by chance onto its neck, and by other bad figures; if there is need to correct this matter, the midwife should be skilled and subtle in these things, and if she errs and is deceived, I will show you all the figures how one must help.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	If the infant comes up its head by natural birth, and the woman gives birth with great pain, and her strength is weak, then let the midwife sit on a stool, or the women hold her; and apply oil or fenugreek that has been cooked to it, and then give the midwife a small spatula of this form:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.	and pierce the second joint, and cover its angle as far as the moisture that is now corrected; and take the belly of the woman so that the child descends, and if it does not descend, then it is necessary to smear the woman with fenugreek powder mixed with mustard oil; then let her inhale and expectorate the condition, and keep her mouth and nose closed for an hour: if this now causes the child to descend.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	And if both hands are dislocated, it is necessary to gently and gradually reset them; and if they cannot enter, then place the woman on a chair, and raise her feet high; then remove the chair from the ground, and tie the woman, so that she does not fall during the removal; and if the hands still cannot enter, and the child is dead, then cover the hands with the cloth that was previously placed there, extract the child, and gently reset it.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	of the child's feet above
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut; et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz; puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	When the child comes up on its feet, if it is necessary to place it above; then gradually turn it and extend it little by little until it is even; then grasp both feet and extend them gradually.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi; si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	If it jumps up quickly, command it to hold still, and make it sneeze from the condition; if it jumps away, then God willing.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it does not jump away as we have said, then gradually turn it and extend it until it is in accordance with the natural shape.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For then it is certainly.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier; et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz; et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre; puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	If it does not come out as we have said, take muscle powder of high altitude, and oil of wormwood, and melted gum, and grind everything in a mortar; and put on the nature of the woman inside and outside this ointment, then make her sit in a high chair until above the ribs; and when she is softened above, make her a garland of mint, and put it on her, and leave it for an hour; then make her sit on the seat, then make her spit and hold her mouth and nose, and lightly press her belly, for the child has just come out.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	of the child's knees above
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc; puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit; et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval; et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains; et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	When the child comes in this form, so put your hands gently and gently on it; then lean it on its back, and hang its feet down, and let it lie on the bed; and gently fold your hands, and then take its hands above the belly, and remove the cusses from off, until it is cleaned underneath; and if the child does not move, take its feet and form it gently, then move its belly upwards, then put your hands; and slowly feed the child little by little; and command the woman to wait until the child is born.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	of the issue of the child who comes out wide a hand during
I covient engignier a ramener la main: s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler; s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment; puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit; et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main; et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	It is necessary to engineer to bring back the hand: if one cannot bring it back, then lift the woman, and go; if she cannot go, then make her lie on the bed, and bend her legs together; then administer the muscle relaxant that I have mentioned; and if she does not give birth, then make her sit on the chair, then study to bring back the hand; and when the child is according to the natural figure, and make it sneeze, and command her to hold it until the child is born.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	of the child's neck, and let his hands be spread out, and his face turned towards the back of his mother
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement; et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc; et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	It is necessary that the bailer wipe his hand, then turn it slowly and lightly; when it is even, if you put some muscle oil of high and old, as we have said, then command him to move slowly; when you have done this, make him sit on a chair, and command him to bend over; and make him spit.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	of the same manner to all the second one
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie; et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes; puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois: adonques si istra legierement.	When it comes to doing this to the second one, if the second one can hold your hand, until the moisture is drained; and if the child can move his face and neck, then hold the baby's head, so it is not held back, and the child dies; then feed the child inside, as you should, and command the woman to bend over once: then let him go lightly.
de l’issue des gemelz	of the issue of twins
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent III ou IIII; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	It is often the case that twins are born, and sometimes not at all; and this is not an uncommon thing, and it happens.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom; je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude; et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	It is strange that they do not live, if not all; I know that they can be multiplied, and are separated by the same sac which gives them birth, which is attached to the placenta; and sometimes they come out naturally as one at a time, just like we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait; et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	And if they come out harshly, as we have said the care should be, and the birth canal is subtle, and do quickly and lightly what it does; and do thus as it should be for their health.
de plusors enfans	of many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient; si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	There are no children formed in the first through fifth or sixth or seventh or up to fifteen, and all are formed in the shape of a child by the measurement of the wise glorious, and it is necessary that the bath cures all, because by chance similar things happen to him; so do according to what is necessary.
de l’enfant mort	of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains; si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort; si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees; et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant; puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges; puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief; si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes; et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide; et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	When you care for the woman of the dead child or womb, as I have said in the division, and it does not come out, and you are forced to do manual work; if the woman is of sound virtue and has no accident or fear of death; then it is necessary that you smear her with a two-part ointment made from the tannin of willows and fenugreek and linseed, then wipe the bath's hands with these oils and muscillages; then lightly apply the ointment to the woman's hands, or wherever it is convenient for her, and if the child has been born and is wrapped in cloths that are not suitable for this, and take care that the child does not descend over its head; then smear the ointment in the child's eyes or on its neck or in its mouth or in its palms or behind its ears or on its forehead or on its chest or between its ribs; and if the child has descended, then smear it with the ointment on its back, and hold the child in your left hand, and apply the ointment to all of its body lightly, and smear the ointment in any of the places we have mentioned, until the thing is empty; and this is the form of the ointment:
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz; et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	Then remove the other thorn, where you have the skill, so that the extraction is even; and then place it evenly by moving one part and another, to make it move, and let the thorns be sharp to hold, as in this form:
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie; et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	And if a part remains, use some of its two oils, and drive them into that part, and pull out the other part; and if it does not remain, put this thorn or higher up the limb, and do so until it all comes out.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote; puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	And if one hand comes before the other, and it cannot be returned by tightening, then you must wrap around the cloth, as much as it moves; then cut it at the joint of the foot or at the heel, and thus you should do in the other hand, and so on.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue; ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui; et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment; et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer; et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues; et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	If the question concerns a child who is large and has a sharp bone at the neck, it is necessary to insert the spatula between your fingers and break the sharp bone; or you can use the tool called "almidach", with which the instruments or chapter that follows this one are made; and in the same way, if the child has a great natural head, draw the bones with pincers, and if the child's neck springs out, hold it firmly until the blood issues; and if it cannot issue, cut it into pieces as you can; and if it is swollen in the belly or outside the ribs, it is necessary to pierce it until the blood flows.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if the infant is above its feet, then the traction is light, and the pressure at the mouth of the marsh is light.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main; et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre; et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris; puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer; et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses; et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	And if the infant is stiff in the belly or the foot, it is recommended that you extract it from the wrapped cloth over your hand; and when the belly or the foot is open, as long as the moisture that is there is corrected; and if the other member is broken, and the question remains, then bring the billy goat's hand in front of the marsh, and pull it to the mouth of the marsh; then bring the one or two, and pull it out; and if the mouth of the marsh is retracted by an abscess that has come, it is not recommended to strain, but it is recommended to manage moist and fat things; and the management emplausters, and siece in a high mollifying and moistening.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif; et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	And if the shoulder is dislocated on its side, and you can put it back in place, as we have said for the living child; and if you cannot do so, then treat it by pieces, and leave nothing of the secondary.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris; et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	And when you have done this, treat it as we have said for abscesses that come in the marsh; and if blood comes out, it should be tightly bandaged, and treated with other remedies.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut I autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman in whose womb an infant had died, then consulted the other about it, and refused to let the others die.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time, some abscesses appeared in the groin, and they swelled up so much that they burst, and then began to cause great pain.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I went to the doctor, and after a long time, I thought it was not healing.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I applied strong attractive ointment, and some bones were pulled out, and after some time others came out.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I was very surprised because the belly does not have any bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	I thought it was the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point; et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu; et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	I looked at the wound, and through it I saw many bones, until the woman was in much better condition; and she saw the woman like this for a long time, and it was only a little bit of blood from the body; and I do not remember this chapter except that when masters find an unusual thing, they know how to give aid.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	bring the marble back to its place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a II tornans as II chiés des II liiens.	For the form of pressure, we use books; and at two returns to two questions about two joints.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux; et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi; et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus; et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	However, the corners should be more subtle than the restrictor, and be made of flat or round; and the mouth of the funnel should be two fingers wide, and the edge of the trees should be a palm and a half long; and in the two joints, they should be two supports of this same funnel, which are firmly fixed on one side and the other, half a palm or more long; and these two supports are driven into the mouth of the marble when turning the two corners.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles; et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large; et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes; puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	Another form, more subtle and lighter in appearance, should be made of ebony or boxwood, according to the appearance of nails; and it has two prongs, as you see, one palm long, and two wide; and when you want to open the mouth all the way with the instrument, place the woman on the bed, the feet together and the legs spread, then push the two prongs together into the mouth, and hold the chief of the instrument between her teeth; then work your hand with the instrument equally, according to the quantity you want to open the mouth of the woman, until the pain makes her do what she wants.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	This instrument is all above, and they are multiplied in their similarities; and when the master has them prepared, the more hasty the work, and the higher it is for men due to its quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	If you do not despise the instrument because you have not prepared it, for its necessity is not excused.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis; et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	When the second instrument is retained at birth, it is necessary to command the hairs that they hold their tails, and then make them expel the conditions, and hold your hands on the mouth and nose; and if they sneeze through there, well enough.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire; toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	If not, take a pot and make a hole or cover, and put herbs that can open the mouth of the marsh, such as rue, anise, chamomile, cassia, and centaury; all these herbs, or some of them, should be cooked or boiled over the fire; then put a cloth or cover in the pot, and the other head in the mouth of the marsh, and wait until the vapors come into the mouth; then make him spit, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If the second joint also moves out of place.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction; mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	And if it remains in place after this treatment and is not too strong, command the bath attendant to gently massage her right hand with olive oil or musk mallow, and then put it back in its natural position, and find the second joint; and when she finds it, grasp it and extend it slowly and carefully, so that the marsh does not break during extraction; but it should be gently moved to the right and left, and then removed; if it comes out, it will disappear and dissolve.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes; et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire; mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon; si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	And if the bite of the marsh is extended, we have said the cure of expectoration, and fumigation of herbs; and if she does not have all that we have said, then guard that you do not follow the sucking; but it is advisable that what is at the mouth of the marsh, that you tie to the cheek of the woman, then cleanse with a plaster of quadrifarmaceutic ointment; if she will swallow and return, and it will heal; but nevertheless, when she swallows if there comes bad odor to the stomach and head, and bleeds the pain.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	Therefore, it is advisable to use the following fumigations: none of the ancients have experienced fumigation of watercress and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The form of the instrument used to smoke the woman at the retention of flowers and the second ingredient is as follows:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu; et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	And it is like a wire, similar to a needle, and one puts the tip subtly into the nature, and the rest of the wire over the fire; and the smoking is done over the coals, and the lice until they are burned, and then start another.
de percier lou fondement	to pierce the foundation
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac: si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche; puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many children are born who have not pierced the foundation, but one has stupefied them with some subtle poison: therefore it is necessary for the mother to pierce that poison at its source, and not pierce too deeply, and keep the wound clean; then put on a moist cloth in wine and oil, then the treatment of the wound until it is healed.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it will not set, put or press a splint on it, and let it remain for some time, and be bound as soon as the child wants to go into rooms.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	And never comes this swelling from an infected wound or abscess; if it does, cover the wound: if it is treated, as we have said of the splint.
de la fistule dou fondement	of the fistula from the foundation
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	Fistulas that come from below the foundation are nodulation, and groser than those that come above the foundation, or in the space between the two parts, if there is one fistula or more; and when this nodulation is old, it works, and shortens moisture above white or subtle blood, and these fistulas never heal; and they are known by the fact that there is egestion or ventosity when the pain makes egestion, and perhaps some verses.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	And if there are fistulas that pass through the bladder, and through half of the penis; and they reach the joint of the hip, and through the back.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant: et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	And thus one knows the fistula passing through the basement, and not passing: and it is that you should prick your index finger or base with a thin needle of silver or iron in the fistula when there is no twisting.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit; et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit: saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	And if it has twisting, if you prick a thin skin of lead or horsehair, as long as you feel the skin or hair at your finger; and if you do not feel it, and there is no perforation egestion or ventosity or ver, as we have said: cut so that it does not pierce more; then hasten to cure.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula is persistent near the bladder or near a urinary tract, if it allows urine to pass, and cannot be healed by medicines.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu; s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement; et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	If it is perforated near the hip joint, then the tendon is close to the bone; if there is no twisting and the location of the pain is not clear, it is because it is stuck, and there is no cure by medicine or ointment; and in these persistent fistulas, there is no cure except labor, and the vanity of those who meddle with them.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre; puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	In the one that is not persistent and not ancient, in hope of healing by iron, as I have experienced, and it is that the pains are hidden between your hands on its back; and lift the legs up to its knees, and let its knees bent towards its belly; then boil a tent of tin, or lead if there is twisting, until you remove the tent.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans; si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	If the pain is felt around the base, then you should insert your index finger, so that it feels as if it has pierced the bone; and whether you feel between your thumb and forefinger, or the syphilitic sore or the chancre, then cut it out, for there is no need to trouble oneself when it cannot be healed.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc; et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit; et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil; et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	It can be healed in some cases, but this does not often happen; and the aid that is used is to heat the fine cauterizer according to the width of the fistula, as it has been previously said; and then push it all through the fistula, until it reaches beyond the base; and do this two or three times, until you know that these charred pieces are burnt out, which resemble a barb of an arrow; and then treat the wound with ointment, until those charred pieces are completely gone, then treat the wound with a bandage.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If he is thus healthy, it is good.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez; et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur; si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente; et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	If not, otherwise nothing can be healthy; and if it attempts to enter, and does not perforate just where it is based, and between the attempt and the tent a thick covering of fleece or syfac, and you see the fistula at which the covering points; if the copper begins at the beginning of the fistula, and goes ahead of the tent, and then the cautery after, until it reaches the top of the tent; and he will be delivered from the attempt, and closed; then wash those fleeces that seem like a quill of an eagle, and none remain.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if you cannot remove it, and cut between you and the work, then cauterize with fire or medicine.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor; puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe; puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	For the fire cauterization assembles two things: to know, the burning of these charred parts, and the stopping of blood and the separation of moisture; then cure tents made of butter or of choice crushed herbs, until the wound is filled with blood, and the chars are burned in the wound; then cure the wound with hard-boiled onions soaked in durable char, and these medicines are dry.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it is restored, it is healed and does not return.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if the fistula comes from the base, and is away from the body, then press on the neck or foundation, and inquire what.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres: ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit; puis le cure, si com nos avons dit; par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé; puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues; puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	If you feel the tent, and between them is the thread or the suture or the charcoal, where it is close to being pierced, then there is no other remedy except hope and faith in one of the three methods: either you cauterize it as we have said, or you cut it from the base, or if you can put tents and cure it as we have said; and do not move too much at first, so that you do not cover the foundation that holds the base, and bring the excretion out through the direction of your will; then cure it as we have said; perhaps it will be healed, or you remove that covering and uncover it after it is cut below the foundation, or by tent or other instrument appointed; then clean the char that is in the wound, as much as you can; then study to restore the wound and to stop the fistula in the part before the foundation: if there is a lighter thing to the pain.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	And sometimes fistulas are made in this way: and when you push the tent into the fistula, it is found at the cost of the foundation below the skin above, so take a tent perforated at the head according to this form:
Et i boute I fil tort en II, et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And you push the thread into the fistula, and push the tent along the entire thread into the fistula until it reaches the head.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement; et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II; et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent; puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	If it is not found at the edge of the foundation within, then pull out the thread from that one perforated, so that you push your other or foundation; and take the head of the thread, and assemble the two parts together, and hold them against each other, and leave it there for a day or two; and do not restrain it once, until the thread covers these characters that are between two, and heal; then cure the wound until it is closed and healed.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not pierce, then I will pierce it in all ways that you can, unless it is too far advanced.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it does not behoove to try to realign it if it is too far advanced, and then treat it as we have said until it is healed.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans; et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	The form of the spinal needle used to make the fistula is very sharp and thin; on the one hand, it is sharp and piercing; and on the other hand, it is not, because we do not know what we should not do, as you see here:
des emorroydes	I do not understand this word in the context of the text
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors; et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz; si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines; et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot; et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere; ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement; cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere; et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	Body parts can be dislocated in two ways: when they are inside the foundation, like grain of resin, and there are small and large ones, and some have blood, and some have none, and some are under the foundation and at the bottom of the foundation; but those that are under it have little moisture, and some have a little sharp or a little blood, and they have the color of the body; and the treatment of those who have inside the foundation is that you command the patient to shake his head so he can move into other rooms, as long as the foundations let him go, and it shows the son; if you hurry, and you can hold them with pliers, or you hold them at your angle, then you cut in their roots; and if they cannot hold them for their moisture, take them to a cloth, or a cotton, or a piece of cloth; and you hold them to your two hands, then you cut, and powder over some hot powders that are in the cauterizer; or you cauterize it as it is said in the chapter of cauterization, then treat it with other treatments until it is healed; and if the foundations cannot come out, then clean the patient with a biting and rough cloth to wash what is at the foundation, so that it can come out openly; but if the limbs are strong and full of the foundation, then the treatment is light; and it is that you hold them at your angle or with pliers, and you cut, then treat it as we have said, until it is healed, and it does not fear the incision by iron.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc; puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose; et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is necessary to sew the wound according to this method: take a thread of twisted hair, and make it into a needle, then pull the thread from above and pierce the needle from the other side, and turn the two ends of the thread away from the needle, and if it is too wide; and tighten the thread properly, then loosen the thread, and pull out the needle, and do the same with all the others, and leave one to let the excess blood drain; then put above the wound a cloth soaked in rose oil or cerote, and put above the wound, and instruct the patient to rest; and then let him rest until they heal, and when they are healed, treat them with ointment and other treatment until they are healed.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	dryly and firmly on the foundation
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	often occurs in the intestines due to constriction of the body, and when the disease is old and medicine does not help.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient; et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is necessary to reset the bone at the point of a spatula or your finger's tip, which does not allow it to become moist; then treat it as it should be while it is dry; and if it cannot be treated, start the cut again more strongly than before, until it is fully healed, and then treat it.
dou fremit	dryly
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont; et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	formication is a small appearance cut through the skin, and it goes very far; and sometimes the frost finds it, and one feels as if one is dead of formication, and it spreads throughout the body, and more so in the hands than any other part.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor; puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	And the treatment is that you take a needle of a goose feather, or a pen of a vulture very strong, and put that needle on the swelling, until the circle pressed the swelling all around; then turn your hand to all the needle until you cover all around the swelling, and put it in front, and release the swelling from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see, make a needle of rain or iron in this form, and be subtle to pull out and draw up:
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	and do not pierce, to hold both sides, and press; and if you see, cauterize the swelling, as it is before or chapter of cauterization.
de la forme dou clistere	of this ointment form
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	Never make an ointment with silver or tin, or melted lead or millstones; and never use these small and large tools according to those that they are intended for.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Therefore, those that one should use in the care of children and those who are weak and in pain, are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The form of this ointment, whether small or large, is above broad, or the belly is tied according to this manner:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I; et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre; et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	and there should be a difference or the belly is tied as you see, and the belly is pricked inside; and it has on one side two holes, and on the other one; and it should have the belly where one puts the medicines in a beast’s bladder or parchment, and it should be pierced all around with small holes, and there should be between each hole one inch of space, then bolt in these holes one thread of strong thread twisted in ten or around, and gather the belly as if it were a goat; and when the medicine is inside, if the belly is tied with a strong thread, then apply the ointment; and this is the form of the circle.
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement; puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	And let the medicine not be too hot or too cold, and anoint the head of the poultice with oil or vinegar, or something similar, then press it lightly; then squeeze the ministers to both hands together, until it is completely clear, then remove the poultice, and relieve the pain in his legs at the same time, and if the swelling wants to come out, let it come out as much as possible; and if he sleeps all night, it is a greater help.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you apply the poultice in the disease of diarrhea of the belly, and the medicine wants to come out, then start again as long as it is healthy.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	And if they are stuck at their base, or in an abscess, then the plaster should be as delicate as for a child; and this is the form of the delicate plaster above how the skin is stretched:
des plaies	of wounds:
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	We have already mentioned in the division the treatment of wounds; now we will tell you about the treatments for hands and medicine, according to completion.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are different according to what they are made of, and according to the limbs or wounds that are made, and from what they are made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses; ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres; et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	The things by which wounds are made are by piercing with a spear, and the cut of a sword and a dagger, or of a lance or of a staff or of a arrow, or of similar things; or those that are made according to the limbs of the body, such as a wound that is made above the neck, or above the head, or the eye, or the belly, or the liver, and similar members; and I will tell you about the treatment of each wound, and I will begin with simple wounds to the head, because the remembrance will come in its chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree; et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	When a simple wound comes to the head or the bone is not broken, take care if it is an embedded arrow or similar things, and the skin is completely torn and the wound is large, and you doubt lightly of abscess: if you do it immediately cleanse the head itself if there is little blood from the wound, and the cleaning should be on the opposite side of the injured part; and avoid the painful things such as wine and heavy foods.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char; et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice; et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés; et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if he does not want to cleanse, then soften his food, and do not drink wine, and do not change his drink; and put on the wound, if abscess comes, cotton moistened in rose oil only, or in sterilized wine; and if there is no abscess, then put on the wound, if it is fresh with all its blood, and it is not moved by air, powder, which I will say a little later; and if his arm has been moved, then put on some ointments, as long as it is healed.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large, like a sword wound and similar, and the lips cannot be closed by stitches, then close them by sewing, as I will say about abdominal wounds, from the seam.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	If the wound is exposed to the bone, and can be moved, but only held by a small piece, then cover it with a poultice; then treat the wound with medicine, and restore hard flesh in place of skin, and command the patient to eat soft foods, such as tests and cooked grain, like chickens, and similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure; et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil; et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	And if you have a piece of leather or flesh for a poultice, and it does not reach the bone, then cover the whole wound with it, and pour in warm water, then treat it; and if there is an artery in the wound or vein, without cutting, and it cannot be stopped by medicines, then tie the artery, and if you have a piece of flesh for a poultice, and it does not reach the bone, then cover the whole wound with it, and pour in warm water, then treat it; and if it does not improve, then cauterize.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if these wounds are small and simple, then the light cure is used: and you should put this powder that boils as soon as the wound has moved.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon II parties; chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc; et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And the manner of the powder is as follows: take incense one part; dragon's blood two parts; live chalk three parts, and the powder finely, and fill the wound, and bind it tightly, until it becomes firm and joins all its parts; then tie it well, and leave it undisturbed, unless it swells; for one should not remove the medicine until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And one should never use chalk alone, when one does not have incense or dragon's blood, but that the wound has moved.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre; mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe; puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound has moved, immediately apply this powder; but put on top some ointments digested, or flour of oats made with honey and water, until it heals; then treat other wounds until they are healthy.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz; et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	And if the broken bone comes with the wound, and it is small, then straighten it with fine forceps; and I will tell you about the main fractures afterwards.
de la plaie dou col	of the neck wound
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If the wound comes from the neck and it is simple, there is no difference between this and the main fractures, but if the nerves of the neck or the artery are cut.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire; et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres; mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	If it is a bone, there is no other remedy than to let the care, and not put anything restricting, for it hurts bones and makes them withdraw; and do not put anything sharp on the wound, for the substance of the bones is cold, and the continuation of such things is with the brain, which is the highest member; but let the medicine be gentle, like a sieve washed in hot sweet water, and mixed with rose oil, and the bandage washed in hot sweet water, and other stones of this manner, and moist wounds.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, then wrap it with bandages until it is healed.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu; et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est; et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel; et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier; et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue; et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	If the wounds are deep and the head is shaved and filled with blood, pierce or lower the bone; if the artery is cut, and blood flows out, cover it, and the wound, and cauterize the wound; and if the spine of the neck is cut, or the muscle, and the conductor is kept, by which the meat goes, if the cut is above the back of the neck, and do not touch the neck but return it according to its natural shape; then gradually tighten, and leave it for some time, then cure the wounds until they are healed; and if the wound has made an impression in the bone, remove it; and if there are pieces of bone, remove them all if you can, and those that you cannot, leave them until the wound is closed and healed; and if the wound is fresh, powder over the powder that I have said.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	If there is bone in the wound and it has a fistula, then follow the treatment as I have described in his chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	of the wound from arrow or sword
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz; et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide; mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor; et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors; si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne; et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	If it is a wound from arrow or sword, and the wound is deep, look to see if there is any sign of ventosity from the flesh: cut then that the wound is mortal; and if it is not deep, and it is fresh all through with blood, do not put powder in the first hour for the blood so it does not clot prematurely, and return to the heart, and cover the wound; but use attractive ointment, and tie it twice a day; and if you have no ointment, put old cloth in the wound to draw out the moisture, and let it rest for three days, or four, or more; then there will be no spasm, nor any trembling of the heart from anything else; and when you see good dispositions, cut that the wound is saved.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	Cure the wounds of tents and other treatments, until they are healed; and if they cannot be healed, and worked, then make incisions as there is a fistula; thus the cure as it should be.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant; s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez; et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions; et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	And if the wound is from a sword or dagger cut, and it is simple, or small, or at the back, then use the cure for what is in front; if it is large, use stitching; and if it is small, use powder, and if it is embedded in the bone, and has broken pieces, then cover the wound, and remove the foreign bodies if they are not harmful; and if they are not harmful, let the wound rot, it will alleviate the extraction; and for other wounds on other members, use judgment as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	stomach rupture
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis; de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus; et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut; por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres: les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies; et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	The rupture of the stomach is great and medium and small; from a large wound, the intestines or parts of the intestines may escape once, by which the insertion of them occurs; and the suture is more painful, and often the small wound is worse than the large one, because one can more easily put back the intestines if they are not put back correctly; for the intestines swell quickly when they feel heat, so they are more easily put back if done quickly, and therefore the medium-sized wound is better, because one can more easily return the intestines to their place than other wounds. And there are four ways of stomach rupture: the two common sutures are in the abdominal seam, and the suture of other body wounds and two other sutures are common to other wounds; and therefore they are more suitable with the abdominal seam, and I will explain each one and declare.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres: ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	I say that when the wound is small, and nothing of the intestine is protruding, and it is easy to replace, it is done in one of the two ways: either by the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestine is swollen by the heat.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere: moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee; et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	And when it is hot, warm the intestines in this way: moisten a sponge or a piece of cloth with cold water only, or cook it in boiling vinegar and cypress and spike, and roll up the intestine until the swelling is removed; and never do this by force, and it is better to leave it for some time to cool.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose; et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes; et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait; et c’est li estrumens por le fendre: si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	And when you see the swelling depart, if the intestine is moist with sharp or high and badly cooked foods, because by this the entrance is soon; and if it cannot enter, make a small opening in the instrument with which one copes with worms; and the first cure is to quiet the belly, that we should not cut without great necessity where there is none; and this is the instrument for cutting: if you cut from within the belly and not outside, and pull out the form.
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestine jumps out, if you can put it back in its natural form according to its own place, because this is good.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief; et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre; et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	When the wound is large, and it is in the part away from the belly, it is necessary to place the patient on their back, and put their legs higher than their head; and if it is in the part away from the belly, put the head and the worst part higher than the other parts, and thus manage as I said for large and medium-sized wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres; et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort; et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble; puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille; puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte; et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer: por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes; et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure; et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee; et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien; et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras; et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi; ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	When the wounds are small, you should apply what is appropriate, then put your hands between the ministering remedies that cover the whole wound with their hand, and bring together the lips; this is the common way of stitching, and it is that you hold an needle or several, according to the quantity of the size of the wound, leaving a space of two fingers from the top of the wound, and then thread a needle or good strong thread; and pierce the two edges of the skin with the two edges of the sinew, which is outside the skin, until you make it pierced from that part, and bring together the two edges of the sinew four times; then tie the thread into a double knot on the needle from two parts, and then bring together the edges of the wound evenly, leaving a space of two fingers, and then thread another needle; then tie the thread as you did the first needle, and do not stop doing this according to what you have done with the needles, until the whole wound is stitched; and let the needles be medium-sized, between thin and thick, because thin needles cover the whole flesh, and too thick ones cannot enter well: for this reason they should be medium-sized; and do not put the needles too far from the skin and the flesh, so that they do not cover and open the wound before sewing; and then cover the edges of the needles, so that they do not bleed the wound at night, and put tents or cloths on the edges of the needles to keep them in place, and leave them until the wound is sewn; and this way of stitching with needles is more suitable for small wounds, because it requires one or two needles for the second stitching, and it is that you bring together the edges of the skin and the sinew to a needle with good strong thread; and when you have pierced these edges all four together, then re-thread the needle in the part where you started, in the way one threads a needle; and leave a space between each stitch the thickness of a finger.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	I brought back the intestine after it had been out for 24 hours, and the wound was dressed with 15 hours, and it was treated, and it was healed.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle; et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines; et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	And the mother had thought that he would die, and it was a miracle; and I did not treat him with any ointment, for I was in a place where none were found, nor any medicines; and I placed moist cotton twice a day on the wound, and I washed it with honey water until it was healed.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture: pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens; quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer; et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	Or I will tell you the two main ways of stitching: take the needle, and the thread from the part in front of the skin; when it has pierced through the center, then put the tip of the suture or stitch where you have put the needle, and let it pierce on the other side of the part inside the skin; and the understanding of this stitching is that you stitch like the furrier makes furs, and that you leave one end of the suture on one side, and the other on the other, until the stitching is all finished.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere: fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac; puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac; puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit; et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	The second method of sewing, which Galen properly calls, is such that anyone can do, who assemble the two parts together naturally, and apply one of the main needles to the other head, in a similar way: stick a needle or main needle near, and make it pierce only that part alone, and leave the two heads of the syringe; then turn the needle, and make it pierce from the front part just below, the two heads of the syringe; then pierce both from the front part just below, in two other needles that are on the other side; and this is the most common method of sewing.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune; et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies; et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	Some say this word, and no one testifies that one should sew the belly with two needles, or have thread in each; and one must put one needle on one side and the other on the other, in the manner of those who sew corsets; and sutures that when the tear is in the belly, it is more painful than other stitches of the belly.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies: et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe; et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach; puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	The judgment of the wound is such as the judgment of other wounds: and it is that when you remove the fresh wound from all its blood, if the doctor has moved it, then put back the intestine and the gut; then put powder in the form of chalk, and if the doctor has moved it, then put any ointment that is present, until the wound begins to heal; and bind the bandage, and sound the siphon, and the mirror; then cure the wound as the others, until it is healed; and if you do not have medicines, then as soon as it begins to heal, put old cotton, and move it twice a day until it is healed.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples; et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles; et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine; et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	For in other medical conditions with many different wound arrangements where the wounds are simple; and if you doubt that the wound does not make communication with principal members, then it is necessary to apply a light bandage soaked in oil of cold or rose oil, and place it around the joints, and remove it from the bones; and if it hurts or feels hot in the belly, and often happens, then you must clysterize with black wine, and immediately if the heat comes to the intestines; and pierce from within, and cut out what is inside, as when it is the large intestines, it is lighter to heal than the small ones.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	The intestine called "jeun" cannot be healed when it is bare, because of the thinness of its veins that are, and because of the subtlety of all the body, and its approach to the nature of nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres; et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres; puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	And if the intestine jumps out of the wound, put it back as the intestine, while it is fresh; and if it is old and turned to black, then you must tie the black limb that is there, because there are veins and arteries; then cover what is between the guts, and hang the two ends down from the part outside the wound towards the back to align the extraction when the intestine breaks, and the wound bleeds.
de la routure dou boueil	of the breaking of the boiled
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance; et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez; je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	When the intestine is punctured, and the wound is small, if one can put it back into a person's belly, because I saw that some men were saved from being gutted by a lance; and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and it became a fistula, and inside there was egestion and ventosity; I put care according to what I knew, and did not cease to treat it until it was healed, and the patient recovered.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre; et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans; et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere: pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus; et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise; et cout la plaie.	And when I saw it being sewn up, I doubted that the hairs were not in his belly; but there was no harm, and he recovered in better conditions, and fed and watered; and some experienced doctors said that when one has a small wound in the intestine, one should be tied in such a way: take firm gauze, then gather the lips of the wound, and when the firm gauze is over the mouth, it holds the mouth above; then cover the wound, and hold it so that it cannot slip off, then put the other firm gauze in the same way as before, until the wound is completely closed.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere: pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure; et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance; et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	This chief, if it burns in the intestine, and no harm comes to the hairs, and it can be tied with a thin thread that is taken from the intestine of an animal, in this way: take the head of this intestine thread that is very dirty, and then tie it to the head of this thin silk thread twisted, then pull the thread into the needle, and through the intestine, and reattach it at the rip; and this method of sewing is no more than according to the way of faith and hope; and if the wound is large and wide, especially when it is in one of the intestines, there is no remedy or healing, except for its subtlety.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	of fistula or where she is
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	that every wound or abscess, when it is covered, is universally called "fistula", and specifically when it is cut and healed.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil; et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse; aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez; et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes: c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors; ou por sa malice; ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char; ou il i a trop de bowe; ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit; ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure; ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence; ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature; ou il i a voinnes ou os: et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	And fistula is according to its hard and white root, where no pain is felt, and it is cut and healed like the quill of an eye; and sometimes it is clear and thick; sometimes small and sometimes enough; and I have spoken about it in the division of wounds, that every wound that is not healed, and there is no scar, except for one of the eight causes: that is to say, by the smallness of the blood or flesh; or by its malice; or because there is a hard scar inside and on the lips, which does not let new scar grow; or there is too much swelling; or the wound is infected, and the matter is of bad quality; or the medicine is not good in the cure; or because the corruption is like pestilence; or because the property in the region is late digestion, and late health, and flown by nature; or there are veins or bones: and I have already shown all these causes, and the signs, and the cures of medicines in the division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	Or it is necessary for me to tell you about the treatment of fistulas that is done by handwork.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors; car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez; et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	Fistulas can occur in all parts of the body; for there are fistulas that come to great veins, and to arteries, and to nerves, or to the face, or to the intestines, or to the bladder, or to any of the ribs, or to the spine of the back, or to any joint of the hands or feet; and if they come to the property of the main member, and similar ones.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance; et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier; et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit; et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie; puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent; et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens; et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons; et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	All fistulas of this kind are of great difficulty in healing, and there is only labor and ignorance; and if there is any fistula that does not come directly to the bone that I have mentioned, and you have confidence in the cure, and you know how to treat it, then take a lead or iron tent, if the fistula is straight, if the quarter; and if the fistula is twisted, then take a subtle tent of plaster, because the plasters stick to the tortuosity; and if the fistula has many holes and you cannot well cover it with tents, then suture one of the holes, for the moisture will not pass from one hole to another, and it cleans; then treat it carefully to your power, that you know whether there is bone or nerve, and it is covered in front, and ask well of the patient about the pain he feels when pressing with your hand, and the place where he feels it; and when you will know truly the place where it is, and whether it is far from joint, or nerve, or artery, or vein, or in any of the places that I have told you, then cover it according to what I have told you, and remove the infected material that is inside; and then treat it as long as it is healed, and if the fistula is deeply embedded in the right place, then cut it open as much as you can, then put soft tents in medicine paste, and press them on the head of the fistula, until the medicine corrodes the superfluity that remains at the bottom; and then put ointments of clean healthy charcoal, until it is healed; and if it is not healed by this, then cauterize as we have said, and if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, then cover.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit; et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font: si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu; et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If veins or nerves are not causing you pain or damaging your main limbs, as we have said; and if the tooth is exposed, and there is corruption and blackness, then remove the corruption as much as possible until it is completely removed, then treat the things that were injured with charms as long as they are healed; and if they are not healed, and remain the same as before, do not go any further: if it is exposed and you want to remove all the corruption, then remove all the corruption, then restore the tooth; and if it is thus healed, it is good.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir; si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature; et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un; et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	If not, it is better to leave it alone, as there is no other way to do it; and if there is a small bone that is corrupted, and you can remove it with pliers, then straighten it with the appropriate tool, and if there are many bones, then remove them all, and do not leave any behind; and if moisture makes it worse, and there is no error or fear, then use moisture and charms to deliver the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os; et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie; et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os; si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez; et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	And if you cannot remove them within an hour, apply a poultice on the wound containing soothing ingredients, and leave it until the flesh is well-covered around the bones, and then they will have more easily broken bones; and if it is a large bone, such as a leg or thigh, raise the corruption as much as possible until the black part is completely ossified, then cover the wound; and if there is a great part of the corruption remaining, and comes close to the bone; if it should be so, cover it all around the corruption, and treat it as long as it is still soft; and I will tell you about a fistula that happened to a man in his leg, so that you may take example and help in your work.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir; mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors; et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors; et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	The young man was around 30 years old, who had pain in his leg from a cause that came from within the chest, until the matter came to the leg and was inflamed with a large abscess, and there was no reason to open it; but the doctor by their folly opened it so high that the abscess opened and they poured out many matters, and it became a fistula, and there were many fevers that everyone suffered from sweat and moisture of the body; and many more doctors were called within two years, and there was no cure in the art of hands, until I was called and saw his leg and the medicines they were using to heal it, and what was passing through the fevers caused great pain; and his chest became red and had a yellow color.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	I pitched a tent in one of these openings, and then searched all the openings, and found that one was coming into contact with the other from all parts of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens; je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai; et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder; et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu; mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	Then I had to remove it, and I cut into one of the openings until I discovered a part of the bone, and I found it rotten and perforated, and the corruption was coming into contact with the bone from within; I saw that the rotten bone appeared to me, and I thought there was no other corruption except what I had seen; and I began to treat the wound with salves for a long time, but I could not heal it; then I re-examined, and discovered the continued corruption in the bone, and I saw it, and then I removed it, and I was unable to heal the limb; but I could only cut around a palm's width of the bone, and I treated it all over its surface, then I applied salves; it became healthy and healed quickly, and it did not need to be re-examined except for the weakness of the pain, which could not bear it, and for the fear of death that I had for him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	For the evacuation of blood often occurs, but he was healed completely, and in the place of the bone grew a hard callus, and it was of good disposition and had no harm or contradiction at all, neither to the other nor to the coming.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere: pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut; et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char; et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue; et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	And if the bone is broken in any part of the body, then it should be done in this way: take a thin strip of cloth, and extend it at the head of the bone that opens, and command that it be extended upwards; and place another thicker strip of cloth above the first strip, and extend it over the callus that is above the bone, and extend the head, so that you can remove the corrupted part outside, and reveal the callus above the bone where you see it should be, so that it does not rot the callus; and place a bandage or a poultice outside the bone to cover the corrupted part; and it should be done in such a way that one can see and feel the corruption, and it should be done again another time.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute; puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit; et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part; et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper; et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert; et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire; et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce; et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument; et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies; si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	If the tooth is rotted, and cannot be opened, and the decay is in the middle or in one part, then remove the thread from the whole tooth; then sew the decay from one part to another, and let the thread touch the decay only a little, as we have said; and if the decay is in the joint, then cover the joint with the decayed part, and sew the bone or what contains it from the other side; and if the decay is in the continuation of two joints, then there is no other way than to cover it; and if the decay is at the tip of the hand or foot, it is very difficult, but nevertheless you should inquire about that decay, how it opens; and clean it in all ways that you can, but do not let the blood vessel or nerve be damaged; and know that the instruments for covering these bones are many, according to the shape of the bones and the appearance of the teeth, and their size and smallness, and their greatness and smallness, and their hardness; and for this reason you should prepare an instrument for each kind of work; and know that the work will show you the instrument you have to use, according to the knowledge of this art, and the testimony of the ways of diseases; so consider the instrument you have to use according to what it is suitable for.
dou feu	with fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer; et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre; et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	The joints will rot due to causes within or without; and when you have treated the corrosion with medicines, and it does not improve, then you must amputate the member up to the joint where the corrosion comes from, so that the pain escapes by death or by malice, which is greater, due to the lack of the member; and the signs are that the members become black, so that they seem to be burned by fire, and becomes darker afterwards, as the corrosions of the member from member, and take hold of the whole body; if you hurry to amputate, and if the corrosion is at the head of the toe, then cut it off, and do not give it any space for the venom to reach your hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras; et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut; et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe; et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet; et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil; et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort; et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers; puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	If it comes from the hand, if the cloth is at the joint, so that the corrosion does not come to the arm; and if it comes to the arm, if the cloth is at the shoulder; and if it passes the shoulder, it is death, and there is no other remedy except the quantity of its virtue; and thus do all that the corrosion comes or pierces: if it comes to the first joint, if the cloth after the other joint; and if it comes to the bone, if the cloth covers the entire bone; and if it goes up the leg, if the cloth is at the knee joint; and if it comes above the knee, there is no other remedy except that the patient dies; and the way of the cloth or the bandage is such that you tie it above and below, and extend some bands on one side, and some bands on the other side, and moisten the flesh between the two sides to a span wide, until the bone is exposed; then the cloth or bandage, and put a piece of linen on each part so that the bandage does not touch the clean flesh, and it comes to the other injury and abscess.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet: il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet; et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez; et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions; et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere; et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez; et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	If blood comes out when you are working, cauterize the wound strongly, or put some binding powders on it; then return to your medicine until it is completed, then bind the wounded limb with a flexible bandage, and treat it until it is healed; and I will tell you what happened to a man in great pain: he had a black swelling that seemed like fire burning, and that corrosion first appeared on his right side, spreading over the whole body; and when the honorable men saw the corrosion, they covered the body, and it was healed; but after a long time, the corrosion appeared again on the right side of the hand, and it came to me, and I put some reflective things on the cleaned body, but I could not stop the corrosions; and he said that I would cut off his hand, and I did not want to, because I had hope of reflecting the matter; and he also doubted that if I cut off his hand, he would not die, for the virtue of the man was weak; and he lost all hope, and returned to his land, and covered his hand, and it was healed; and I have not told you anything else except for what is done in other cases.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe; et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz; et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»; mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»; et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz; et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	Never does an abscess form in a lean limb, and it lingers for so long that it causes great swelling; then it bursts and pierces, and the pus escapes, as if from a vessel; and the skin above is also as thin as cloth, and does not adhere to the bone, nor to the nerve, and such disease is called "sinus", and is not called "fistula"; but if it is so long that it reaches the bone from the front, it is called "fistula"; and the skin is that you cover that skin all around, and even when it is thin, as if it were cloth; and it does not heal for its corruption.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi: regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite: prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel; et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus; et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant; fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor; et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez; et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet; ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain; et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin; ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens; et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez; et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	If the skin is hardened and decay is not yet complete, and the skin is charred, then use the following ointment: check if the breasts are large, and the nipple is foul-smelling, then use an Egyptian remedy made as follows: take aloe, oil, and frankincense equally, and boil them together in a vessel over the fire until the medicine turns red and thick like honey; then take honey according to your needs, and mix it with water and make an ointment of the breasts, and apply it to the wound and tightly bandage it; leave the medicine on for two hours, then remove it by sprinkling; do this many times until the breasts are clean and free of pain; if the pain cannot be borne, and the Egyptian remedy or the ash water does not work, then use an ointment made of honey and wine with a little frankincense broken up; or use an ointment made of honey and melted honey that has the property of cleaning and washing, and the wine makes the flesh sore; when you have done this, and you are sure the breasts are clean, then use an ointment made of char and oil and rose water, and make it with a little frankincense; if the nipple is too small, and the ointment cannot enter, then enlarge it with a needle and put in a tent of Egyptian ointment or basilicon ointment until it is large enough; if the wound is too large, then leave it alone so that the skin or the ointment can enter, and if the nipple that is above the ointment is sore, then cover it with a cloth or lower bandage where it is.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char; et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe; et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain; puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois; et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste; et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez; et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	For when the bone is displaced, do not allow any charms to be used; and if you cannot cover the wound as you see fit, arrange it in such a way that the bone moves to the lowest point where it is, for when the bone is displaced, do not allow any charms to be used, and if you cannot cover the wound as you see fit, arrange it in this manner: that the bone moves smoothly downwards, and nothing remains of the bone; and take consolidative medicines to place on the wound, and cover the entire wound with a linen cloth; then apply forces at the correct point to lift the bone slightly off the other cloth according to the size of the bone, and place it on the bone to align the bone, and do not remove the large cloth until after many days; and whoever is over the bone, often remove to move the bone, and see what comes from the bone, whether it is poison or little or much, or digested or undigested; and take precaution if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not, and when your medicine has been applied in this way and you see the nature that succeeds over the cloth, then see that the bone has already healed, and approach health; and then remove the dressing in the morning, or the next day, and when you remove the wound, change the other cloth, and renew the poultice.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the breasts are not well digested after many hours, it is necessary to press them so that they do not harden.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	And if the subtle poisons are cut after long tension, do not despair of health, for health approaches.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire; et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie; et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine; pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance; puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu; et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire; et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use; et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens; si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	For there are men who delay in applying charms to their wounds, and those who do the opposite; and if the breasts are not well digested after many hours, press them so that they do not harden; and if the breasts delay from being softened, and are distant, then apply medicines of moist substance and dry in virtue, such as ointment, which has a great part of vitriol, and this is the last medicine; take ointment definitive, and make it with rose oil, and the vinegar of old wine even in substance; then cook and use it; and the same thing is also good for growing wounds, when ointment definitive is not present, or you take myrrh and aloes and incense, and grind them, and powder on the honey when it is on the fire; and then apply the cloth, and put it on the breast, and never administer an aristocrat long, and roots of lily celestial, which is also like flour of wheat and centoire; and use simple or compound: grind them, and make powder, and put on the honey that I have said, and use it; and if the cure is long, and is not cured by this cure, then suppose that the corruption is already in place, and press it into the bone, or the hard limbs, or the joints; then the cure of the cure of fistula, as we have said before.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	of the abscess of the finger
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois; et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute; et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	Panarice is an abscess that arises from the pouch of the hand, or from the palm, or by chance in other places; and when it is opened, and no care is taken, if the abscess extends to the root of the finger, and possibly entirely, and comes to corrosions just to the bone, as long as there is pain, and the affected area is large and red.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	If you treat it as we have said in the division, and the cure does not help much, then you must remove all the excess that remains from the finger, then cauterize the wound afterward.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne; et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	The cauterization is a great help if the bone is healthy and the joint is sound; and if the joint approaches the skin quickly, and begins to prick, and the wound, then it is necessary that you put the cautery away from the joint so that it does not pierce, and bring the end upwards, and cover this char subtly and gently, and put above the remaining part of the char hot and corrosive medicines to remove all; then cure the wound until it is healed.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner; et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier; puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor; et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	And if the corrosion is in the bone, then cover it and drain, for as much as the bone is corrupted, it cannot be healed; and if you see the other also corrupted, then cover it with a subtle and gentle cloth as before said, then cure it until it is healed; and if it is fierce, and bleeding, and it feels great pain, then it is necessary that you first heal it; then cover the joint with a subtle and gentle cloth cut across, and make sure that the cut does not reach the part of the char that is outside the joint, for the hairs would feel too much pain; and if there is, then put something on top to relieve.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	The pain of the hand should be soft
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	Those who are born in the hands of some men by chance are all charred, and sometimes they have bones, and sometimes they have a hook, and none of them are born at the root of the joint, or their birth is in any of the fingers.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet; la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere: taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	Those who are born in no finger of the hand do not move, and those who are born at the joint of the hand, sometimes move; the size of the charred one is light, in this way: cut it at its root into a wide spatula.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	Those who are born at the root of the joint are difficult to cure: if you hold the copper.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	For those who are born or must have at the back not, it is necessary that you first cut the round flesh to the bone, then cut the bone to a suitable silk for this, then treat it until it is healed.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The same things that come together in this way come either by birth or by wounding or by burning of fire or by similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz; puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent; ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	If it is necessary that you cut the wound, so that the parts return according to their natural forms; then put between two tents or cloths moistened in rose oil, so that they do not stick together; or you put between two pieces of thin leather, until the wounds are healed, as it should be.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	If it comes to any of its two with the palm, then apply that cure as it should be.
des vils	of the wounds
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors; et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	Vis are veins large and swollen full of superfluous melancholy, which come from many members of the body; and more so in the legs of those who stand and work and carry, than in others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	It is therefore necessary that you give it once purgation of black bile, and then the healthy from the basilisk.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir; et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	The cure of iron is done in two ways: one is that you apply it and draw out the black blood; and the other way is that you open the vein and let it all flow out.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil; puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir; et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire; et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	The tailor is done in this way: first, the leg of a high, very hot iron, so that the large one is not subtly heated, then straighten the leg with the bad pain below the hip; then cut the vein in I, II or III, with a wide gash, then release and draw out the black blood to your hand, from one to the other, until as much blood as the bad pain can bear is drawn; then tie it off, and command him to be shaved of meats boiled with black coal; and start the evacuation and cleaning when the veins are flat, and not swollen with the bad pain.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes; et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville; puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent; et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche; puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers; puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope; et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse; et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide; et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	1. The fire cauterization method is as follows: if the leg has long and even hairs, first shave them, then place it in hot water or steam until it turns red and swells the veins; if you don't have hot water, heat it over a fire, and apply a warm poultice to the affected area, either on the thigh or below the knee; then apply the flesh side of raw meat to the wound, and scrape off any discoloration from every part until it appears as if you were scraping a white cord; then remove the raw meat, and bandage it lightly with linen; then apply a cool poultice for about three days; then scrape the skin over the vein until it appears, then lift it to the wound, as you have done before; then apply another bandage, as many times as necessary; then cut away the discolored skin and lift it, and apply a new bandage to the second wound; then strip away the bandage from one layer to another, until it is all clean; then apply another bandage; and if you cannot pull and lift it, insert an needle through the thread very tightly, and pull and lift it, and remove the thread, turning your hand from one side to the other until it is all out; be careful not to let it stick, for if it sticks, it cannot be pulled or lifted, and it causes harm to the wound; then place a soft cloth soaked in wine and rose oil on the wound, and treat it until it is healed.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	And if the eye is contracted and twisted and swollen together, and it is not straight as we have said, then you must torture it severely but do not cover it; and treat it as we have previously described.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne; et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	The shape of the iron that is used to cover the eye is curved, and it does not cut much, so as not to cover the vein; and it is of large size, because if it were thin, it would cover the vein, but if it is large as we have said, this is the shape:
de la voinne civile	of the vein civil
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor; et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	This vein is inserted in the legs, in warm parts where there are no herbs or trees, and in land where there is no moisture; and by chance it arises from another part than the legs, and if there is a pus that comes out of the skin, as it comes from within the flesh and muscles, insert between the skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	And if the signs of the beginning of this wound are such that a very large inflammation comes in the leg, then the limb changes, and the wound begins to protrude, like the root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe; et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue; car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie; por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors; et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	When the wound is open, it is necessary to wrap around a piece of cloth about one and a half inches wide and long enough to cover the leg, and leave the cloth on the leg, and every time it is not needed, if it is wrapped around the cloth, and covered with a bandage; if it is too long, cut off a part and wrap the remaining part, and do not cover its root until it is completely out; because if you cover it, it will go back into the wound, and cause abscess and putrefaction of the limb, and severe illness; therefore it is necessary that it be treated little by little from the top, and nothing remains or rots; and this wound never occurs when it is treated with the palm of your hand, or ten fingers long, and some have come to me, because it was ten fingers long, and when you cover it, if it swells or bursts, and pierce it from the bottom, so that everything comes out; and remove the matter inside, and administer medicines in a salve for putrefaction every day, then cure it as with abscesses.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	And often times at this vein, and especially when it opens in the joint of the little finger, or the big toe, and much pain comes, and it suddenly falls back; therefore as we have said before, you must do as follows.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	verses that grow between skin and flesh
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer; et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre; et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	This disease is called in our land "cow disease", because it often affects cows, and it is a small worm that grows between skin and flesh, and goes up and down the body, and is felt by each member to member, until it burrows into the skin where it went, and jumps out; and it is caused by some humors, such as worms and leeches and tapeworms or intestinal worms; and people doubt its harm, because as it goes through the body, and goes up to the head, and comes to the oil, perhaps it enters, and destroys the oil; and this has happened many times.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait: si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire; et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit; et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer; et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	When you see that the patient is curable and can be treated, then it is necessary to place the limb above and away from a very tightly bound joint, then cut across and remove it, and if the blood comes out in front of the char, you do not remove it, but cauterize it with fire until it dies; and the greatest harm it does is that it corrodes the oil, as we have said; and if you see it coming or approaching near the oil, then hold it away from it firmly, then cut across and remove it; and it is necessary to use the remedy of healing of the bodies of medicines dissolved for the bad humors for the diseases.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	of the pain that comes from windiness
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	This disease is called in our land "vakirir", and it is a pain that comes to certain members, and then moves from member to member; and I have seen what I will tell you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais; et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre; li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais; puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	I was called to a sick woman, and I discovered one of her arms, and saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm; and soon after, I saw it rise like a worm in the shoulder, faster than anything, as if it were live silver when it cuts through flesh; the pain departed from that arm, and moved to the shoulder, and then a little later corrupted all over her body, until it came to the other arm; then she told me that she had turned inside out around her body, as I saw.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I was greatly amazed at how it moved from one member to another, for I had never seen this disease in this way before.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme; et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte; et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	Indeed, I had seen that it could move from one limb to another, but I had not seen it in this way before; and I thought that it was because the woman had a dry skin, and her veins were exposed, and because that vulnerability appeared constrained; and it did not happen in the same way to those who are delicate, and who have moist skins and covered veins.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer; et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	And when you see how to cure this disease, and the pain feels as we have said, if it appears as we have mentioned, then firmly hold the limb above and below, and then apply a caustic to the skin; and if you do not see it at your eyes, then treat the vulnerability as we have said, with fetid pills, and serapin pills, and similar others.
des saiettes	of arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	Arrows are various, according to their similarities and according to the types of bodies they pierce.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees; et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces; et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	The variety of them is such that there are those with large points, and small, and barbed, and soldered; and those with two angles, and those with tongues, and those with pieces; and the one which pierces any member according to the manner: whether in a principal limb it pierces as in the neck, head, heart, lungs, stomach, intestines, bladder, and similar members.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent: si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions; et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	When it pierces therefore in any of these members, and the sign of death, which I will tell you next, appears: then it is necessary that you attempt the extraction of this arrow, for the death comes after in many ways; and when this bad sign does not appear to you, and the arrow is not completely out, then pull it, and care for the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole; et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix; et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char; et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	And the signs of the head when the arrow pierces and perforates the bone, and the spasms that occur above the brain, are blindness and dizziness and vomiting and swelling of the tongue, and spasms and confusion of mind, and vomiting of bile; and perhaps without strength in the nose or in the ears; and perhaps without speech and voice; and a white discharge from the wound that resembles pus, and also like boiling oil; and if these signs appear to you, then keep the arrow if it has not been removed.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide; et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope: saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	The signs of a shoulder dislocation when it occurs or breaks, are that it is near the right breast, and feels as if it was stuck in a hard thing, not empty; and perhaps the shoulder also moves like a chicken, and in cutting out black blood, and comes with coldness and cold sweat, and syncope: therefore, without doubt, the patient will die.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of a wound that does not promote healing is that without any foam coming out of the wound, and the throat swells, and the limb changes color, and it breathes high and seeks the heat.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	And if the arrowhead pierces into the covering of the lower back, it is behind the small ribs; and it causes great pain and shortness of breath, and moves all the members of the shoulders.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the arrowhead pierces into the stomach, by chance if it jumps out of the wound, nothing of the undigested meat.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if the arrowhead pierces into the belly, and does not jump out through the intestine rupture, there is no hope in the cure, nor in the extraction of the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	And if the arrowhead pierces into the bladder, and the urine jumps out and comes out afterwards, and the pain is very great: it is certain that the wound is mortal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other limbs, such as the arm and neck and throat and shoulder and elbow and back and spine and hip and knee and legs, and similar members, are safe according to various positions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in a limb or an artery, and it is not venomous, as I will tell you what happened to me, because of what you were doing otherwise.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis: je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	It happened to a man with an arrow in his arm at the root of the nose: I tried to remove it, and took it out from the other side of the ear grease, and was healed without pain.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	And in a horse, an arrow was stuck that went through the grease of the oil paper, and the arrow was removed, and it could only reach to the point facing the fist, and the arrow was large like a Turkish bow, all of iron without ears; the horse was healed, and no bad accidents came to him.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles: je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	And an arrow was taken from the throat of a Christian, and the arrow was Arabic with ears: I cut off the barbs, and carefully removed it, and the Christian was healed.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit; et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition; je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	And an arrow was taken from a man, which was in his neck or belly, and I thought he would die; and after he had passed thirty days, his condition did not change; I cut into the arrow, and extracted it, and there was no bad accident.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus; et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	If you wish to treat a person who has an arrow stuck in their back or chest, and the wound was closed over; and the arrow remained inside, and did not change its natural positions, and found no harm in any of its natural works.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie; et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	And if you wish to treat another person who had an arrow stuck in their face, and the wound was closed over; and it remained thus to suffer great pain; and many others similarly.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	And if you wish to treat an arrow to the man of the king, who had it in his neck, and was slightly tilted to the right side; and the arrow was completely healed, I was called to cure after it had been three days.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	If the wound is very narrow.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie; et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	I carefully opened it with a very thin needle, and I did not feel anything; and he felt no pricking or pain outside his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast; et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	I thought it was the tip of the arrow that I put on his forehead with a strong adhesive bandage, because the wounds did not inflame; and I saw the arrows on his forehead.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	I then applied the bandage again, and immediately healed the wound, and the pain lasted a long time, until he felt the arrow inside his nose; and he told me so.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu; puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement; et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir; adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	I applied medicinal acid to the wound with my hands, as long as it was open, and tested it, and felt the tip of the arrow that was embedded in the flesh; then I inserted more medicinal acid into the wound opening, until the arrowhead appeared visibly; and it passed well through the four months, and then rotted if the wound that I had sown with needles, and on one side and the other, and could not get out; therefore, I did not cease to subtilize and engineer in various ways of instruments, until I got good needles, according to what its form will come at the end of this chapter, as long as I sown it and restored the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer: je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	And the miracle worker judged that the cartilage of the nose could not be restored: I restored it then, and it was sewn up, and the pain was completely healed.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre; mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	Or I told you the quality of extracting some arrows, so that you might place your care where I did not say, for books cannot comprehend everything; but wise masters know well many things, and know what is present and deficient, thus finding new work, and new instruments, in the understanding of strange things that happen in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres: ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part; et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	I say that arrows do not come out of the limbs or they are removed because of two ways: either by the way they enter, or from another part; and the one that goes out through the way it enters, is an arrow entered into its flesh, and it never came out.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue; et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor; et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	And if she does not jump now, let her remain until the charcoal is completely burned out, and the issue is alleviated; and also if she is stuck in the bone, and cannot escape, let her remain thus for several days, and move her every day; and then she will jump, and if she does not jump, pierce around all the forest subtly, until the bones around are expanded, and then draw it out.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	And if the arrow is stuck in the head bone, and goes towards one of the belly's ventricles, and any of the accidents that I have previously mentioned causes pain to the patient: do not draw it out immediately, but let her remain thus for several days, because if the arrow comes towards the face, it is death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	And if the arrow is not stuck in the bone only, and does not come out on its own, and remains there for several days without causing harm, then use the method to pull it out.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is deeply stuck and cannot be pulled out, then apply tar around it as I have told you; then treat the limb until it is healed.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente; et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble; et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans; et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire; et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	And if the arrow is embedded in the body so that it cannot be seen, then search for it throughout the tent; and if you feel it, then remove it with any suitable instrument; and if you cannot because of the narrowness of the wound, and the depth of the arrow, and there are no bone, nerve, or vein, then wait until the wound is large enough to remove it; and remove the arrow if you can, and if it has ears attached that hold it in place, then cut the flesh that is stuck to it with a sharp knife, and then break or pry open the ears of the arrow, until you can remove it; and be careful not to break the arrow while removing it.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	If you cannot do it once, then place the lain around the shoulder until it is properly positioned, then pull it out, because the extraction is alleviating.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre; et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	And if the bleeding from the vein goes against you, follow what we have said about the treatment in its chapter; and guard against incising the nerve and the vein, and put in place as you can draw out the arrow without danger, or soon or late, firmly or roughly; and put the pain according to the form it was in when the arrow fell off, for that is the greatest help there is, and if you cannot, then follow what the sign shows you.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment: taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	The arrow that comes from another part, where it opens nothing of it, or the skin is inflamed in a place where we can see or feel it: cut then above, as much as the hooks can take, and then extract it: if it suddenly breaks now.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is stuck in the bone, round your hand and push it into the bone, until it enters the bone, and expands the bone, then remove it.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer; et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust; et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	And if it cannot come out, leave it still, and then restart the extraction until it comes out; and if there is any of the arrow left, and you have to administer it little by little, if you are administering the instrument with a hook, so that the point of the arrow enters the hook; and then pull out, and if the arrow is hooked, pull the instrument in, to facilitate the extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	And if the arrow is embedded, it is necessary that you cut out all of the flesh around where the poison is, if possible, then treat the wound as it should be.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope; et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est; et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if the arrow is stuck in the neck or back or stomach or bladder or ribs, and it is close to them, and you can cut over it, if possible; and do not cut into the vein and nerve, and then extract it, and then treat the wound if necessary; and the cure until it is healed.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The shape of the needles used to extract arrows is similar to a bird's beak, and this is its form:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	And there are many ways: large, medium, and small, according to the amount of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	The shape of the arrowhead is also like the beak of a bird, to put at the point of the arrow, such as this:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	The shape of the barbs for inserting and removing is such as this:
des voinnes dou cors communes	Veins common to the body
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir: II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»; et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans; et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»; et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis; et les II guindeges qui sont ou col; et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»; et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	There are thirty-one veins that can be tapped from, of which there are sixteen heads, namely: two veins that are behind the ears, which are called "herbech"; and the two arteries that are in the temples apparent; and the two veins that are in the arm pits of the eyes, which are called "aspires"; and the vein that is in the forehead; and the vein that is at the top of the nose; and the two jugulars that are on the neck; and the two veins that are in the lips above the mouth, and these are the veins called "augeherich"; and the six veins that are outside the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras: l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»; et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	The veins that are commonly opened are five in each arm: the one is to the cephalic, and is on the right side, and is called by the people "the main vein of the head"; and the middle is called "the forearm", and is composed of the cephalic and basilic, and is called by the people "the vein of the chest"; and the basilic is on the left side, and is called by the people "the vein of the belly", and is above the foscile, and is that which is opened, which opens manifestly above the pouch.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains; et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei; et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	And the salvatelle is the vein that is between the auricular and the anular, and it is on the right arm; and in the leg and where the knee is, there are three veins: the one is outside the corbeure of the pouch of the right side costeit, and the second which is at the knee of the left costeit; and the vein which is called "nesse", which is at the knee of the other costei; and in the other leg are three veins.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine; et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief: quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche; puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues; puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee; et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	The treatment of veins after the ears helps with old catarrhs and headaches; and the qualities of the treatment, as I told you, is to remove the main cause of the pain, and to rub the skin where the veins are on a rough cloth; then squeeze the veins at their base with a cloth until the two veins appear behind the ears in two places: then apply your finger there, and where you feel the hair coming out of your finger, cut it; then take the lancet and poke it just outside the vein next to the bone, then lift your hand up the whole vein, and scrape and the skin and the vein should be crossed over well, and let the blood come out until you see it; then strain and tie, as long as it is clean; and I have already mentioned the incision and the cauterization in the first book.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz; et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis: et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement; et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche; puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit; puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton; et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	The translation of the first sentence is: "For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor; et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere; puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	The purging of the vein in the front is as valuable as the purging of the cerebral diseases and facial old diseases, and headaches, and rheumatism; and the quality is such that the pains are strange, twisting their neck until the vein appears; then take the instrument called «fosseur», which has the following form:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues; puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	And place the point above the vein, and hold it with your hand or another thing, and let the blood issue according to the quantity you see; then loosen the neck of the patient, and tie the vein until it is healed and never again in a wide flame.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	Therefore, it is not necessary that the flame be too hot; and the position of the bone is important, because the bone is close, and by chance it may break the flame when it is thin.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice; et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant; puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	The position of the second veins that are in the two armpits helps with the elbows, and the wrist, and the palm, and the back of the hand in the oil, and for diseases of the face; and the quality of their position is such that the pain is strange when twisting any limb, as before; then the position, and let the position be on the other side, a little bit long of the flame, a little bit wide, because there is no char.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if the flames are thin, perhaps they will break; then correct the blood, as much as you have skill, and then tie with cotton, and bind it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree; et c’est li forme dou flaime:	The bloodletting of the vein is good for ague, and for fevers, and for facial diseases such as migraine and headache that come in the face, and constantly when it is old; and the quality of the bloodletting is such that the pain is strained on its neck, then strain its vein to your right hand, and take the thin flame long, and put it in the space between the two nostrils, because the vein does not open well, and the blood will start to flow; and do not move too much in front, and correct the blood according to your need, then tie it for a night, because it is quickly restored; and this is the form of the flame:
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit; et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est; puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	The salve of the second compound helps to narrow the alainne, and at the beginning of the ulceration, and in many diseases, and in impetigo, and in corrosions, and in herpes, and in estomenes; and the quality of the salve is such that the pains strangely separate from each other, as we have said; and so the masters are above the chief of the pains, and the pains lie on one side, then cleanse the wound with a long, slightly wide blade, then drain the blood constantly, or as much as the matter requires; then do the other side in the same way, then remove the bandage, and hold both wounds evenly, that the pains do not entangle; and let it rest until morning, so that the wound is healed.
de la sainie des leivres	of the health of the liver
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The health of the lips above helps to cure in the mouth, and corruption of the gums, and cuts of the lips, and sores inside and out.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit; puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires: cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	And the quality of the health is to make the pain sit in front of you, and hold its neck as I have said; then turn the lip, and look at the two veins, one on the right lip and the other on the left, and they are known by the fact that they are black, and by the fact that around them there are small black veins: cover both of them, and if you do not know them, and if you are in doubt, cover the largest of each part, and do the same for the two veins that are above and below, for it is the same method.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	of the tongue's disorder
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche; et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire: saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	The disorder of the veins that are outside the tongue helps after the disorder of the cephalic, and it is the narrowness of the throat, and diseases of the eye, and diseases of the mouth; and the quality of the sailor is that the maladies cease between your hands before the sun, and he lifts the tongue, and looks at each side a black vein: therefore healthy one and the other, and do not move too much in front, because outside are the arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres: ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»; et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	The veins of the jaw that are commonly cured are cured in two ways: either by pinching all the flame wide, or with a thin slice as if cutting through, and is called "aneurysm"; and they are wide and thin according to the width and narrowness of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The form of the flame mirror is very famous, and it is wide as you see.
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble; et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	And it has skill to open veins that are closed and have thick blood and turbid; and this is the form of the flame mirror.
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	And it is more delicate, and is for cleaning fine veins, where there is fine blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre; et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	The vein of the basilica, which is one of these veins, helps with diseases that are outside the neck, and under the collarbone, and in the arm, and in the stomach; and it is important for the cleaner to clean carefully, and to withdraw the artery that is outside.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit; et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	And if the artery is cut, and blood flows, it should be cooled, as I have said; and it should not be touched with the flame, but cut as with scissors.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre; ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement; et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	And if the basilic vein does not open clearly, it should be stretched and changed, or you may see any sign of blood in it, or you may open the vein in place of the arm: it opens clearly; and it should be coped with scissors as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz; puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil; et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	And if you know the vein of the sinew, it should also be stretched, and you touch the vein until you feel the pulse; then sign the vein with a needle, and then bind the arm, and cut the vein with scissors; and watch that you do not cut into the artery when you see the vein swell, for it is the artery: avoid it then.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere: haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient; se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see a stream flowing out as high as the urine of a child, and the stain is red and thin, it is from the artery: hurry then, and place your finger longwise, then remove your finger without stopping, as it often does; bind the arm, and leave it thus, and do not move the painful parts; and be afraid, and do not move it until it is healed.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	And if the stain is not stopped, and it hurts, and the medicine is not present, if the artery opens, for the blood flows out; stop the stain.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor; se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc; et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	Take a small splinter of the thistle, and make it into a poultice, and place one half on one side and the other on the other side; if there is no pain, it is good; if there is pain, as we have said, use the ointments that relieve pain; and the reliefs are not greasy in many positions for the small wound of the sore, and the position of the joint of the arm.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit; et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner; et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	The salve of the vein in the middle helps to treat blood that is above and below, because it is composed of basilica and cephalic, as we have said; and it is necessary for the salve to be applied to all the nerves that are out of place, and if it does not too much in front, and he finds the nerve, and he swells and the ointment is either greasy, and perhaps cannot heal; and this nerve often opens, and if it does not open in any man by its subtlety, then you should use the salve from the instrument anesil; and protect the nerve to your power.
Et se il a voinne entre les II ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if he has a vein between the two nerves, make it long.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz; et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	The cephalic vein is helpful, as it draws blood from the head, and helps with it; and it is best to prick in the olive or oleander fire, for it is the safest of all veins, as it has no connection with nerves or arteries.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence; et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	However, it is best to seek the lightest vein, and do not hurt anything if you cannot find it the first time, and start again; and perhaps some men's veins swell at first, but it does not hurt.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of health is according to your thoughts.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir; et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique; et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent; et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	The first thing you must know about health is that health is not maintained except to maintain health and to prevent diseases from coming; and let health be done in one of the three veins that are or cost: namely, cephalic, femoral, and basilic; and if it should be done at the beginning of spring, autumn, and winter after fasting, when the sign of repletion appears; and if it should be done on the first day or the third, after two hours or three in the morning.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens; et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	The remedy that is administered to diseases does not have a determined time, but rather when needed, at all hours and in all situations; and it does not matter to suckle children under 14 years, nor to give medicine to pregnant women except for labor pains from the fourth month until the seventh.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez LX ans.	Nor should one administer remedies to the elderly who have passed 60 years.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz; ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques; et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors; puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir; puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit; et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses; et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans; et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on; puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	And when anyone wants to administer remedies, in any way whatsoever, it is necessary that they first clean the intestines from a light clyster, if they have too much retained feces, so that the veins do not absorb excessive and harmful substances into the main members; and one should not administer remedies to those who are too fat from meats, or drunkards, as much as they may be, nor hydropiques; and if one wants to administer remedies after colic passion, vomiting, diarrhea, and frequent travel, pregnancy, watching, and fasting, and all the virtue, whether by arm or body; then subtly the humors, if they are not too heavy, by foods and drinks and medicines, if one has them; then take a bath or abstain from anything that does not prevent, to subtilize the blood, and cure the vein around the third hour, as we have said; and guard against work, needle, luxury, and similar things; and be tied and joined, and let the remedy be higher than that of whom one administers, and let the arm rubbed twice or three times, then gently move the joint above the middle, because when it is too stiff or weak, it cannot correct itself; then rub the remedy on the hand until the veins swell, and feel the pain; then mollify the remedy with a drop of old oil, then put its due amount on the right hand over the vein of the hand where one wants to administer, that the vein does not fail to strike.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus; et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	There are veins that flee as quickly as strings to the sieve, and there are some that are plain in their softness, such that when one puts them over the flame, they withdraw from the flame, and cannot open the vein, and thus are those; and if it opens the vein, then the wound is too tight, because it is necessary that the sieve be careful in these things.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if the vein opens the first time, it is good; but if not, then one should try again a little below that place or above, if the veins are not inflamed.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras: par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait; et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement; et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	And if the veins are inflamed, and the pain spreads, one should leave it alone or rest for a day or two, and not tie the arm: perhaps an abscess will form; do not enter or take a bath, then try again with the sieve if it suits him; and if the wound is small, or if one cuts subtly and doubts that there is as much blood as one saw, then put the fire directly on that wound; and work a little hastily, as long as the veins are inflamed; for this happens many times when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile; et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc; et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	If you see the limb swells, do not restart the wound, and put a small amount of oil on it, because it alleviates the course of the blood, and it is good for this limb that the oil; and thus administer the oil in every wound that you heal the wounds, to stop the course of the blood; and the same thing does triangular and bow-shaped, when put on the limb; if subtly the blood and sparks when it is too thick.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre; et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie; et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	And if there comes large abscesses that often occur, exactly when it is not healed except at this time or the opening of the vein is small, then hurry and put on the limb soft sponge in hot and in a cloth a little wet, and hold it an hour; and it is necessary that you do this after the issue of the blood from the vein, and if it remains in the limb for any time no longer or greenish, then do not put anything on it; and if you see, put on any thing of aloes or of myrrh mixed with honey, mustard or similar.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And often there is an abscess and appearance of the saint's head at the basilica: place your hand on it, and if you press the bone too much with your hand, that appearance is bad.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai I emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore do not place anything that we have said on it, for inadvertently you may cut the artery; but apply a dry poultice to harden the bone, then treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And treat each wound according to the amount of its virtue and the color of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	For if the wound is black, let it bleed until it turns red; and if you see that it is thick, let it bleed until it becomes thin; and if it is too hot, let it cool.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges; et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant; et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	And it is fitting for one who is in pain and out of place, and has the task of extracting arrows, to make a larger wound, and let the flames be wide; and for the weak, do the opposite, and let them rest often, and it should be bandaged by cutting across, not by pinching; and this method of bandaging is safe from the separation of arrows and the entanglement of nerves, and it is better than the bandaging done long or wide.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	And for one who has a weak body for the bandaging, it is fitting to give bread made from ground apples; if they are heated, take out the arrow three times or four times; and if they are of cold constitution, change the bread made from ground apples before the bandaging with mustard bread, or aromatic honey syrup with spices, such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cloves, and strongly scented syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	And if he palms the pain after much bleeding, it is necessary that he drink broth of bone, and sweet-smelling syrup, and use the other things that we have said in the section or chapter on syncope, for the evacuation of blood.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he wants to stretch an arm, and bleed again, it is necessary that, when he is weakened by much bleeding, he should bleed a little and a little, according to the amount of its continuous virtue.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine VII houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And if he wants to bleed an arm after the first bleeding, and he has great strength, he should bleed seven hours after the first bleeding, or after the ninth hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And whoever wants to heal from the other side, should heal on the second day or the third.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson; puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens; et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus; ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz; mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	For there is much blood within the body that is already heated, and causes fever; if you need to draw out a great quantity, and widen the vein until it bleeds well; then you must restore all the conditions of healing, and place your hand on top of the wound when it is healed, so that the dead does not return in place of the wound, and this has happened many times, when the healer is negligent; and it does not matter if you see the arm bleeding, and draw out blood the second time, and the vein is closed, that you press firmly on top; or if it is curved, that you extend the arm quickly, for this would be bad; but let it heal the second time; or until the unhealthy part is removed from the vein, and put a small amount of fresh salve on the wound, and press lightly.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the swelling is present, let it be and do not press it until the abscess is calmed.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if it is necessary to draw blood the second time, if the healthy vein in the same limb or in another vein or in the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein in the arm is healthy in place of the main vein because it is composed.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges; puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc; et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez; et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit; et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	And the manner of drawing blood is that the vein bursts with sharp heat, until the blood is red; then it is gently moved, so that the vein appears well, then draw blood across, not too narrow or too long; and let the punctures be wide, and draw blood well near the joint of the hand, and if none can come out, if you put the hand in sharp heat, and let the blood flow in the sharp, until you have enough; and if it is still not coming out, do not repeatedly put the hand in sharp heat, for it will be worse than before; and drawing blood from this vein is safer than all other veins, there are no artery or nerve.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere: estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie; et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	The salve of the hand of the right side is good for all diseases of the liver, and this is how: strain the hand, and boil in very hot water until the vein is out, if one sees it; and if the salve goes against, and if you cover it with everything, it will not hurt anything; and do not move it too much, for the nerves are all nude of char, and then put the hand in very hot water, if it is not frozen in the wound, and it cannot come out.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have treated the arrow as much as necessary, put oil and thread on the wound to sew quickly, and thus do for each one.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The salve for the left hand is good for the disease of the mouse, and do everything as I have told you on the right side.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	The salve of the sage is good for all diseases that are outside the body, such as marsh diseases, retention of urine, and kidney diseases, and old leg and arm diseases, and similar diseases.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains; saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	And the quality of its salve is that diseases are quickly dispersed in hot, piquant water, and rubbed on the vein until it perishes, and binds over the joint of the pain; and the vein is at the elbow, and through the pain, many rains go out; therefore the salve is good for large veins, or at the elbow, that moves.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you find the healthy ones above the skin, and they are removed from the dead, and the healthy one crosses as in sewing; and let the flames burn.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if it cannot be removed without any, reset the skin in the hot, and let the blood drain well.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz; ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	And if it is necessary to first clean the healthy one, then start the second above a little, for the first is salted; do not doubt the tendon, as we have said, and so make the other side of the skin equally.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The first blood from the vein is at the elbow, and its cleaning is worth the pain of the back, when it is for an arrow.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant; et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	And the quality of its health is such that the hairs between or bathing, and it is strange above the ankle four times in twisting, for otherwise it does not open the vein; and if it opens, then heal it in all ways you can, and in various directions; and it is better to cover it, because the feet are clean, and it is very easily infected by handsmen.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners; et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	And if you do not treat it, it will heal none of the blood that opens or drops from the wound, and towards the little toe, and it guards against the nerves; and correct so much blood as you see, and then remove the ligament, and put it on cotton and hold it in place; it is now healed.
des sainies de ventouse	of suction cups
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc II manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Suction cups are made of horns, or of tin, or of glass; and ventosation is done in two ways: either by pricking and drawing blood, or without pricking.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu; et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col; et II autres en II costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton; et li ventouse des II espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies; et les ventouses emmi les II bras; et les ventouses des II jambes; et les ventouses des II chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne; et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	And this suction without pricking is done in two ways: either all fire, or without fire; and suction done by pricking and drawing blood is done in twelve places on the body, of which one is all over the chest; and the others are under the collarbone; and the other two are on the ribs; and the suction below the chin; and the suction on the shoulders; and the suction on the hips; and the suction on the arms; and the suction on the legs; and the suction on the ankles; and the suction does not treat blood, except for small veins that are scattered in the body, and for this reason it does not weaken anyone, as one does when drawing blood; and it should not be administered, neither with fire nor without fire, in any disease caused by repletion, until the whole body is emptied.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens; car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief; et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz; et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc; et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	And if necessity of diseases requires ventilation, or for customs, then we should stir up each hour at the beginning or end of the month, or in every ten; for there are some who, when they have need of ventilation, have heavy breathing; and there are some who experience repletion and tightness in their face, and in their head, and in their throat; and there are some who taste blood in their mouth, and extend their tongue, and suck blood; and there are some who sing, and see through a mist of blood and nausea and death and similar things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés III houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, and especially when it is in the month of May, we command them to fast for three hours after midday.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors; et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement; et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	The fasting of the mouth helps to cure the headache … that comes from them, and should only be done after the evacuation of all the blood; and this fasting is in place of the fasting of the cephalic, and should not be used by those who are of cold complexion or who have diarrhea, for this does great harm; and therefore it is not suitable for those who are awake or who have other cold diseases.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who often feel better, if they become forgetful, and for this reason, you should put the bandage a little lower due to the uncertainty of forgetfulness.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion; et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	The bandage around the neck is in the place of the head and the temple, and for this reason, it is best to place it at the narrowest point, and at the base of the jugular vein, and all over, and at repletion; and it should not be placed too tightly, as it may cause forgetfulness or stomach ache or heart.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	The bandage on the two sides of the neck is good for headache, and obtundedness and emaciation, and choking, and pain at the roots of the teeth, and it is in the place of the healing of the temple; and you should command the patient to put his hand when placing it, that he does not press the artery, and does not cause bleeding of blood.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des II levres.	The breathing through the nose is beneficial for diseases of the mouth, and for corruption of the gums, and similar diseases that are in the mouth; and it is in the health of the two lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	The breathing through the shoulders is beneficial for diseases that come from heat and filling.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes; et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	The breathing through the elbows is as beneficial as three veins of the arm, for it draws blood from these large veins; and commands the healthy one not to be too eager in the beginning, for the arms are bare of clothing, and can cause veins and arteries.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The suction cup that is placed on the back should be used for hernias, and to remove dislocations, and it should be large and made of metal, so it can properly pull; and if it is too thin, it may break; and I cause great wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des II sophenes, et des II chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	The leg suction cups should be used widely, as they draw blood from the entire body, and are useful for old pains of the rain, and the marsh, and the bladder, and they remove clots; and they are in place of the two thighs, and everywhere they weaken the body after long use, and cause pain in many positions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	The method for applying the vacuum is that you first apply it empty and quickly succeed, then press it strongly and move it evenly, and do not stop doing this until you see the limb red and swollen, and appear the outflow of blood; then stop, and replace the cups, and take care in the position of the body, for there are those who have thin skin and clear flesh: it is necessary to strike once only, and it is necessary to make large wounds, and one deeply; and suck lightly.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir II fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	And if the skin is thick, then it is necessary to strike twice: the first time to thinly pierce the path of the thick blood.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And if it is very severe, then you must prick the third time; and when we want to draw out the arrow little by little, we should only do it once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif: se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite; et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	And if we want to draw out much blood, we should often recommend it; and if the wound is not severe, then prick it in front, and the end should be that the keel is pierced deeply, and it is suitable for those who have thick skin and are strong, and who have sharp teeth, that you apply the leeches of oil that is appetizing and dissolving: if it is in this state, of violet oil, or of sweet almond oil, or of cucumber seed oil; and if it is in winter, of pennyroyal oil, or of lily, or of camomile, or another similar one.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the excess is large and cold, take oil of tarr, or balm, or aniseed oil, and similar things.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	And if the one who is to be sewn has wide and large pores, then it is not necessary to put oil, but it should be washed after the application of sharp vinegar, or cold vinegar, or vinegar of myrtle, or vinegar of cucumber, or vinegar of porcelain, or another similar thing.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And those who have much moisture, if they rise from ash, or sharp vinegar, and of similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans; et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	And those who have excessive superfluities rise from old wine, or from vinegar of sucking, or from decoction of anise or chamomile, or other similar things; and they should not be immediately washed with a suction device before the bath, but after the bath for one hour or two; and they should not sleep immediately after the suction, and it is recommended that they move around, when they should be sucked and when they are being sucked.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez; si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses; et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	And if those who are sick are choleric, and if they have too much bile and are inflamed; it is recommended that they take cold things, such as green apples and endives and leeks at the table, and similar things; and pulp of pears, and char of Chartres, and moist meats.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons; et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier; et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz; et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	And those with a cold constitution should take honey syrup, aromatic wine between old and new, and a little vinegar, pomegranate juice, and small olives and pigeons; and on the day they are to be ventured, they should drink more than usual; and it is recommended to give some myrrh or musk to some men before or after the venture to strengthen the main members; and the wine should not be subtle, but only those who are hot should drink it.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre; et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu; et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	The suction cups that are placed on the body are those placed on the liver, and on the spleen, and the gallbladder, and on the stomach and the belly and the kidneys and the buttocks, because these members do not suffer from pressure except to draw blood from one member to another, as we put suction cups on the breasts when the baby is born; to remove the viscosity that is in the member, as we place suction cups on the stomach and on the belly to soothe the member; and to remove pain, when there is an abscess or a stone, by its attractive power it may happen to remove the abscess or dislodge the stone from its place; and thus it is done when placing it on the liver and on the spleen when there is retained viscosity, and these suction cups are administered empty for drainage alone; and sometimes they are administered together with fire, and sometimes with a hot bath of sharp herbs, as in diseases of pleurisy, and in such a way that one fills the suction cup with hot sharp herbs.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The shape of the pneumatic device administered by fire is as follows:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre; et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent; car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	And it has two inches of width and half a palm of length, and has or costates around the middle one small hole, as to put an needle, and it is of tin, sulfur before so that it does not burn the skin when putting it on the limb; and it has in the middle a crossbar of tin or iron, for putting a candle, and they are large and small according to the diseases and age of those who take them; for the suction devices of children are different from the old, and thin ones from fat ones.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre: empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide; et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse; et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	And one should place this suction cup in such a way on the limb: take the candle of wax or the liniment, and put it inside the suction cup through the rod that is inside the suction cup, so that the light may be at the bottom of the suction cup so that it does not burn the hairs; then place it on the limb, and do so as we have said, so that when one wants, if the vapor rises, and remove the suction cup; and take the liniment as before, and repeat often, if you have the opportunity.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement; et c’est li forme:	In the suction cup that is used in the disease of pleurisy, at all times, there is no rod or stopper, and it is not administered until it is full of air, and it is placed on the limb entirely alone; and this is the form:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus; et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans; et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren; et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres; et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues; et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	Sansues are not treated except in members where one cannot place suction for their smallness, such as lips and gums, and similar things; and in similar members, remove the char, such as two or teeth, and others similar; and the quality of the user is such that when you trueve sansues that are in sweet waters without pressure, take them; and put them in sweet water until they are familiar, and have nothing in their bellies; and then cleanse with blood and suction, then rub the member until it is red, and put on the sansues; and when they are plain, and cherrched, if it is a member where one can place suction, place it, because this is very helpful afterwards.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint; et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés; et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez; ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant; et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	If not, raise the limb gradually and well, and then wipe it; if the wound is too large after the furrows of the sinews, then moisten a piece of linen in cold water, and place it on top, until the wound is cleansed; and if the wound multiplies, then place on top vitriol broken into pieces, or salves, and similar things, until it is cleansed; or you place half-peeled beans on the limb, and leave them until they burn the limb, to stop bleeding now; and if you have more need, take other bandages.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent; et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	And if the snakes do not want to take, rub the wound with fresh blood, or you insert a needle so that the snake bites it, and then place them on top, and as soon as they feel the blood, they will die; and when you see that they are dying, powder with a little aloe and beaten silk, or ash, so they will now burn.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	Here begins the book of fractures
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and it deals with fractures and dislocations.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent; et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin; et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie; et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	So, dear child, that the foolish might see this chapter, they have never seen any of the old books, nor have they read any letters; and for this reason, the science is hidden in our land, for I found none good; and I know nothing, except by the science of the old books, which I have studied so much that I have treated it, and by experiment, and by the custom of my life; and I have described to you in this chapter what is contained, and I have abbreviated it at the end, and I have shown clearly the forms of the instruments that will be needed, as I have done in these two chapters before.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	It is therefore necessary that we say or prologue of this book the sums of the word and the chapters where the wise put their understanding, and stay on the truth, so that those who are experienced find and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars; ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	I say that when fracture or dislocation or twisting or bruising comes to any part of the body, it is necessary that you hasten to treat the injury on both sides, if nothing happens, such as weakness of the body, children, or old people; or if the pain is not very great, or too sharp; and use cold remedies, that is to say, cold compresses, and chicken broth, and do not drink wine, and do not use any heavy meats, and do not fill up too much with food that fills the veins of blood, until you have no doubt of abscess or spreading of matter to the member; if the pain returns as it has used to.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when broken bones begin to heal, it is necessary to apply a thick poultice of meat that makes large blisters, or has viscosity, such as cooked wheat, and rice, and tests, and peas, and chicken breasts, and eggs, and fish, and large wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For the poultice should be changed often and more quickly than the breakage.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans; mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	And know that broken bones of the elderly and infirm do not mend well or heal according to their nature due to the weakness of the members, nor those who are too tender, such as the bones of small children; but rather, reset the broken bone over the joint and join the member together, as it was before; and do not let it rest entirely, and for this reason, it is necessary to apply a thick poultice of meat, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And there are many ways in which bones can be broken.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the fracture of the shoulder is different from the fracture of the arm or leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all the ways of fracture.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there is a fracture that goes through, and another when wetting, like the point of a pen for writing.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if there is a fracture with a wound, and a fracture at one small cut.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu; et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main; et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure; mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	And each way has its own method, and its proper instrument in restoration, according to what memory comes in the limb; and the fracture of the bone is known by the fact that the limb is twisted, and open well by itself, and it is to be pressed with the hand; and when there is no twistiness or touching, and the pain is not much, if there is no fracture; but it can have twistiness, or cut, or small fracture.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	It does not matter if you move it with your hand, but put the remedies that come after this, and then gently constrain it now.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne; et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez; puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	And if the fracture that was in the arm, and the two parts are disjointed, you should now put them evenly, as much as an abscess comes; and if an abscess is hard and comes, do not leave any joint, until the abscess is calmed; then put it even to the muscle that you can lightly and safely, and if the restoration of this is lighter than the restorations of those who have pieces; then constrain, as it should be after this.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main; et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor; et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	And if the bone is broken into pieces, if it is in the hand or foot, or at your hand if it is small members, or to two strings, or to a string and at your hand; and put the member according to its natural shape, so that when the parts of the member broken are separated, if you can join them together as best as you can, and guard that by your work no harmful injury or pain comes; and well set the two broken bones according to the best forms.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	And feel it well in your hand if it seems to you that it is not quite right: if it feels beautifully, and do not strain it too much, and do not press it as those who bring it by their work aposteme and contraction of the member, as we have seen many times.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere; et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	And when the member is set, properly restrain the painful part so it does not move, whether awake or sleeping, turning or in any other way; and ensure that the member is so secure that it feels no pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor; et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez; et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	For when it feels no pain, it is not yet set properly, and it should be placed in the correct position so that it feels no pain; and guard that it is put straight, for twisting will not come when it is restored; and the quality of the member broken is as I tell you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	The members broken are different in size, greatness, and shape.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz; et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche; puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure; et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet; puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus; puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	For there are small members, such as the arm and leg, and similar ones: if they are thin, cover them with fine linen cloths; and those that are thick, such as the thigh and calf: if they are large, cover them with a wide and strong bandage, for the wide bands embrace the whole member evenly, and hold it equally from all parts, so that there is no gap; then wrap lightly around three or four times according to the length of the member, and hold your hand a little on every part of the bandage, then go above the break and hold it less, than the break slowly remove a little from the break; then soften the bandage little by little, until you grasp a large part of the healthy flesh, then take another bandage and turn around again on the broken member; then return to the part away from the break, and hold it gently, neither too hard nor too painfully, as we have said in the first chapter above; then put between the bandages linen or cloth, as much as they are equal, then bind everything above with a bandage, and then put your well-made fingers on top, if there is no abscess or inflammation.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors; puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	And if there is an inflammation or abscess, put something soothing on the abscess, and what removes the inflammation, and let it be like this for some time; then place it on the wounds, and be of half a wide bandage, well-sewn, or of wood from which the splints are made, or of palm leaves, and they should be according to this figure:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres; et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor; puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure; plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol; car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	But the splint that one puts on the fracture should be a little larger and wider than the others; and it should also be as long as it is needed for the limb of small or large size; then place the splints as you have done in the first chapter, then tie them together with a thread evenly, as you did in the first chapter on the fracture; the tighter it is, the less; and it should be that the threads are medium, neither too thick nor too thin, and they should be of flax; for if the threads are thick, as I have seen in the works of the folk who make the cords of linen thread, and this is great error, because the bandage cannot be even if it is too fine, and it should only have between each splint about two fingers' space.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the wounds are closed by the strings of the needles after the straining in their clean state, then put them out of the cloth or other clean rag so that it does not become infected.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is with the splint, and the bandages are broken, I will tell you the treatment here afterwards.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And it is not necessary to strain all the broken limbs on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant; et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	Because when the limbs are large, it is not necessary to put on bandages until after five or seven days, or more depending on your safety from abscess: and see the method of ancient plasters to restore fracture, dislocation, and torsion: and it is that you take some flour that is held as in the walls of the mill, and mix with an abundance of egg, and put this mixture, not too clear or too thick, and use it, and this is the common method of the plaster restoring fracture to many positions, and especially to women and small children, because it is not too hard or too soft.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana V З.; alechil VIIII З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Another way to treat fractures and dislocations and twists: take equal parts of aloe leaves, mugwort, Arabic gum, and myrrh, each X amount; myrrh and aloes, V amount; achillea, VIII amount; and make a powder, and mix with honey; if the body's condition is hot, use this plaster, as it is of good composition, and it heals broken bones quickly, and is worth many men.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.; acaice VI З.; bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Another plaster that is good for twists: take mugwort and valerian, each X amount; myrrh and aloes, VIII amount; acacia, VI amount; Armenian bole, X amount, and grind well, and mix with vinegar or honey, and administer.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	Another way to treat joints and bones that are diseased from their sockets, and to relieve the pain coming from them, and to use the bone, and the breaker: take a new one, and moisten it in oil and heated oil, and put on top of the limb.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	These plasters do not last long, but they are good for relieving abscesses and properly treating pains.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another way to treat broken bones that lasts: take dried fig leaves and earthworm castings, and grind them together, and make a plaster.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	Another method of treating the fracture of a bone and to lessen the pain of an abscess.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Take root of wormwood, chamomile, flowers of violets, flour of almonds, of each one part; and grind, and mix with wine, and if the limb is swollen, mix with fresh coriander juice, or dried, and use.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	Another method of treating more than the first, when an abscess is coming to the restoration of the limb.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Take root of wormwood, and seeds of linseed, balm, melilot, and sanicle, and flowers of violets and chamomile, of each one part; and grind, and mix with salt juice, or sweet juice, or with wine, according to the heat of the limb, and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Hippocrates said in his book that one should not put on a broken limb except for a cerote made of wax and oil, and nothing else, and he said that it should be neither too soft nor too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems that Galen said that one should put on a broken limb to restore it, things that are dry and slightly warm, such as myrrh and aloes and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another way to treat wounds and pain: take mallows and horsehair, or feathers of an owl, and egg whites, and mix them evenly, and grind them, and make a poultice and apply it to the wound.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor; puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut; et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then, after a little while, take care not to feel any pain, nor if the bones of its limb are dislocated; if not, do not release it by hand again. And if pain comes to the limb, or itching, without rest or inflammation, quickly release it, and remove the plaster now; and take a light bandage, and moisten with sea water, and rinse in hot water, and lift the limb until the itching stops, and soothe the pain; then let the member rest for an hour, then put on dry linen, moistened in hot or rose oil, and tie up with a nut, as long as you are sure of no abscess forming; and rest the inflammation of the limb, and soothe the pain, then restart the subtle binding, and a little plaster, and do not strain it too hard as before; subtly until it is healed.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that the abscess is filled with pus and redness and pain and swelling, and you have skill in applying ointments and poultices, then restart as you did before equally.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII; et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus; adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir; arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure; par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	And if it does not come to the limb at all as we have said, then do not delay for three or four or five or seven days; and never leave it more than twenty days, according to what we see, until the fracture is set, and approaches the joint of the bone above; then it holds more than before, and increases its strength, as I have said before; and if you see that the limb is setting more than is necessary, then cut away the callus that cannot come again; then apply hot water often when you reset it, and this every hour, and loosen a little the bandage; by this method, then the callus is removed from the limb, and quickly repair what the foolish doctors do, which tortures the member: this is bad, and if it is not done properly, I see nothing else but weakness and doing it straight.
des diverses manieres de brisure	of various breaking methods
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees; car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	Many breaking methods are, and various figures, and the causes are distinguished; for there are breaks that are made by the impact of a spear, and the collarbone fractures the entire bone just under the shoulder blade, which is outside the bone, as it does in the neck or the back; and because of this method of breakage is called "haichure".
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces II brisures grans ou petite.	Or the spear pierces the bone from above in a transverse direction, and this method of breakage is called "absolute"; and it is the wound of these two breaks large or small.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is impact with a blow, or a cut from the spear, or a fall on the stone, or other similar things.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if it is a broken bone that approaches the skin near the bone, or on top of the bone, and this wound is large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»; et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	And if the wound that is set in the bone as thinly as a hair, and the fracture is small, and because of this it is called "hair-like" fracture; and if the wound made by a spear, or by falling, or by something similar, and allows the piece of bone to enter below, and the threads are like those used by hatters when they set them on the hats; then the spear enters inside.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant; et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	And there are those who have or suffer from moist bones, such as children; and they have all these kinds of fractures where small pieces are dislodged like these; and I will speak about them in their place.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And we know all kinds of fractures by the removal above them, and the examination with tents, and by the corrupted flesh that is above.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The appearance of hair is known because when one has revealed the bone, and one rubs it above, if there is an open fracture.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of the fracture, take care of accidents from evil, and if you see no bad accident, such as vomiting of bile, and loss of consciousness, and extension, and paleness, and fever ague, and the eyes issuing forth and reddening, and other similar things in many conditions, then it cannot be healed without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see any obvious injury, and you hope for healing, then begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the fractured bone comes first to you, and it is in the leg, then you should remove the bone before the fourteenth day, so that you can.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is in the arm, then you should remove the bone before the seventh day, as long as the flesh around the bone is not decayed, and the injuries that we have mentioned occur.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset; et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	And if the fractured bone comes close to the tissue that covers the brain, then it is necessary to cut away the part that is injured in this way: and you should grab the head of the painful wound, and uncover the bone in all ways that you can, and over the shape of the wound as softly as you can, and if blood comes out when exposing the bone, or an abscess forms, help with what is necessary, and it is necessary to fill the wound with soft cloths in rose oil; and let the wound rest until the abscess is calmed, and make sure that the blood does not come out; then begin around the bone to remove it, and this is done according to the two methods of work: one method is that you cut tightly in front, and this is the form.
Et puis i boute I autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	Then make another cut larger than the first one.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	And the second method is that you have many different cuts, some sharp and others wide, and they are pointed and made of iron, and work lightly, so as not to wound the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou I cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des III manieres de tareres:	And if the tooth is very hard and out of place, it is necessary that you drill around it, as well as administering cuts with trephines, but not so far that it goes through the bone; and above the point there should be a margin or circle, which does not allow the point to pass beyond the bone; and you must have several, so that each one corresponds to its own part of the bone, so that you have trephines for all parts of the bone.
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes I tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	To pierce through the broken bone, you must place the iron over the bone and turn it to your left until you feel that the bone is pierced; then remove the iron to another part a little later, and so do all around, then cover the incisions the space of the bone between the periosteum, and do this more subtly than you can, and lightly, as we have said, until you take the bone in your hand, or in any of the instruments you have such as forceps, pliers; and be careful not to touch the brain or the spinal cord.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire; et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	And when you have pierced and treated the bone, it is advisable to remove any remaining small bones or scales from it with any instrument similar to a scalpel; but it must be more flexible and subtler than the other scalpel; then treat the wound with bandages and ointments as we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And the other way of working is as the Gauls say, which is more safe; and it is very good, and that is their word.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	Firstly, you must remove a part of the bone where the fracture is open and wide, so that when you have uncovered that part, you can place the lens-shaped piece of this incision, which is the form:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz; s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	And do not cut from one part, and the broken piece is in two parts, so that the cutter is towards the bone; then strike with a small hammer on top, so that you lightly copper the bone all around, and take care of the thread that is outside; if it is against the bone, then lightly cut the bone, because one cuts well without harm, and without fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the fracture of the bone does not pierce through the skin, and the bone is only broken from above, and there are small pieces, then you should smooth out that roughness, and remove scales with a sharp tool that you should have in various quantities to manage each limb as conveniently as possible, according to the work and the shape of the fracture.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If you have large razors, and then more sharp ones, and do not stop doing this until it is well.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	In each of the other hair and fine fracture trimmers, you should manage according to its convenience; and this is a thing that is not repeated to him who has put his study in this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie; puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement; et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication; et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	And if the wound is exposed, it is necessary to apply a cloth of linen according to the size of the wound, and moisten it with rose oil, and place it on the wound; then take another cloth doubled in two or three, and moisten it with wine and rose oil, and place it on the first cloth; and do this more gently than you can, so as not to irritate the wound, then administer by the side of the other liquid, and do not restrain it until it has only stained the wound; and leave it in this way for one or two days, until the abscess is calmed, then remove it, and administer medicines such as lily roots, flour, incense powder, and aristolochia, and similar things; and from these things make a powder and place it on the wound, and administer liquid medicines without irritation; and keep the wound clean, so that you do not leave any ointment, or any blood, for when blood gathers under the skin, it causes great pain and injury; because when something sharp is placed on the wound, it does not cure.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Take care then, if no accidents come to the patient, as we have said, it is uncertain with doubt.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac; puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if no other remedy comes to it except the one we have put on, which has virtue, then you must apply a part of honey, and three parts of rose oil and an ounce of cloth, and put it on the wound; then treat the wound in ways that are suitable, until it is healed.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les II parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont II os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	Note that the two parts of the nose above are never broken, or one by itself, because they are two bones; and the upper one is cartilaginous and does not break, unless it is bent or twisted, and then it heals.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil; et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	And if one of the two parts is broken, it is necessary to break your small finger or nail of the finger, and place the broken part inside your index finger, and in the palm by default, until the finger regains its natural shape; and do this lightly, and make sure the pain does not feel through your work.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the broken part is in the upper part of the finger, and cannot reach the finger joint, it is necessary to place it on the tip of a needle or a slightly thick one.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues; se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	And if the broken part is from both parts, make another one and hurry to restore the first joint, if you can; otherwise, after the seventh or eighth day, when the inflammation of the wound is calmed, then place it at the tip of the finger with pieces of linen cloth, if the broken part is in one piece.
Ou tu boutes I autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	When you bend one way or the other, where the fracture is, and the bandages are so large that they fill the pores of the nose.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	And they said no one should moisten the bandages in the morning, and each day.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	It does not seem to me that this is right, but it is necessary that they be moistened with a mixture of egg and powdered bread; then leave the bandage until the bone is hard, and the cartilages are hardened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a I souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And never use feathers instead of bandages, and if there is soft cloth around, hold the fractured part, and blow the pain away; now do what you see.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en I poc de dyaquilon.	And if abscesses come to the nose while you work, put clay or cotton soaked in red wine or a drop of ichthyol into the nostril.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis; et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu; et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if abscesses do not come to the nose, then apply a poultice made of mustard flour and powdered frankincense mixed with egg yolk; then place light strips over it and do not tie the nose too tightly; and if the broken piece of the nose is small and in many pieces, then remove them with suitable instruments, then cut off the wound, and the cure of things embedded in charcoal and soldered, as suitable emplastres and ointments; and if there is no wound inside the nose, then treat it with tents, and put in plasters until it heals.
de la routure de la mandibule	of the fracture of the mandible
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the mandible is fractured, and there is no wound elsewhere, and the fracture is not complete, but only slightly broken in two, because of the teeth inside, if one knows it lightly.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	If the fracture is in the right part, you should push your right little finger into the mouth of the patient; and if the fracture is in the left jaw, push your right little finger with your right hand, and push the fracture inside lightly, and bring it to the other hand by default, and make it even.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en II, si covient que tu aministres extension de II pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the fracture of the jaw is in two parts, then it is necessary to administer traction of two parts until they are even.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus I drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And if the movements of the teeth have occurred, or the breaking, then strain them with a gold or silver or silk thread, then place on the broken jaw, and place on the cloth a double layer; and place on the cloth a large well-made sheet, or a piece of leather even and wide according to the jaw, and tie it to the mouth so you can, and command the patient not to move, and give light food.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en III semainnes.	And if you see that the shape changes, then remove it to the other jaw, and then put back what is changing; and apply plaster on top, of flour from the mill with abundant honey or ground mustard, after having removed the cast; and place on the plaster another light layer, and if the plaster does not stick, let it remain until it becomes healed; often it is healed in three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if abscesses come to the head, then follow what we have said many times.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is a fracture and wound together, cover no part of the bone with the flesh; instead, carefully remove the flesh from unsuitable tools.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, then enlarge it according to your need.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus I des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have removed all these pieces, and there is none left, then clean the wound, if it is wide, and apply suitable bandages to stop bleeding until they are healed.
de la forcele	of the shoulder
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc III manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en II, et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	The shoulder bone breaks several times in front and behind the shoulder, and the fracture is in three ways: either it is broken and crushed into two pieces, and there are parts, and it is the least heavy to restore; or there is a fracture with a wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies II ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And the treatment when the fracture is with a wound, you should have two assistants, one to feel the shoulder bone broken; and the other to extend the neck to the part; then set the fracture to your hands, so that it is as it should be, and there is no appearance or movement.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And if you have the means to extend it further, place a rounded sphere of cloth or linen, as needed, against the shoulder at an angle; and stretch and relieve the pressure, and hold the sphere in your hand, so that you can align the break, as it should be.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule I oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot pull the shoulder blade back, because it comes out in front, then you must push the misaligned bones back over their surface, and place against the shoulder a hollow bone, and bend the minister's elbow down, until the bone of the shoulder blade is raised.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	Then bring the fracture to your two ends, and if you have true teeth that are broken, it is necessary that you cut above; and carefully file the pieces lightly, and if the bone cannot be joined for any reason, use one of the instruments you have; but put the forceps of this instrument outside the wound to guard against the swelling.
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os; et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	And it seems like a spoon, and is not too sharp, and should also be as wide as needed, according to the size of the bone and the skill of the work; and have two prongs, one wide and the other narrow, as the edge of the wound that you made when you cut the bones; and when you are sure of an abscess, clean the wound, and if the wound is small, or you doubt an abscess, use dressings and bandages according to its size.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille I drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if an abscess comes, if it is swollen, take a cloth dipped in rose oil and vinegar and wine, and put on top.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier; puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant; et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint; et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors; puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	The splinting of the bone, when it is painful and swollen, is that you put on top of the bone the plaster of the mill flour and some egg, and put on top. Then take a very large bandage of one palm wide and long, then put the cloth double over the light dressing and the plaster; then take a thin strip of three inches wide and long, and wrap it around that bandage so that the head of the bandage is hanging down; and put the strip on the fracture, and turn the bandage over the neck, and off the fracture, and off the fracture, and wrap each part, and when you see that the bandage holds the fracture evenly, and you see clearly that the strip does not move over the broken bone, reward it every day, and when the bones are healed, hold it; and make the fracture lie on its back, and put what little oil is left from the fracture on top of the shoulder, to align the shoulder by the positioning of the arm, and not move the arm if no bad accidents happen within 20 days; then restart the plaster, if you see that it has a use, and tighten and leave it until it is healed; and it is healed in 28 days, and less to some men.
de la brisure de l’espaule	of the shoulder fracture
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en xxv, Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	It rarely happens that the shoulder is broken or does not break in the middle, and it is only touched; then according to the figure of the fracture, and it is reset according to its natural form, in all ways that you can; then put on the bone powder from the mill with abundant wheat flour, and light dressings, and put on a double cloth; then put on a wide and thin plate, a little larger than the shoulder, and if the plate is not in any part of the shoulder, then use a strip of linen so that the plate lies evenly; and then strongly bind it to all with a large bandage, so that the plate does not move from its place, and watch each day for the wound; and every time it breaks, if it is broken, and reset it if it is off its place, and dress the wound on its side; and the shoulder is restored in 20 days or 25. And when these numbers are completed, then release it, and be careful, for this is not bone that is put back firmly.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a piece of the bone is broken before the joint, and not completely separated from the bone, then cut through it, and the bone, and do what we have said in the breaking of the finger's joint to relieve an abscess.
de la brisure dou pis	of the breaking of the little finger
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer.	The little finger is never broken in the middle, but this happens rarely; but it often breaks at the base.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	And when it is broken in the middle, it declines towards the outside, and the patient feels great pain, and lack of movement, and all, and perhaps vomits blood, and opens the joint in the broken bone, and the patient feels well.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met I cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des II costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en I drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is such that the hairs are gently pulled up over their backs, and the cushion is placed between the shoulder blades, then press the shoulder blades, and assemble the ribs of the two ribcages in your hands, and subtly put them back into all the positions you can, until the shape of the bone is as it should be; then place bandages and poultices on top of the thin salt sling, or some other light one, and wrap it in a cloth, and tie it to the broken bone so it does not move; then gently round the limb back to its position, and gradually tighten it, and every hour turn the limb, and if it moves, tighten it; and if it needs to be loosened, for corrosion or itching that comes to the skin, or pain or abscess, then hurry, and loosen it, and reapply the bandage, and treat whatever has come from the methods of healing; then reapply the bandage, and tighten it until it is healed.
de la brisure des costes	of rib fractures
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	that the rib fracturer comes only from large blows to the back and at the neck, and does not break easily because they are brittle; and the pain is felt well at the inspection of this.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And the remedies are that you put the fracture back in place as it should be.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	Then apply the plaster and the bandage of a splint if you know how to do it.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And if the rib fracture is declining inwards, it causes great pain and sharpness, as if of piercing, because the ribs do not allow the needle; and it must be pricked, and everything and vomited a great deal of blood, and this is a very bad sickness, and the ancients have put much effort into it.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And those who say that it is necessary to administer foods that swell the stomach, in order to push the fragment outwards.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We should not make this mistake, unless an abscess is present.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if it is present, then lance it.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And they said that no one should apply suction cups to the limb, for they draw out formations well, and this seems reasonable; however, there is doubt as to whether the cup will attract excess from the limb due to its weakness.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And they said that no one should cover the limb with a soft linen cloth in oil, and then place bandages between the ribs to even out the fluid inside, then treat the cure of pleurisy, food, and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the pain is great that the patient cannot bear it due to the bone not being covered, and there is doubt, then you must cut across the broken rib on the side, and place a tool to hold back the tongue; and then you must break the bone, and gently pull it out, and then suture the two lips of the wound, if it is large, and treat them with ointments, until they are healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if an abscess comes in the armpit, then place wet cloths moistened with rose oil on the affected area; and treat it as you would for an abscess, and let it lie near the chest where it should be, until it is healed.
de la brisure dou col	of the broken neck
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	No one ever breaks the bones of the neck, and it rarely happens that they are damaged; and so with the spine of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	And when it happens to anyone, and you want to know whether they will be healed or not, if you see their hands softened and swollen and dead, and they cannot move or extend them, and when you touch them with a needle, they do not feel.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	It is often deadly in many conditions, and if they move and feel well when you hold them still and do not, then it is known that the joint of the bone is saved, and the pains are cured, if you put care on them.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	And if a similar thing comes to the spine of the back, and you see whether it is healthy or not, if the feet are soft, and if the accidents that are in their hands, and above the back suddenly ventosity and egestion without will; and when they are laid on their belly, if suddenly egestion without will.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	And when it is laid on its back and it wants to sit up, it cannot.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	It is a deadly condition: do not labor in its treatment.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this accident does not come to them, it is the lighter thing.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the treatment is that you reward him if he has an abscess that needs to be opened, and put rose oil or goose grease on the spine until it is relieved; then put one of the healing plasters that comforts and dries, and tie it with a bandage, and command the patient to rest; and do not sleep on that part where he feels the pain, until it is healed.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if any bone is decayed, it is necessary to cover it with a kerchief; then remove the bone, then gather the two edges of the wound, if they are large, into a seam, then treat the wound with char, until it is healed; and if the patient's bone is broken, which is called "the broken bone", if you have a handkerchief in your right hand, put it evenly on the other hand to your power, then put the plaster and the bandage on top, if you have the skill; then tighten it, and if there is decayed bone, do it again, and remove the bone, and treat the wound until it is healed.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	of the fracture of the rib of the back
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	It is rare that the ribs of the back are broken, and if they are, it does not usually cause much discomfort to the head; and making it long, and declining to the waist, and coming to the pain in the limb, and swelling, and inflammation as it is broken.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And the restoration is that you extend your hand over it, as far as you are over the broken part; and cut away those parts that are broken and their shape; and if the break is only at the top, then set it straight until it is in its natural shape.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the fracture is long, or it inclines towards the inside, then lay the limb across the patient's belly, until the restoration of this fracture is complete.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	And when you have set it straight, apply the plaster, then place a splint of wood or cloth, and hold the fractured part still so it does not move; and keep the limb away from the sides, until the splint is even.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And instruct the patient to sleep on their side or on their back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	And if abscesses come, do not touch them until they are calmed down, and place on it what we have already mentioned; then return to the restoration, and hold it as it should be, if there is no bad accident; and this is the way.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	of the shoulder dislocation
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des II manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren I fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	The shoulder is located between the neck and the top of the shoulder, and if it is broken, one must restore it according to one of the two methods: one is that you take a piece of bone from a single unbroken bone, in this form:
Et lie as II chiés II liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus I siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	And tie the two broken pieces together and lift them up, and saw the painful part above the seat; then pour some brine on the broken piece of bone, as far as it will go, and add a hook of bone, then put something heavy on top; then put the broken pieces together in the hands together, until the broken person returns as it should be.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a II ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout I liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And the other way is that one pricks the pain above its shoulder, and places the hand on its neck, then commands two ministers to have one tattoo what is above the broken bone at his hands, and the other tattoos elsewhere to all that is connected, and stretches each to their part.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	And if you see that the extraction is too far, then hold the connected parts outside the broken bone, and above the broken bone, and stretch each of the ministers to their part.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the broken bone is near the top of the shoulder, then it is necessary to place the connected parts outside the shoulder blade, and the other towards the back, outside the broken bone; and similarly if the broken bone is towards the back, then it is necessary to place the lighter parts gently, without labor, until the broken bone is even with the shoulder and the back, then set the fracture as it should be, and stretch it, if there are no signs of inflammation.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a VII jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	If an abscess appears and comes, if it is not held for seven days, and put in a poultice of milk and rose oil, until the abscess is relieved; then hold, and the manner of holding is that you place the plaster on the broken part, then assemble the arm above the support, and put your hand on the shoulder or on the chest; and put the bandage, and hold above the support, and above the arm, so that the arm is in its place, without anything defending it, or if the bone is not moved.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele I doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure III dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	And if you doubt that the bone does not move, use splints, and put on the break a wider and stronger splint than the others, and have between each splint two inches of space, and each splint is so large that it passes the broken part three fingers from each side; then hold above the splints, as I said at the beginning of this chapter on the break, stronger and less distant.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	And if you see the position of the splint, and the binding, as we have said, in the hour that you restore the broken member, and you doubt the abscess has healed, let it lie still for seven days, as we have said; then look at the joint every three hours, that it does not swell or become inflamed, or that the dislocations do not come to the limb because it is too tight.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	If the splint, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	And if no such accidents happen, then after three hours or more, let the patient lie on his back, and have his hands on his stomach; and put the aid in a cloth evenly, and look at the figure of the broken member every hour of the day or night, that it does not move, or that the joints are not softened; if the splint by the power of medicine, and give him the food we have previously put, in such a way that the food is at the first subtle; and when he begins to recover, let it be thick.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	It is customary that the shoulder and leg should be reset within 40 days of all; and then it is necessary to release and administer a bath and medicines of ointments for the limb to heal.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	And if its structure is ugly and deformed, it may take 1 or 2 months to reset.
de la brisure du bras	of the broken arm
Li bras est compos de II os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the "humerus" (the upper one is smaller and supports the elbow; the other is larger and is on the inside, towards the small bone). Sometimes only the large humerus breaks, or sometimes both together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	When small bones are broken, the restoration is light, and the healing; and when large bones are broken, the healing is poor, and more painful than when they are broken together.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	If it is only the small bones that are broken, then it is best to extend them slightly and align them evenly.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	And if it is the large bones, then it is best to stretch them more forcefully; and extend them upwards on the cushion, and the little fingers higher than the other fingers, and the small fingers lower than the other fingers, and the knuckles cross each other above themselves, and the cushion in front of him higher than the knuckles, so that the knuckles suffer no labor; then stretch the assistants' arms to the part outside his hand, or to the elbow, and other assistants to the top.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And then place the mirrors evenly, according to its best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if it breaks into pieces, put each in its place, and if there is no suitable piece to hold the bone, you cannot restore it to its place, so do as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if with the broken piece there is a wound, I have spoken to the surgeon about it; take care of it.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	And if at the beginning of restoration there is an abscess, then glue the cloth made of rose oil and white wax, which is not too hard or too soft; and tie the cloth gently until the abscess is soothed.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	And then remove the crust, and put on the poultice of the flour from the mill with abundant urine, then place the bandages, and make sure that the broken bone is held together more outside, and slightly wider than the others; and there should be six bandages or arms in more positions: whether the broken bone is in one of the bones, or in two; and held higher above the break than other parts, and always less away, as I said at the beginning of this chapter; and let the cloths that are on the break be soft and moist, and not too hard or sharp; and let the thread, of which it is bound, be of linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	Reward the limb and its joint after some time.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	And if any accident occurs to the limb, such as itching that comes to the limb, it is necessary that you raise the limb in hot water, until those itching are soothed; and leave the limb to rest without being tightly bound.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	Then continue the stretching, and if the joint is broken and the bones are displaced, and similar things, then advise.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses I poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if the tendons cannot come to the limb because it is too tight, it is necessary that you soften it a little, and leave it like this for some time, until the tendons heal, and then stretch.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	If none of these things we have said come to harm, it will not be until after twenty years.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	Or if it is inside, then he can place his hands on his neck, and make his neck even, and guard against movement and dislocation, and sleep on his back; and after thirty years or thirty-five, or perhaps twenty years, depending on the constitutions and natures of the virtues.
de la brisure de la main	of the broken hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	However, at the back of the hand and with us, few breaks occur, and only rarely does it happen.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en I drapeil de lin.	And when the palm of the hand is broken or dislocated, it should be straightened and set correctly in front of him equally; then place his hand on the extended palm, and stretch the broken bones, and put them even with the other fingers, until they are well jointed; and put on the plaster and compresses, if there is no swelling, then put a splint according to the size of the hand; and it should be wrapped in a linen cloth.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	And if the broken bone is in the middle of the foot plantar, make a bandage sphere and instruct the patient to wrap it around their broken foot; then stretch it into a long cloth, and let it be as wide as the palm of the hand, and stretch it as needed.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the broken bone is in the back, it is necessary to place a splint above and another below in the foot, so that the hand is open and straight, then tie it all around the hand, and stabilize the joint between the two.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en I tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	And if the broken bone is in one of the other fingers, if it is the thumb, straighten it as needed; and stretch it with the palm, and if you see that you need to place a small straight splint to lift the broken bone and not move; and if the broken bone is in the other fingers, such as the index or the others, straighten it and stabilize the joint with the finger next to it; or tie them all together while holding them, which is better, or place a splint above, depending on whether it is the thumb; and take care of the restoration and positioning of abscesses, and support what comes to it, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	of the broken ribs
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie I liien desus la briseure, et I autre desoz.	The ribs of the ribcage are often broken, and one can see it when they turn in front and behind; and the restoration is such that one lies on the side of the breaker, and the other outside.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And the pain is set on their face, then each minister stretches their limb equally to their part; and it is when the break is brought to the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	And if the break is close to the root of the ribcage, then one lies on the side of the breaker, and the other limbs outside.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	And thus if it is near the groin, and then the joints above the groin are stretched out, and the extension is below; then place the bone evenly in both hands, as it is according to its natural shape, and then apply the plaster, and the bandage, and no abscess comes.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	And if there is an abscess, let it settle down then return to your work and your treatment; the bandage is made in this manner.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	It is necessary that you wrap around the fractured part doubled in two or three times, and let the excess remain, then bend the leg so that the toes come to the root of the knee, and tie a long thread between the thigh and the leg below the groin, and bring the top of the thread above; then bend over the leg and the thigh, the bandage, then place the bandage on the fractured part, and put a strip of cloth on the bone of the leg; then fill the wool between the leg and the thigh to make the pressure even, then begin to tie three or four times above the fracture; and as you go higher than the fracture, and less the pressure; then feel the two threads that you have tied between the leg and the thigh, and the three strips that are above, then return to the top of the thread, until you come below the knee; and the pressure, so that it does not move from its place, then let it remain like this, so that there is no abscess or swelling.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	And if it is broken, and it dislocates, and address what comes, as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of the bone that can be felt, then it should be set, if possible; and if not, then it must be broken, and traction applied; and the cure as we have said, until it is healed.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	And never is the rib broken in such a way that these ribs are placed, as in the dislocation and arm; however, in the restoration thus made does not hurt the hairs.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en L jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And the ribs are restored at different times, a little less or a little more, according to the diversity of the constitutions.
de la ruelle dou genoil	of the groin path
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	There is little breakage in the groin path, but it often causes pain.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	If it breaks, it is only a small cut, or a puncture, and it causes pain to all wounds, and without pain, and it feels bad.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is to put what is broken back together as much as possible; then apply the plaster, and if you have skill, put on a round bandage, and hold it in place as it should be, then treat all the dispositions that we have said for other fractures, such as abscess and similar things; and for each accident, put what is necessary until it is healed.
de la brisure de la jambe	of the broken leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	It is said that in the leg there are two bones, one of which is called "mustelz" on the right, and the other is called "foscile"; and all the fractures come out as they do in the arm, and for this reason the restoration is the same as that of the arm equally, and the work is all there. And if both bones are broken together, then the leg returns to its normal state from all parts.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the small bones are broken, then it returns in front.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz.	And if the large bone is broken, then great pain is felt, and it can be seen well; and it returns outside.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	Therefore, apply counter-extension, and make it even, and tie the fractured parts equally; however, if there is a break and it is ugly, and there are many pieces, then the extension should be less and lighter; and the alignment according to your skill.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren II faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en II leus I bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent I bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have completed your work, take two strips of cloth that bind the leg on one side and the other, and be long enough to cover the leg from the knee to the ankle; then wrap them above and below, and tie in the middle as well, and at this point the leg will not bend to the right or left, and thus it is good; and no one administers the long cloth of the leg, and it is made of, and properly place the leg to prevent movement, and correctly done they put it in the fracture where it has a wound; and move the leg every day to see if there is an abscess or other accident; if the cure as long as it is healthy.
de la brisure des os dou piet	of bone fractures of the skull
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle, there is no fracture, but in the skull, bone fractures never occur and it is very rare, and there are only a few cases of dislocation.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a II chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	And if there is a fracture of the skull bones, and you see these bones overlying each other, then place them back on the ground as if they were walking, then put your bone over where the bones are raised, then press it until it returns to its original position; then apply the plaster and wash it with water, and put a small cloth soaked in the patient's plain on the belly of the skull, then strap the skull evenly, then wrap bandages around it and other things that you have experience with.
Et quant III jors ou IIII seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when three or four days have passed, if the joint is dislocated, you will find the bones even, whether they are broken or displaced.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a II ou III, ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en I drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	And if there are any of the broken bones, if you set them as we have said for both hands; then place a splint along the length of the broken bone, and make it slightly wider, then place the bandage as I have described, and tighten it evenly; and if there are two or three, or more, broken, place a splint for each one according to its quantity, wrapped in a piece of linen, and tie the bandage from above the splints so that it covers the wound well.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And it is necessary that you do not forget the other things that I have said about other fractures, as soon as we have mentioned; and treat each accident as it should be.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	of the fracture of the bone of the thumb
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the bones of the woman are broken, if the wound is enlarged, then incline it to the back part, and hold it by the back; then fill the wound with cotton, and put in as much as possible; then raise the woman, and lift the back slowly and slowly, and then the cotton will come out of the natural opening, and the bone with the cotton; and when she wants to urinate, remove the cotton, and when she has urinated, return it, and thus do this for seven days or around: if it is restored, and if you see, take a bladder of lamb’s wool, and tie a catheter to a needle, and blow all the bladder into the natural opening; then blow into the catheter formally, until the bladder is inflated inside: nature will restore the fracture; then fill it with cotton, and leave it in this way for some days, until it is healed.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	When the bone of the little finger of the hand is broken, or of the woman, if it is reset as we have said in the bone of the shoulder; and these broken fragments are not hidden from him who puts his study and practice to it, and attends my book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	For the broken bone means in many positions the right way of restoration: understand therefore.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse III jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	In the thigh, when it is broken, take a goose neck and beat the thigh; then wrap it in cloths, and leave it for three days or around, and it will heal quickly.
de brisure avec plaie	of fracture with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is necessary for one who has fracture with wound, especially if it is large, such as the bones of the ribs or shoulder or similar, that they be cleaned immediately, so that the cleanings that we have said bear witness.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound is clean, and if there is no other thing, then begin to restore the fractured bone in the same hour, or the next day, if there are no complications.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if complications arise, then leave the restoration until the next day, until the complications are soothed, and do not touch it on that day or the following, for you would bring about bad accidents.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the broken jaw appears to be displaced, then you must gently place it back in position with your hands, extending it slightly.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a VII dois ou VIII de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne III ou IIII, selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if the extension is not available to place in your hands, then use the iron instrument that is seven or eight spans long, according to the size of the wound; and the width should be according to the quantity of the wound; and it is necessary for the mire to have three or four, according to what it has in each case of fracture; and it should be round and a little thick, so that it does not pierce through the member at your work, and it should be sharp in front, and wide in the middle, like this:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	And it is called "palainche", because the patient must have the broken bone placed above the head of the visible bone; and the bone is pushed once, as much as it returns, and they are evenly spaced one against the other.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And if the fracture is subtle, and the instruments cannot well grasp the bone, then you must cut the head of the bone until the instruments have hold.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you cannot bring the bone back, as we have said, then use an appropriate tool, such as a saw or chisel, to your power; then file off what remains in the bone of sharpness and small scratches.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	When the bone is returned, and the pain is great afterwards, do not let it remain in its natural place.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	If you do this until it is in its natural place, then wipe the bone with black stiptic wine, and properly if it has been broken; and do not put anything on the wound except oil, that it does not cause pus and corruption to come forth; then administer these things as soon as you have restored the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and cover the covering all around, according to the quantity of the wound, and be careful that the wound is not strained with the breakage; many times this has been done by fools, and they have caused pus or death or corrosion to come forth.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	If the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that no harm has come to it, as we have said, and if you relieve pain at the limb, then it does not need to be elevated; but wrap around it, in place of elevation, hard cloths, and tie them.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And when you see after one or two days that the wound is beginning to open again, remove what you have put on top of everything, and apply healing ointment, such as triple antibiotic ointment and similar.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre II fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And it is necessary that you move the limb twice a day, in the morning and evening, as long as it is sound and healthy.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And it is necessary that the limbs be arranged in such a way that the bow can move freely.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if they continue to overstep, and it cannot be fixed but remains bent, with small pieces of bone, for which it is necessary that you take the wound with a tent, and remove all these unwanted pieces that cause that pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	And if a fistula comes to the limb, or another kind of corruption, then it is necessary that you treat it according to what it says in its previous chapter.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	And when the bone is broken and open in the limb, like the bones of the thigh or shoulder, and other similar large limbs, do not pull it out, for many times it kills, but let it stay as long as it can; perhaps it will fall off after twenty days or thirty, then treat the wound if you can; and if you cannot, let it be.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	brutal blows that come from the forging
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	We often see them after the health of the forger, even when it is near the joint, and it is a bad thing to see the shape of the limb; and perhaps they cannot do their natural work.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Therefore, if we find that it is fresh, then administer stypic medicines such as aloes, incense, and myrrh, and sarcocollis, acaice, and similar things, either one or all together, and mix them with stypic wine or abundant oil or vinegar; and place it on the nail in an enema, and hold it well, and do not let it slip into the hands later; then remove it, and start another until the swelling is gone; or you hold a piece of raw meat well made; for the property of the raw meat is that it removes all the swellings from the limbs; and if the swelling has become hard like stone, and it is necessary to remove it, if the cope above, and making the superfluity apparent; or you cut it with a knife until it is removed, and care for it until it is healed.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	a weak limb after a dislocation
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the fracture of the bone is restored, and the limb remains weak and subtle afterward, this can be due to many causes: one is because it was too tightly bound, and was not bound as it should have been; or because there were too many bandages, and could not bring the members together to the limb; or because of too much swelling; or because of too great movements, not in its time; or because it has little blood in its body, then it is weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the cure is that you make the pain less, and make the body tense, until the swelling is not multiplied in it; and administer baths, and give joy and ease; then put poultices on the limb, so that the poultice attracts to the great swelling, and the swelling often of hot water, until the swelling goes to the limb; and return to its natural shape.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	a twisted limb after healing
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai I emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	When the limb is twisted after healing, and the bones are broken open, and the form of the limb is deformed, yet it does not affect its natural appearance: therefore do not believe those who say that one must break the limb entirely, and many have done this in our land; and these practices are blamed, and great harm comes from them, and perhaps death; however, if the fractures and deformities are fresh, it is necessary to apply hot, or softening herbs boiled, such as willow bark, roots, and meadowsweet, and similar things; and the mollifying plaster, such as made with good hydromel, and take the willow bark powder, and mix it with goose grease or sesame oil, and apply the plaster; or take figs, and grind them with linseed, and similar medicines that alleviate the pain.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	And never is the dislocation caused by continuously and long rubbing with wet hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And allow movement to the limb every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if the tortuosity is awake and hardened, like stone, and it needs to be removed with the iron, if it fits under the bone, make a shallow incision; and put on a bandage and rest in the care.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book of dislocations
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation comes to any joint, it must now be returned to its proper place.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors; toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	For if it is delayed, the joint may swell, and if it is reset, it may return to its incorrect place; for it does not matter that it moves as it is swollen: many times, spasms and other pains are brought on; therefore, when this happens, first cleanse the wound, then leave it until the abscess has been soothed; then raise the limb with hot and oil, then gently reset it, and treat each member as it comes back to its proper place.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	I have ordered the chapters on the dislocations of the shoulder joint down to the feet.
des mandibules	of the mandibles
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc II manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	There are two ways in which the mandibles can be dislocated: either they are slightly displaced from their place and somewhat softened; or they are completely dislocated, hanging downwards, and preventing the tongue from holding saliva, nor can it close its mouth, and enveloping the tongue with speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is small, it often returns on its own in various positions.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie; et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	And if it is completely and fully dislocated, then you must reset it urgently, and do not delay; and in this manner, the healer should apply pressure on the painful part of the jaw, and insert a small piece of cloth into the root of the dislocation of the mandible inside the mouth, if the dislocation is of two parts; and the other hand should be outside, to hold evenly; and command the patient to soften his jaws, and move them from all sides.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And when the bone is uneven, until it returns to its place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les II mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And if it is difficult to reset, especially when both mandibles are together, using hot and oil, until it moves slightly; do not force the resetting as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens; et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules; et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	And when they are reset evenly, and the jaw pain is relieved by softening, put a cloth made of melted wax and rosin on the molded dough; then tie it lightly with moistened linen strips; and let the patient sleep on his back, with his head between two pillows, so that he does not move to the right or left, nor strain himself to turn, but take light food, until the pain is gone, and the jaw is healed; then change what he wants lightly, and do not force him to open his mouth for eating and drinking, until the jaw is well healed and healthy.
Et se les II mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two jawbones cannot be reset to their proper position within an hour, and they are not converted back to their usual alignment, then fevers and sweats become customary, and perhaps diarrhea, and perhaps vomiting of pure bile.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en VIIII jors.	And when you see this, then cut it out as it is fatal; and many times those who have had it die within eight days.
de la forcelle	of the forcelle (a type of medical instrument)
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The forcelle cannot be extracted from the side without cutting through the continuation of the skin and the flesh, and it is never removed unless necessary, and well one can feel it.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint; et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez; et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	And the restoration is that the hairs are gently pulled back over their backs, and they extend their arms; then press the joint firmly into your palm, and it will return; then place the plaster and bandage, and hold it tight; and the one who is on the side cannot dislocate; if not, and if it dislocates once, then reset the joint as we have said; then place the plaster and bandage, and hold it tight, and command the patient to rest until they are healed; and thus the same is returned to the shoulder, when it is free from its joint.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	of shoulder dislocation
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc; et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	There are three ways that the shoulder can be dislocated: one is that it dislocates at the part of the armpit outwards; and the second is at the part of the elbow; and by chance it dislocates at the part above, and this happens little; and it does not dislocate backwards for the shoulder, and it does not dislocate inside for the arm; and often it dislocates outwards towards the armpit, especially to those who have little strength, because for these it is done forcefully; and for those who have enough strength, it dislocates easily, and returns easily.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And sometimes happens to some men, percussion or fracture, and inflames the shoulder with an abscess, and thinks it is dislocated by this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	Then you must examine him until you are certain; and then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste; et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens; et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier; et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	And it is known that the dislocation is when it is below the acromion, and it distinguishes between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find between them manifest differences; and you will find at the top of the shoulder a depression, and below the acromion the top of the shoulder, as if it were an ace; and the bad hand cannot move its finger, nor any movement; and also, if it is dislocated above, it is not hidden, for you will see it manifestly at the back; and this way of dislocation is only to be reset when it is new, or when the pain is severe.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	And the manner is that the minister lifts the hand of the injured person up, then puts his fingers below the joint, and pulls the joint upwards to the shoulder; and the minister lifts the hand, and extends it up, so he puts it away; then it will come quickly.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree; puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide; et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere: et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar; et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	And if it does not come as we have said before, then it is necessary that the injured hand be soaked in hot water; and the minister should apply a softening and soothing lotion, such as a decoction of sage and fenugreek and melilot in hot water, and apply it; then place the injured hand on its back, and put a cloth of even thickness, neither too soft nor too hard, under the joint, then put the foot of the injured hand on the cloth, and lift the shoulder gently, and pull the hand; and other ministers wet the head of the injured hand, so that it does not move downwards; this shoulder is now completely set, and if you see that it is reset correctly: and you must make sure that there is someone who is taller than the injured person; and they should stand to the side of the chest, and pull the shoulder of the injured hand away from the joint, and lift the joint upwards, so that the injured hand hangs in the air; and other ministers take the hand of the injured person down towards the belly.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And if the pain is too light, with it there can be nothing heavy, and the dislocation returns now.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile; puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment; et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	And it is also done in another way: and it is thus that one puts a long stick on the ground, where the patient can be held as with a spear, and not too heavy or too rough; then it is placed away from the pain, but with a soft cloth over it, and the pain should be at the long end of the stick; then extend your hand down from the other side, and the joint will return to its place quickly; and if it does not want to return for all these things that we have said, do this cure: take a stick of two arms wide and four fingers high, which has the head round at one end, like this form:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus I eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	Then tie a soft cloth over the shoulder where the dislocation occurred, which was not causing the pain, then remove it from the dislocated area; extend your arm over the long one, and tie the helper over the dislocated arm, and the hand at the head of the hand, then place your arm over the broad side of a broad arrow, and stretch your hand downwards, and leave the body hanging on the other side: the joint is now healed.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when she is ready, in whatever way it may be, it is necessary that you place a soft cloth over the shoulder, then apply the plaster mixed with powder from the mill, with incense and a little honey, over the entire shoulder and around, then remove the cloth from the shoulder evenly, and return the limb to the plaster, and embrace the hand at its neck, and let the hands remain thus.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés V jors ou VII, et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And it is necessary that he change little, as long as the limbs are comfortable, for it will heal faster; and then change after five or seven days, and move it; and if it is stiff and not softened, it is healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint is very weak due to moisture that has come, or for other reasons, it is necessary that you administer cauteries at three places, as it is placed in front or in the chapter on cauteries.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés VII jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And if you do all of this, and it dislocates after seven days, and the joint does not hold, and he cannot raise his arm above, then cut the nerves at the head of the shoulder are cut or stretched or softened; and cut that the joint has never been fixed in its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The dislocation that occurs above the knee and behind the elbow, or below, is caused by impact and stretching of the hands, and it requires another lubricant; and it should be treated until it is healed.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after healing the limb swells and moves slowly, then frequently apply compresses to the affected area until the swelling is reduced and returns to its original state.
de la dislocation dou coute	of the shoulder dislocation
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	The joint of the shoulder is repeatedly dislocated and returns to its place; and it is dislocated from all parts, both in front and behind, and the dislocation does not return, for one can see and feel it well; and it is dislocated according to each shape.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	And when you join the dislocated shoulder with its joint, see it clearly open.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	For the joint is cut, and cannot bend the arm, nor touch its shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And it is necessary to reset it as soon as the joint swells up, for if the joint swells up and comes back, it would be painful to reset; and perhaps it cannot be reset completely at once, especially when it is in the back; it is better than other dislocations, but causes greater pain, and perhaps many die.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes II mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And the resetting is, when it can be reset, that you extend your hand to both of their hands; and their arms are spread out, and their hands like a mirror around the shoulder, back and forth, and push the joint to its knuckles together, or at the root of their palm, until it returns to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is in front, then it returns when he doubles his hand over his hand, and holds onto the root of the palm that is dislocated.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large; et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne; et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	And if he does not want to return to the joint, then apply strong extension; and it is that two ministers extend the arm, and tie it with two ministers, so that it does not move during extension; then turn the arm from each part, then when you have wrapped a double long and wide cloth; and when you see the joint at the joint of his hand, if he holds any oil to soften the joint, then press the joint together, as long as it returns; and when it is in place, put some dry plaster with some honey on top, and press it together, and put the arm on the shoulder of the bad side, and leave it for some time, then remove it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	And if the joint is firm in its place, then release the ligament and leave it; and if you see that the joint does not hold well, then restart the bandage and the ligament, and leave it thus for some time, until it is firmly put back in place; then release it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain; et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	If he feels pain after the resetting of the joint, and it moves, then bathe and rub him well, and press until it is relieved; or place a thick lamb fat on the joint, leave it for one day and one night, then remove it, and put in a bath; and when he urinates, rub the joint immediately, then place the fat back on, and put him in the bath again; do this twice or three times until he is healthy; and if you see that it does not return to its position, then place moist warm water with butter on it, and strain it; then it will return to its position.
li dislocation de la main	the dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	the joint of the hand dislocates, and the return is lighter than other joints; therefore, it must be reset quickly in the same place as it is dislocated, as long as the limb is swollen or there is an abscess forming.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	And the resetting is done by placing the misaligned hand on a table, extending the fingers of the hand, and aligning the palm so that it is over the appearance of the joint; then press it until it returns to its place; therefore, it is necessary to check if it is properly aligned; then place the misaligned hand on a table for extension and resetting.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	And if the dislocation is at the back of the hand, place the patient's hand on a table, and the practitioner places their hand over the appearance of the joint.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If it returns now, it is good; if not, apply warm compresses to abscesses, and leave it thus to begin again.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte; et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	And if it cannot be borne, and you cannot put it back in place after some time, the joint will remain twisted; and do not force anything into the wound until the hand is clean, and nothing can be forced in at all: then cut the tendon or artery; if there is no other means but to cauterize over the bone, and perhaps nothing else works.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse V jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	When the hand is dislocated, put the plaster that we have mentioned on it, then strain and leave it for five days, then release and leave it like that.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it cannot move well, and there is no swelling, pour hot vinegar on it and rub it until it is healed.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	of the dislocation of both hands
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre; adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins; et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	Both hands are never dislocated at any part, not at the back of the palm or the belly; therefore, both hands are held, and reset the dislocation to your fists until it returns, then support the head of the hand, and push it towards the part where it is disjointed; and leave it for two days, and then put it back that day; and tie it as we have said, and loosen it on the next day, and move it, and rejoin it; and do this often, until it is straightened, and do the same if it is dislocated at the belly of the hand, and do as you have done before, until it is healed; and do the same when it is dislocated in other parts.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	back dislocation of the spine
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the spine or neck is dislocated, and there are many dislocations, there is no cure, for the patient dies from the pain.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»: li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	And the signs are that the excretions suddenly jump without volition, cannot be held, and often all the limbs become soft, or the two arms or the right arm or left, and often the spine moves in four directions; this movement is called "gibbering": the cure is to reward the gibberer if it comes from childhood: if there is no cure or healing for the whole.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit; mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	And the one that comes from falling or from impacts or similar things, they said in ancient ways of cures with great words, where there is not much benefit; but I have abbreviated it according to my intention, and have formed instruments in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit; et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis; et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece; puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles; et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons; et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	I say that in the case of a fracture that comes from the front, there is no engineering or healing; and also the one that comes directly to the second rib, and one cannot cure it other than the proper one that comes to the back, as I said; and it is that the hairs should be stretched out over his face in one even layer, and have some straw away from him, so he does not bleed; then make a bandage at the head in earth form, and the other at the feet, and tie one ligature outside the fracture, and the other at the hips, and at the knees, and at the ankles; and the assistant should fasten the ligatures, one at the head and the others at the feet, among the two bandages; and they should be well tied, the bandage as we have said, and the hands put his palms on the spine correctly, until he recovers.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee; et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	And if it does not return by this cure, take a three-armed mallet and strike it from the side, and the hairs should be on the side, and bring the middle of the mallet above the spine; then place the patient's feet on the other end of the mallet, and press firmly until it returns to its place; and if you see, do the same with the turnbuckle that turns to the hand.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc; et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet; et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	And you should place two ropes at the head of the shoulder of one arm and two more by the feet, and between each rope, outside and inside, a palm of long hair; and in each rope, one nail, or the turnbuckle is correct, and the ropes are firmly on the ground so that they do not move; and between each two ropes, one turning rope, along with the turnbuckles, and two small ropes of a palm of long hair to turn the turnbuckle; and then tie the ligament that is among the tendons to the turnbuckle towards the head, and the other ligament towards the feet to the other turnbuckle, and each minister turns his turnbuckle along the whole ligament, and the masters put the spine even as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	When it is even, apply a drying ointment with an abundance of honey, and then insert a probe, and then place the back of a three-finger-width thick board on the affected area and the part of the spine, as we have said, and use subtle pressure, until it is healed; and if nothing comes to the end of health, then administer medicines that are softening and soothing, with the treatment we have mentioned before; and never give one piece of plaster, and never does an appearance come in the lower spine of the back, and be careful not to assume it is dislocation; and this is the bone that opens, for if there is presumption, it may cause death.
des dislocations de la hainche	of hip dislocations
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc IIII parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	Unlike the joints of the hip and shoulder, which only occur as dislocations and not as other joint issues; and the hip joint is misaligned in four parts: inside and outside, front and back; and more inside than that, and slightly misaligned in front and back.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu; et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	And the knowledge of this dislocation inside is that when the crooked leg is joined with the healthy one, it is longer and more open than the healthy ones, and cannot bend its knee to the fire; and the legs that are below are inflamed with abscesses, because the cause of the belly comes from there.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of one who comes after this is that this accident is opposite to those before.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the signs of one who has come before are that he will have his leg properly set; however, if the knee is bent with pain, and if one wants to make it move, it cannot be done, and he retains his urine, and swells up, and when he walks, he passes over the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of one who has come after are that he cannot spread his knee, nor bend it, and the other leg is more twisted than the other, and the swelling is softened, and the shoulder is dislocated from the side of the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	The symptoms of this type of dislocation are such that if it is ancient, and it remains according to its position, there is no cure; and there should be no presumption.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des IIII manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	And in this case where the dislocation is fresh, and it is of four types of dislocation, you must turn the joint back, and extend and flex it, and move it to the right and left; perhaps if it returns, and there is no other cure needed.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil; et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien; et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	And if it does not return in this manner, you must apply two strong ministers, and extend the leg strongly to both sides, or to one that is tied above the knee; and some other ministers place their hand below the chin in a certain manner so that they bite their hands off from their sockets, then hold them with a rope attached to the side; and some grip the head of the limb; and extend up and down all at once, until the pain is lifted from the ground once, and remains hanging.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as IIII semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This method of extension is common for four similar cases, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is good.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele; puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	If not, then you must take care of its similar case. When the dislocation is in the pardedens, you should support the misaligned limb on its sound side, then place the ligament at the base of the elbow, and the limb that is outside the angle, then extend the ligament above the angle and towards the forearm; then take other ministers to grasp the large arm of the misaligned elbow, and extend it in a proper form: if it returns to its place, this method of dislocation is lighter than others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres; puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc; puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	If you do not hold it in this manner that we have said, then it is necessary to bind the two hairs together with a strong string above the two heels, and above the two knees, and let the badly placed leg be stretched out two fingers more than the other; then hang it suspended by the head of a stick, and let the arms be stretched out two arms' length from the ground; then command the minister to grasp the back of the neck, and let another minister hold the badly placed leg, who should grasp it firmly, for the joint is now approaching.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi; puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme; et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	And when the dislocation is gone, then massage the hairs, as we have said in the one with gout, and pull the ligament above the badly placed leg properly, and on the foot also; then put two ties, one at the head and one at the foot, then tie the rope between the thighs of the badly placed leg in the correct form; and wrap moist cloths around it, so that it does not swell up, then each minister should stretch out towards it, and the master place the dislocation equally in his hand.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	If it returns, it is good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If not, place it on a flat surface, and press it in this way as we have described in the booklet, and grind the hairs against the clean surface.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And when the dislocation is in front, it is necessary to stretch the injured leg vigorously, as I have described; and place your hand on the painful part of the limb, then press with the other hand, and extend it downwards towards the groin.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches; et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table; et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve; et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And if the dislocation is in the back, it is not necessary to stretch the injured limb downwards or lift it up, but it should be as it was when dislocated from the back, as we have described for the supine position on the two hips; and it should be supported on its face, and the limb extended as we have described before, and one should press on the joint at the table; and it will be perfect when the injured limb extends its legs, and they are even; then bend the knees, and apply the plaster, and the strap of a bandage, so that the hip does not move; and let it rest for three or four days, then release it, and apply the plaster again; and if you see that they are even, remove the strap, as before, and leave it for three days; then release it, and let the limb move, until the member is comfortable.
de la dislocation dou genoil	of the shoulder dislocation
Li genous est desaluez selonc III manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	The shoulder is dislocated in three ways: that is to say, inward and outward, and backward; and it does not dislocate forward.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez; et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez; puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement; et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And the signs are that you command the patient to bend his leg at the hip, and if he cannot bend it at the hip, then it is dislocated; and the restoration of all is that you make the patient sit straight, and extend his leg if he can, and put your back against his face, and put his foot on yours; then take his shoulder to your palms, and pull between your fingers, then bend both sides of the shoulder correctly; and another minister extends his foot, until the shoulder returns to its place, and the sign is that he can bend his leg at the hip lightly; and put the plaster on it, and bear the leg against the hip, and tie them together strongly for three or four hours, then release; and do not work on the patient any further until the member is comfortable.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	If the limbs are not properly aligned, administer strong extension, as we have said in the treatment of the back, until they are healed.
de la dislocation dou talon	of the dislocated ankle
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The ankles are never sprained and never fully dislocated, both inside and outside.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee: li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	And the signs are that the bone is swollen, and feels tender to the touch in the place where it is dislocated: the pain is slight, and one should gently extend it with their hands when it is sprained only.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville; puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut; et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient; et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide; puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet; puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent; puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	And when it is fully dislocated, you should first straighten the pain correctly, and hold it with your hands, above the ankle; then pull the bone towards you twice, then extend it upwards, and hit it hard on the top; and do this twice, as we have said, pulling and pushing the bone; if it returns, it is good; if not, start the work again, for it will return; and if it cannot return in this way, put the pain on its back on the ground, and firmly press between its knees, and wrap cloths around it so that it does not bend the pain; then hold the hands of the ministers to the knee, and other ministers extend the bone to their hands or to the tie, so that they hold the collar of the bone; then extend all the ministers equally, and the cloths should be placed between the knees of the pain to hold the pain while it is extended; then put the hands equal to the dislocation at its hands, and other ministers hold the leg straight outside, and the dislocation will return quickly.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois; puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors; et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	And when she does not go through, apply the plaster and soak it above, and let the strain form, and tie the foot to the leg, and hold the nerves that are above the ankle behind, so that the joints are not too tight; then leave her for two or three days, and if the joints dislocate, apply the plaster again; then release it on the third or fourth day, and let it walk for four days; and if it goes before this term, it is not sure that it will not dislocate again.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if abscesses come, it is necessary to calm them as we have said before, until they are healed.
des dois	For the fire cautery, instruct
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	when the two are dislocated, if they must be stretched out, it is a light matter.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne; et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the dislocation is in no way on the inside or outside of the joint, it is necessary that you make the patient sit with the affected limb straight out or on a table, and put your hand on what opens up from these joints, then press firmly, until it returns; and when it is even, and there is nothing open, put the sole of the foot on a table at II o'clock, then stretch it firmly, and leave it for three hours, then release; and let him rest, until he is healed.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	of wounds and of dislocations together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert: si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis; et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit; et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne; et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis; et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples; et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	When a wound comes with dislocation, and one wants to restore it, often many die: if you are not very presumptuous in the cure, and you are not wise in the art and have not used it for a long time, and if you are not merciful and patient and slow; at the beginning of things, use gentle things to calm the abscess, and leave the pain in God’s hands, if you do not see hope of health; and when you see hope, then reset the member now, as soon as the abscess comes; and when the member is in place, then administer gentle things to calm the abscess, and cure the wound, as it should be, with frequent dressings; and if with dislocation there is a fracture, and small bones are shattered, then remove them, and do what we have said in simple diseases; and beware of entering the path of fear, according to what I have said, for it is better for you according to your Creator, and for the knowledge of your weapon and your body.
Amen	For the fire cautery
